CLINICAL  
BIOCHEMISTRY
Metabolic and clinical aspects
For Elsevier:
Content Strategist: Jeremy Bowes
Senior Content Development Specialist: Ailsa Laing
Senior Project Manager: Beula Christopher
Designer: Miles Hitchen
Illustrator: Chartwell Illustrations
CLINICAL 
­BIOCHEMISTRY
Metabolic and clinical aspects
THIRD EDITION
EDITED BY
William J. Marshall MA PhD MSc MB BS FRCP  
FRCPath FRCPEdin FRSC FSB FLS
Consultant Clinical Biochemist and Clinical Director of Pathology, 
The London Clinic; 
Emeritus Reader in Clinical Biochemistry, 
King’s College London, 
London, UK
Marta Lapsley MB BCh BAO MD FRCPath
Consultant Chemical Pathologist, 
Epsom and St Helier University Hospitals NHS Trust, 
London, UK;
Honorary Senior Lecturer in Clinical Endocrinology and Nutrition, 
University of Surrey,
Surrey, UK
Andrew P. Day MA MSc MB BS FRCPath
Consultant Chemical Pathologist, 
Weston Area Health Trust and University Hospitals Bristol Foundation Trust; 
Honorary Senior Clinical Lecturer in Chemical Pathology, 
University of Bristol, 
Bristol, UK
Ruth M. Ayling BSc MB BS MSc PhD FRCP FRCPath
Consultant Chemical Pathologist, 
Derriford Hospital, 
Plymouth, UK
Edinburgh   London   New York   Oxford   Philadelphia   St Louis   Sydney   Toronto   2014
An imprint of Elsevier Limited
© 2014 Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or 
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any information storage and retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further information about the 
Publisher’s permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such as the Copyright Clearance 
Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it are protected under copyright by the Publisher 
(other than as may be noted herein).
First edition 1995
Second edition 2008
Third edition 2014
ISBN  978-0-7020-5140-1
eBook ISBN  978-0-7020-5478-5
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
Printed in China
The
Publisher's
policy is to use
paper manufactured
from sustainable forests
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience 
broaden our understanding, changes in research methods, professional practices, or medical treatment 
may become necessary.
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their own experience and knowledge in evaluating and 
using any information, methods, compounds, or experiments described herein. In using such information 
or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of others, including parties for 
whom they have a professional responsibility.
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check the most 
current information provided (i) on procedures featured or (ii) by the manufacturer of each product to be 
administered, to verify the recommended dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, 
and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners, relying on their own experience and 
knowledge of their patients, to make diagnoses, to determine dosages and the best treatment for each 
individual patient, and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors, or editors, assume any 
liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of products liability, negligence 
or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods, products, instructions, or ideas contained in 
the material herein.
v
Contents
Preface  vii
Contributors  viii
	 1	 Uses of biochemical data in clinical  
medicine  1
William J. Marshall  •  Marta Lapsley
	 2	 Acquisition and interpretation of  
biochemical data  6
Helen Bruce  •  Marta Lapsley
	 3	 Quality aspects of laboratory medicine  21
Helen Bruce  •  Marta Lapsley
	 4	 Sodium, water and potassium  27
Michael D. Penney
	 5	 Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue  
oxygenation and their disorders  65
William J. Marshall
	 6	 Calcium, phosphate and magnesium  93
Timothy Cundy  •  Andrew Grey  •  Ian R. Reid
	 7	 The kidneys, renal function and kidney 
disease  124
David Makanjuola  •  Marta Lapsley
	 8	 Proteinuria  152
Anne Dawnay
	 9	 Renal tubular disorders and renal stone 
disease  168
David Makanjuola  •  Marta Lapsley
	10	 Clinical biochemistry of nutrition  180
Ruth M. Ayling
	11	 Nutritional disorders and their  
management  200
Ruth M. Ayling
	12	 Clinical biochemistry of the ­gastrointestinal 
tract  214
Ingvar T. Bjarnason  •  Roy A. Sherwood
	13	 Assessment of hepatic function and investigation  
of jaundice  231
Roy A. Sherwood  •  Adrian Bomford
	14	 Acute and chronic liver disease  250
Adrian Bomford • Roy A. Sherwood
	15	 Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology  
of diabetes mellitus  273
David B. Wile  •  John P.H. Wilding
	16	 The clinical management of diabetes  
mellitus  305
Ian W. Seetho  •  John P.H. Wilding
	17	 Hypoglycaemia  333
Mourad H. Labib
	18	 Hypothalamic, pituitary and adrenal 
disorders  349
Miles J. Levy  • Trevor A. Howlett
	19	 Thyroid dysfunction  373
Colin M. Dayan • Onyebuchi E. Okosieme • Peter Taylor
	20	 Metabolic response to stress  403
Robin Berry • Philip Gillen
	21	 Disorders of puberty and sex  
development  412
S. Faisal Ahmed  •  Jane D. McNeilly 
	22	 Reproductive function in the female  433
Leslie D. Ross
	23	 Reproductive function in the male  451
John Miell  •  Zoe Davies 
	24	 Inherited metabolic disease  461
Fiona Carragher  •  Mike Champion
	25	 Paediatric clinical biochemistry  484
Fiona Carragher
	26	 Introduction to haematology and transfusion 
science  497
David Ah-Moye  •  Ceinwen Davies  •  Joanne Goody  •   
Peter Hayward  •  Rebecca Frewin 
	27	 Biochemical aspects of anaemia  515
Rebecca Frewin 
	28	 The porphyrias: inherited disorders of haem 
synthesis  533
Michael N. Badminton  •  George H. Elder 
	29	 The haemoglobinopathies  550
David C. Rees • Roopen Arya
	30	 Immunology for clinical biochemists  560
Joanna Sheldon • Rachel D. Wheeler • Pamela G. Riches
vi 
Contents
	31	 Metabolic bone disease  604
Timothy Cundy • Ian R. Reid • Andrew Grey
	32	 Biochemistry of articular disorders  636
Jeremy G. Jones
	33	 Muscle disease  646
Laurence A. Bindoff
	34	 Investigation of cerebrospinal fluid  660
Geoffrey Keir • Carrie Chadwick
	35	 Biochemical aspects of psychiatric  
disorders  673
William J. Marshall  • Teifion Davies
	36	 Biochemical aspects of neurological  
disease  683
Paul Hart  •  Clare M. Galtrey  •  Dominic C. Paviour  •  Min Htut
	37	 Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein 
metabolism  702
Graham R. Bayly
	38	 Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular 
system  737
Clodagh M. Loughrey • Ian S. Young
	39	 Therapeutic drug monitoring  767
Mike Hallworth
	40	 Poisoning  787
James W. Dear
	41	 Metabolic effects of tumours  808
Wassif S. Wassif  •  James E. East
	42	 Tumour markers  821
Catharine M. Sturgeon
	43	 Molecular clinical biochemistry  844
Roberta Goodall
	44	 Forensic biochemistry  874
Robert J. Flanagan  •  Sarah Belsey  • Terhi Launiainen
Index  883
vii
Preface
In the preface to the second edition of this book, two 
­major changes in the practice of clinical ­biochemistry 
were noted. The first was the increasing ­integration 
­between the pathology disciplines, driven largely by 
shared ­technology and now reflected in the multi-
disciplinary training for many healthcare scientists. 
The ­second was the increasing tendency for medically 
­qualified clinical biochemists to have direct responsibility 
for the management of patients with metabolic diseases. 
Both these trends have continued, and we have recog-
nized them in preparing this third edition. The sections 
on haematology and immunology have been expanded so 
that, while not attempting to provide detailed accounts of 
these subjects, we believe that we have provided ­sufficient 
information to allow clinical biochemists to familiarize 
themselves with both their laboratory and clinical as-
pects, and to be in a position to seek greater knowledge 
from specialist textbooks as required.
The aspects of metabolic disease for which medical 
clinical biochemists may have responsibility include nu-
tritional disorders, diabetes, inherited metabolic disease 
(particularly in adults), metabolic bone disease, renal 
calculi and dyslipidaemias, and we have encouraged our 
authors to provide sufficient detail to convey the general 
principles of the diagnosis and management of these con-
ditions. We believe that this material will also be of inter-
est to scientist clinical biochemists, by helping to set the 
more scientific material in its clinical context.
The overall aim of the book remains unchanged: to 
provide, in a single volume, a textbook of clinical bio-
chemistry both for senior trainees and for established 
practitioners. We have not included details of analytical 
methodology, which are well covered in other books, but 
have included a new chapter devoted to quality manage-
ment, since this is such an important topic: laboratory data 
are useless – and potentially dangerous – if their quality 
cannot be assured. Although the processes of quality man-
agement are to a considerable extent centred on the labo-
ratory, they start and finish with patients and their medical 
attendants.
Comments from reviewers of the previous edition have 
encouraged us to include material that is usually outside 
the scope of textbooks of clinical biochemistry. New 
chapters on the metabolic response to stress and forensic 
aspects of clinical biochemistry increase the breadth of 
coverage in a way that we hope readers will find useful, 
informative and relevant.
We thank our numerous contributors, old and new, for 
their commitment to this project, their (in most cases) 
adherence to deadlines and their tolerance of our edito-
rial input. No one writes book chapters for the money; we 
are grateful to them all for their ready acceptance of our 
invitations and for their time.
The greatest change with this edition has been the re-
cruitment of three new editors – Ruth Ayling, Andrew 
Day and Marta Lapsley (lead editor) who have joined 
William Marshall in place of Stephen Bangert, whose 
other commitments precluded his being involved. Two 
editors took the main responsibility for each chapter, but 
all of us read and commented on all the material, and ap-
proved the final versions. We hope that we will thereby 
have produced an error-free manuscript and apologize 
for any errors that may have slipped through. Will any 
reader who spots one please let us know, so that it can be 
corrected at reprinting?
At Elsevier, Jeremy Bowes commissioned the project, but 
day-to-day management has once again been in the capable 
hands of Ailsa Laing. We are indebted to her for her con-
stant encouragement and for liaising with our authors with 
regard to the delivery of their manuscripts. Not to have had 
to do this in addition to sorting out editorial matters has 
been a huge help. Our thanks also go to the in-house team, 
particularly Beula Christopher, who coordinated the type-
setting and proof corrections, and the designers and the 
copy editor, who have transformed the multitude of differ-
ent styles of documents and images into a coherent finished 
product that is a pleasure to handle and read.
Most importantly of all, we would also like to mention 
the long suffering families, friends and colleagues who have 
listened to endless discussions about the work involved in 
editing the book and have provided practical support over 
many months to relieve us of more mundane tasks. In par-
ticular we would like to thank Wendy (Marshall), Michèle 
(Day) and Michael (Lapsley) who have contributed signifi-
cantly, albeit indirectly, to the final publication.
Ruth M. Ayling
Andrew P. Day
Marta Lapsley
William J. Marshall
viii
Contributors
S. Faisal Ahmed, MB ChB MD FRCPCH
Professor of Child Health, Honorary  
Consultant in Paediatric Endocrinology,  
University of Glasgow, Royal Hospital  
for Sick Children, Glasgow, UK
David Ah-Moye, HND(MLS) FIBMS DMLM
Biomedical Scientist (Deputy Laboratory Manager), 
Haematology Department, Gloucestershire Royal 
Hospital, Great Western Road, Gloucester, UK
Roopen Arya, BM BCh MA PhD FRCP FRCPath
Consultant Haematologist, Department of 
Haematological Medicine, King’s College Hospital, 
London, UK
Ruth M. Ayling, BSc MB BS MSc PhD FRCP FRCPath
Consultant Chemical Pathologist, Derriford Hospital, 
Plymouth, UK
Michael N. Badminton, MBChB PhD FRCPath
Senior Lecturer and Honorary Consultant, 
Department of Medical Biochemistry and 
Immunology, School of Medicine, Cardiff 
University, Cardiff, UK
Graham R. Bayly, BA BM FRCP FRCPath
Consultant Biochemist, Bristol Royal Infirmary,  
Bristol, UK
Sarah Belsey, BSc MSc
Clinical Scientist, Toxicology Unit, Department of 
Clinical Biochemistry, King's College Hospital, 
London, UK
Robin Berry, PhD FRCA DICM
Consultant in Anaesthetics and Intensive Care, 
Derriford Hospital, Plymouth, UK
Laurence A. Bindoff, MSc MRCP MD
Professor of Neurology, Department of Clinical 
Medicine, University of Bergen, Haukeland 
University Hospital, Bergen, Norway
Ingvar T. Bjarnason, MD MSc FRCPath  
FRCP(Glasg) DSc
Professor of Digestive Diseases, Department of 
Gastroenterology, King’s College Hospital, 
London, UK
Adrian Bomford, MD FRCP
Reader in Medicine/Honorary Consultant Physician, 
Institute of Liver Studies, King’s College Hospital, 
London, UK
Helen Bruce, MChem MSc FRCPath
Principal Clinical Scientist, Department of Clinical 
Biochemistry, Royal Surrey County Hospital, 
Surrey, UK
Fiona Carragher, MSc FRCPath
Consultant Clinical Scientist, Department of Chemical 
Pathology, Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation 
Trust, London, UK
Carrie Chadwick, BSc (Hons) MSc FRCPath
Consultant Clinical Scientist, Aintree University 
Hospital Foundation Trust; Laboratory Director,  
The Walton Centre Foundation Trust,  
Liverpool, UK
Mike Champion MSc FRCP FRCPCH
Consultant in Paediatric Metabolic Medicine, 
Department of Paediatric Metabolic Medicine, 
Evelina Children’s Hospital, Guy’s and St Thomas’ 
NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK
Timothy Cundy, MA MD FRCP FRACP
Professor of Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, University of 
Auckland, New Zealand
Ceinwen Davies, BSc MSc
Coagulation Supervisor, Haematology Department, 
Gloucestershire Royal Hospital, Gloucester, UK
Teifion Davies, BSc MB BS PhD DPMSA MSB CBiol 
FRCPsych
Director of Undergraduate Psychiatry Teaching,  
King’s College London, Institute of Psychiatry, 
London, UK
Zoe Davies, MA BM BCh MRCP
Specialist Trainee in Diabetes and Endocrinology, 
London Deanery, London, UK
Anne Dawnay, PhD FRCPath
Consultant Biochemist and Honorary Senior Lecturer, 
University College Hospitals, London, UK
	
  Contributors	
ix
Colin M. Dayan, MA MB BS FRCP PhD
Professor of Clinical Diabetes and Metabolism, 
Director, Institute of Molecular and Experimental 
Medicine, Cardiff University School of Medicine, 
Cardiff, Wales, UK
James W. Dear, PhD FRCPEdin
Consultant in Clinical Pharmacology, National 
Poisons Information Service, Royal Infirmary of 
Edinburgh; Senior Clinical Lecturer, Queen's 
Medical Research Institute, University of 
Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
James E. East, BSc MB ChB MRCP MD
Consultant Gastroenterologist,  
John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK
George H. Elder, MD FRCP FRCPath FMedSci
Emeritus Professor, Department of Medical 
Biochemistry and Immunology, School of Medicine, 
Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
Robert J. Flanagan, PhD ERT MFSSoc CChem FRSC 
FRCPath HFCMHP
Consultant Clinical Scientist, Toxicology Unit, Clinical 
Biochemistry, King's College Hospital, London, UK
Rebecca Frewin, BSc MB ChB MRCP FRCPath
Consultant Haematologist, Haematology Department, 
Edward Jenner Unit, Gloucester Royal Hospital, 
Gloucester, UK
Clare M. Galtrey, MA MB BChir PhD MRCP
Specialist Trainee in Neurology, St George's Hospital, 
London, UK
Philip Gillen, FRCA FFICM
Consultant in Anaesthetics and Intensive Care, 
Derriford Hospital, Plymouth, UK
Roberta Goodall, BSc MSc FIMLS FRCPath
Formerly Consultant Scientist, Department of Clinical 
Biochemistry, North Bristol NHS Trust, Southmead 
Hospital, Bristol, UK
Joanne Goody, BSc MSc
Assistant Laboratory Manager, Blood Transfusion 
Department, Gloucestershire Hospital NHS 
Foundation Trust, Cheltenham General Hospital, 
Cheltenham, UK
Andrew Grey, MD FRACP
Associate Professor of Medicine, Department of 
Medicine, Faculty of Medical and Health Sciences, 
University of Auckland, New Zealand
Mike Hallworth, MA MSc FRCPath EurClinChem
Consultant Clinical Scientist, Royal Shrewsbury 
Hospital, Shrewsbury, UK
Paul Hart, MB BS BSc FRCP PhD
Consultant Neurologist, Epsom and St. Helier NHS 
Trust, London; Atkinson Morley Neuroscience 
Unit, St Georges Hospital; Royal Marsden Hospital, 
London, UK
Peter Hayward, BSc MSc
Blood Transfusion Section Supervisor,  
Gloucestershire Hospital NHS  
Foundation Trust, Cheltenham General Hospital, 
Cheltenham, UK
Trevor A. Howlett, MD FRCP
Consultant Physician and Endocrinologist, Department 
of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Leicester Royal 
Infirmary, Leicester, UK
Min Htut, MB BS MMedSci MD MRCP DGM DTM&H
Consultant Neurologist and Honorary Consultant 
Neurophysiologist, Epsom and St Helier University 
Hospitals NHS Trust, London, and St. George's 
Hospital, London, UK
Jeremy G. Jones, MD FRACP FAFRM
Consultant Rheumatologist, North West Wales NHS 
Trust, Ysbyty Gwynedd; Senior Clinical Lecturer, 
School of Sport, Health and Exercise Sciences, 
University of Wales, Bangor, UK
Geoffrey Keir, PhD MSc FRCPath FIBMS
Clinical Scientist and Honorary Senior Lecturer, 
Neuroimmunology and CSF Laboratory, Institute of 
Neurology, The National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, London, UK
Mourad H. Labib, MB ChB FRCPath
Consultant Chemical Pathologist, Clinical Biochemistry 
Department, Dudley Group of Hospitals, Russells 
Hall Hospital, West Midlands, UK
Marta Lapsley, MB BCh BAO MD FRCPath
Consultant Chemical Pathologist, Epsom and  
St Helier University Hospitals NHS Trust, London, UK; 
Honorary Senior Lecturer in Clinical Endocrinology and 
Nutrition, University of Surrey, Surrey, UK
Terhi Launiainen, PhD
Postdoctoral Researcher, Department of Forensic 
Medicine, Hjelt Institute, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
Miles J. Levy, MD FRCP
Consultant Physician and Endocrinologist, Department 
of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Leicester Royal 
Infirmary, Leicester, UK
Clodagh M. Loughrey, MD MRCP FRCPath
Consultant Chemical Pathologist, Belfast Trust, Belfast, 
Northern Ireland
x	
Contributors
Jane D. McNeilly, BSc(Hons) MSc PhD FRCPath
Clinical Biochemist, Biochemistry Department, 
Southern General Hospital Laboratory, 
Glasgow, UK
David Makanjuola, MD, FRCP
Consultant Nephrologist, Department of Renal 
Medicine, Epsom and St. Helier University Hospitals 
NHS Trust, London, UK
William J. Marshall, MA PhD MSc MB BS FRCP FRCPath 
FRCPEdin FRSC FSB FLS
Consultant Clinical Biochemist and Clinical Director 
of Pathology, The London Clinic; Emeritus Reader 
in Clinical Biochemistry, King’s College London, 
London, UK
John Miell, DM FRCP FRCPEdin
Divisional Director of Specialty Medicine and  
Pathology and Head of Metabolic Medicine 
Department, Consultant Physician and 
Endocrinologist, University Hospital Lewisham, 
London, UK
Onyebuchi E. Okosieme, MD FRCP
Diabetes and Endocrinology Department, Prince 
Charles Hospital, Cwm Taf Health Board,  
Merthyr Tydfil, UK
Dominic C. Paviour, BSc PhD MB BS MRCP
Consultant Neurologist and Honorary Senior 
Lecturer, Epsom and St Helier Hospitals NHS 
Trust and St George’s University of London, 
London, UK
Michael D. Penney, BSc MB BS MD FRCPath
Consultant Chemical Pathologist, Department of 
Clinical Biochemistry, Royal Gwent Hospital, 
Gwent, UK
David C. Rees, MA MB BS FRCP FRCPath
Senior Lecturer in Paediatric Haematology, 
Department of Paediatric Haematology,  
King’s College London School of Medicine,  
King’s College Hospital, London, UK
Ian R. Reid, BSc MB ChB MD FRACP FRCP FRSNZ
Professor of Medicine and Endocrinology,  
Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medical and 
Health Sciences, University of Auckland, New 
Zealand
Pamela G. Riches, HNC BSc PhD FRCPath
Retired Professor, Department of Immunology,  
St George’s Hospital, London, UK
Leslie D. Ross, MB BS MRCS LRCP FRCS(Ed)  
FRCOG DMI
Consultant Obstetrician and Gynaecologist, Epsom and  
St Helier University Hospitals NHS Trust, London, UK
Ian W. Seetho, BA BMedSci BM BS MRCP
Clinical Research Fellow, Department of Obesity and 
Endocrinology, Clinical Sciences Centre, University 
Hospital Aintree, Liverpool, UK
Joanna Sheldon, PhD CSci MRCPath FRCPath
Consultant Immunologist and Honorary Senior 
Lecturer, Department of Immunology, St George’s 
Hospital, London, UK
Roy A. Sherwood, BSc MSc DPhil
Professor of Clinical Biochemistry, King’s College 
London; Consultant Biochemist, King’s College 
Hospital, London, UK
Catharine M. Sturgeon, BSc PhD FRCPath
Clinical Scientist, Department of Clinical Biochemistry, 
Royal Infirmary of Edinburgh; Honorary Fellow, 
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK
Peter Taylor, BSc MB ChB MRCP MSc
Welsh Clinical Academic Trainee in Diabetes and 
Endocrinology, Thyroid Research Group, Institute 
of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, School of 
Medicine, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK
Wassif S. Wassif, MB ChB MSc CSci Eur Clin Chem MD 
FRCP FRCPath
Consultant Clinical Biochemist and Head of 
Department, Clinical Biochemistry, Bedford Hospital 
NHS Trust, Bedford, UK
Rachel D. Wheeler, MA MSc PhD
Clinical Scientist in Immunology, Protein Reference 
Unit, St George’s Hospital, London, UK
John P.H. Wilding, DM FRCP
Professor of Medicine and Honorary Consultant 
Physician; Head of Department of Obesity and 
Endocrinology, Institute of Ageing and Chronic 
Disease, Clinical Sciences Centre, University Hospital 
Aintree, Liverpool, UK
David B. Wile, MB BCh MSc FRCPath
Associate Specialist in Clinical Biochemistry, Diabetes 
and Endocrinology, Department of Clinical 
Biochemistry, University Hospital Aintree NHS 
Foundation Trust, Liverpool, UK
Ian S. Young, BSc MB BCh MD FRCP FRCPath
Professor of Medicine and Director of the Centre for 
Public Health, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast, 
Northern Ireland
1
C H A P T E R  1
Uses of biochemical data 
in clinical medicine
William J. Marshall  •  Marta Lapsley
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  1
SPECIFIC USES OF BIOCHEMICAL TESTS  2
Diagnosis  2
Management  3
Screening  4
Other uses of biochemical  
investigations  5
CONCLUSION  5
INTRODUCTION
The science of biochemistry is fundamental to the prac-
tice of clinical medicine. Many diseases have long been 
known to have a biochemical basis and research in bio-
chemistry is increasingly providing descriptions of 
pathological processes and explanations for disease at a 
molecular level.
As a result of the application of biochemical principles 
and techniques to the analysis of body fluids and tissues, 
clinicians have an extensive and ever-increasing range of 
biochemical investigations that can be called upon to aid 
clinical decision-making. Such investigations can pro-
vide information vital to the diagnosis and management 
of many conditions, including both those with an obvi-
ous metabolic basis (e.g. diabetes mellitus) and those in 
which metabolic disturbances occur as a consequence of 
the disease (e.g. renal failure). On the other hand, many 
conditions are successfully diagnosed and treated without 
recourse to any biochemical investigation, while there re-
main conditions in which it might be expected that bio-
chemical investigations should be of value but for which 
appropriate tests are not yet available. For example, there 
are, as yet, no practical biochemical investigations to assist 
in the diagnosis and management of the major affective 
disorders (see Chapter  35), although there is consider-
able evidence that biochemical disturbances are involved 
in the pathogenesis of these conditions.
Biochemical analysers range from large, automated 
instruments capable of performing multiple tests on 
single serum samples to relatively simple instruments 
designed to measure only one or a few analytes. In 
general, they generate results quickly, reliably and 
economically. However, some tests, often more com-
plex and expensive ones, are performed manually and 
may take longer to complete. Biochemical data are thus 
readily available to support clinical decision-making. 
Ordering a biochemical investigation is a simple proce-
dure and there is no doubt that such investigations are 
often requested automatically, without regard for their 
potential value in the specific clinical setting. Clinical 
biochemists decry this but do themselves no favour by 
their use of the term, widely employed by clinicians, 
‘routine investigations’ (usually meaning relatively sim-
ple investigations that are performed frequently) and 
even ‘routine laboratories’ (meaning the places where 
they are done).
Ideally, investigations should always be performed 
because there is a specific indication for them, that is, 
because it is anticipated that their results will provide 
information of benefit to the management of the pa-
tient. However, it cannot be denied that investigations 
requested for no specific reason can sometimes provide 
valuable information. Most clinicians are able to recall 
occasions when an unexpected result from a ‘routine test’ 
has provided the essential clue to the diagnosis in a dif-
ficult case. More often, the finding of an unexpectedly 
abnormal result may engender considerable anxiety and 
involve further investigations to elucidate its cause, only 
for it to transpire that the biochemical abnormality is of 
no clinical significance.
The potential range of investigations available to sup-
port the clinician is considerable, from simple low cost 
urine dip-stick tests to magnetic resonance imaging using 
hugely expensive equipment. There is an understandable 
tendency for clinical biochemists to think that biochemi-
cal investigations are pre-eminent among special investi-
gations. In some conditions they are, in others they have 
no role, while in many, their value is greatly increased 
when their results are considered alongside those of 
other investigations, for example imaging. The clinician 
should be aware of the whole range of investigations that 
are available, but needs also to be able to appreciate their 
­various advantages and limitations. The clinical biochem-
ist, too, needs to be aware of the role of other investi-
gations, so that he or she can view biochemical tests in 
context and advise on their suitability and the interpre-
tation of their results in specific clinical circumstances. 
2	
Clinical biochemistry
It has been the editors’ aim to ensure that this informa-
tion is provided where relevant in this book.
The processes of acquiring and interpreting biochemi-
cal data are complex. Correct interpretation requires that 
the clinical context and reason for requesting the test are 
properly understood, otherwise the result has little value. 
This chapter explores the variety of potential ways in 
which biochemical data can be used in clinical practice.
SPECIFIC USES OF BIOCHEMICAL TESTS
Diagnosis
It has been said that diagnosis in medicine is an art, not a 
science, yet the process of diagnosis is amenable to scientific 
analysis. Making a diagnosis is the equivalent of propounding 
a hypothesis. A hypothesis should be tested by experiment, 
the results of which may support or refute the hypothesis, 
which can then be extended, modified or discarded in favour 
of an alternative, as appropriate. The validity of a clinical 
diagnosis is tested by observation of the natural history of 
the condition or its response to appropriate treatment or by 
the results of definitive investigations: the diagnosis will be 
confirmed if these are as expected from knowledge of previ-
ous cases. If they are not, it must be reviewed.
Clinical diagnosis is based on the patient’s history and 
clinical examination. Taking general and hospital practice 
together, it has been estimated that, in more than 80% 
of cases, a confident diagnosis can be made on the basis 
of the history or the history and clinical findings alone. 
Even when this cannot be done, it should be possible to 
formulate a differential diagnosis, that is, a list of diag-
noses that could explain the clinical observations. The 
results of investigations may then lead to one of these be-
ing considered the most likely and providing a rational 
basis for treatment. Subsequent observation will indicate 
whether the diagnosis was correct.
Although not necessarily required for the management 
of an individual patient, it may be possible to extend the 
clinical diagnosis by further investigation to determine the 
pathogenesis of the condition and ultimately, its underly-
ing cause. For example, measurement of serum troponin 
concentration may confirm a clinical diagnosis of myo-
cardial infarction in a patient with typical chest pain and 
electrocardiographic abnormalities; angiography could be 
used to demonstrate coronary atherosclerosis prior to sur-
gery or angioplasty; the finding of hypercholesterolaemia 
would indicate a causative factor for the atherosclerosis; a 
family history of premature heart disease would suggest 
that the hypercholesterolaemia was familial and DNA mu-
tation analysis might reveal the underlying genetic defect.
The ideal diagnostic investigation would be 100% 
sensitive (all cases of the condition in question would be 
correctly diagnosed) and 100% specific (no individual 
without the condition would be wrongly diagnosed as 
having it). The concepts of specificity and sensitivity are 
examined fully in Chapter 2. In practice, the capacity of 
biochemical investigations to provide precise diagnos-
tic information is extremely variable. At one end of the 
spectrum, the techniques of genetic analysis are making it 
possible to reliably diagnose inherited metabolic diseases 
in utero; at the other end of the spectrum, to take just 
one example, a decrease in plasma sodium concentration 
can occur in many different conditions and is, on its own, 
diagnostic of none of them.
Molecular genetic analysis has become a separate dis-
cipline in its own right and is a special case for the use 
of biochemical investigations for diagnosis. It is used to 
detect the presence of a mutation responsible for a spe-
cific disease. Even when possession of a mutation does 
not inevitably result in the development of a disease, its 
presence can indicate increased susceptibility to a condi-
tion. However, even individuals with the same genotype 
for a characteristic may differ in their phenotypes. But, 
although molecular genetics is a rapidly developing field, 
many genetically determined conditions, including in-
herited metabolic diseases, are still diagnosed on the basis 
of their biochemical phenotype.
With the exception of genetically determined diseases, 
the number of conditions in which biochemical investiga-
tions alone provide a precise diagnosis is very small. There 
are several reasons for this. First, biochemical changes are 
often a consequence of a pathological process that is com-
mon to many conditions. Thus, although tissue destruc-
tion leads to the release of intracellular enzymes into the 
plasma, few such enzymes are specific to any one tissue and 
tissue destruction can occur for many reasons, for example 
with ischaemia, exposure to toxins etc. Second, it also fre-
quently happens that a biochemical variable can be influ-
enced by more than one type of process. To cite a familiar 
example, plasma albumin concentration can be influenced 
by changes in the rates of synthesis and degradation of the 
protein and by changes in its volume of distribution, and 
the rate of synthesis in turn depends on substrate supply 
and hepatic function, among other factors. Third, even 
when a biochemical change is specific to one condition, it 
may not indicate its cause and this may need to be estab-
lished before the condition can be treated appropriately. 
For example, the demonstration of a high plasma con-
centration of the thyroid hormone, tri-iodothyronine, is 
characteristic of hyperthyroidism, but this can be a result 
of several different thyroid diseases, and treatment appro-
priate for one of these may not be appropriate for another.
When a biochemical investigation is used for diag-
nosis, the result obtained from the patient will usually 
be compared with a reference range, that is, the range 
of values that can be expected in comparable apparently 
healthy individuals. The theory of reference ranges is dis-
cussed further in Chapter 2, but two points require par-
ticular emphasis here.
First, the natural variation of biochemical parameters 
is such that the ranges of concentrations of constituents 
of the plasma are likely to be narrower in an individual 
than in a group (even if well-matched to the individual). 
Second, for many biochemical variables, there is overlap, 
often considerable, between the range of values seen in 
healthy individuals and those characteristic of disease. 
Thus, a test result in a patient with a disease may fall into 
the range typical for healthy people and vice versa. This 
overlap stems in part from the fact that some organs have 
considerable reserve capacity. The liver, kidneys, pancreas 
and small intestine exemplify this. For example, in chronic 
kidney disease, renal function may still be sufficient to 
	
1  Uses of biochemical data in clinical medicine	
3
maintain normal homoeostasis with respect to body fluid 
composition, even when half the functional capacity of the 
kidneys has been lost. It should not, therefore, be surpris-
ing that simple measurements of function can yield normal 
results in patients with kidney disease. In chronic pancre-
atitis, biochemical evidence of functional disturbance (e.g. 
of malabsorption) usually only becomes apparent when at 
least 80% of the functional capacity of the pancreas is lost, 
although the characteristic of severe pain often occurs at 
an earlier stage. Similarly, disease of the small intestine by 
no means always results in malabsorption.
When previous measurements are available in an in-
dividual, test results can be compared with these values, 
rather than with a reference range. Indeed, biochemical in-
vestigations are sometimes requested to provide a ‘baseline’ 
against which to assess future results, particularly if there is 
risk of a particular complication developing or if a change 
can be anticipated from the natural history of the disease 
or the expected response to treatment. A change in a bio-
chemical variable in relation to a previous result may be of 
significance, even if both results are within the reference 
range. Thus, a rise of creatinine concentration within the 
reference range may indicate a significant loss of kidney 
function, and may even indicate acute kidney injury if the 
rise has occurred rapidly. The concept of the critical differ-
ence between two results is discussed further in Chapter 2.
The capacity of a biochemical test to provide diagnos-
tic information can be quantified by the calculation of a 
mathematical function known as the predictive value. As 
will be discussed in Chapter 2, the predictive value of a 
diagnostic test depends on the prevalence of the condi-
tion in the group of people to whom the test is applied. 
If a diagnostic test is used indiscriminately, its predictive 
value will be low.
The majority of biochemical investigations made for 
clinical purposes involve analysis of plasma or serum. 
However, changes in the concentration of analytes in 
these fluids do not necessarily parallel changes in intra-
cellular or whole body content, and yet it may be these 
quantities that are more relevant to the underlying pathol-
ogy. Furthermore, single measurements may not provide 
reliable information in non-steady-state situations, for 
example, the plasma concentration of thyroid stimulating 
hormone (TSH), which is typically very low in patients 
with thyrotoxicosis, may remain low for some weeks after 
treatment has rendered patients clinically euthyroid.
For whatever purpose biochemical data are used, it is 
essential that they are reliable and are available in time to 
be of use. Under some circumstances, it may be permis-
sible to sacrifice some quality in order to obtain a result 
rapidly, but in general, every attempt should be made to 
minimize the influence of both analytical and preanalyti-
cal factors on the accuracy and precision of data. This 
topic is considered further in Chapter 2.
Management
Assessment of disease severity
Most biochemical investigations are quantitative, and 
the more abnormal a result is, the more likely it is that a 
pathological disturbance is causing it. Often, the extent 
to which a result is abnormal correlates well with the se-
verity of a condition but this is not always the case. The 
diagnostic test may not reflect that aspect of the condi-
tion of greatest importance in terms of severity; thus two 
patients with hepatitis may have equally raised plasma 
aminotransferase activities (reflecting tissue damage), 
but the condition will be judged more severe if, in one 
patient, the prothrombin time is prolonged (reflecting 
impaired hepatic functional capacity). Furthermore, 
overall disease severity (in relation to its effect on the 
­patient) is likely to depend on many other factors, in-
cluding the nature of the condition itself, the patient’s 
age, previous state of health, the existence of other illness 
etc. For example, hepatitis due to infection with hepatitis 
A virus tends to have a good prognosis compared with 
that caused by hepatitis B or C.
Prognosis
In general, the results of biochemical tests are poor indi-
cators of prognosis, but there are exceptions to this. For 
example, the plasma bilirubin concentration at the time 
of diagnosis in patients with primary biliary cirrhosis cor-
relates well with outcome; a high plasma concentration 
of a-fetoprotein in a patient with testicular teratoma is 
of prognostic significance, but the concentration of para-
protein in a patient with myeloma is not. Other examples 
are discussed in the ensuing chapters.
One aspect of prognosis is the assessment of the ben-
efits and risks of treatment. It has long been appreciated 
that different patients do not necessarily respond identi-
cally to the same drug. Many factors impinge on patients’ 
responses to drugs including, for example, nutrition or 
the concomitant use of other drugs. Genetic factors are 
also important, and often many different genes are in-
volved. Pharmacogenetics (see Chapter 43) is the name 
given to the science relating the effects of genes on our 
response to drugs, and is a rapidly expanding field within 
molecular genetics that is likely to become established 
within the repertoire of diagnostic clinical biochemistry 
laboratories in the future.
Monitoring the progression of disease
Although biochemical data alone may be of limited use in 
diagnosis, serial measurements can be of considerable value 
in monitoring the course of a disease or its response to 
treatment. The more closely the variable being measured 
relates to the underlying pathological process or functional 
abnormality, the better it will be for this purpose.
However, the reason for a change in a biochemical 
variable is not always the most obvious (or hoped for), so 
that even if an observed change is as expected or desired, 
the result should be interpreted with care. For example, 
a decrease in urine protein excretion in a patient with 
glomerular disease may indicate resolution of the under-
lying condition, but it could also be a result of deterio-
ration leading to a decrease in the glomerular filtration 
rate. Biochemical data must always be interpreted in the 
light of clinical assessment and the results of other rel-
evant investigations, not in isolation. Nevertheless, inter-
vention may sometimes be appropriate on the basis of a 
4	
Clinical biochemistry
biochemical change alone, if this has been shown reliably 
to predict a significant clinical change, for example in 
hyperkalaemia in a patient with renal failure.
When serial biochemical measurements are used to 
follow the response to treatment, the failure of an expected 
change to occur may suggest that the treatment is in-
adequate or inappropriate, or even that the diagnosis is 
incorrect. In therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM, see 
Chapter  39), biochemical measurements may actually 
indicate a possible cause for non-response to treatment.
Biochemical investigations can also be used to detect 
the development of complications of diseases or their treat-
ment before these become obvious clinically, and thus allow 
appropriate action to be taken before there is any clinical 
deterioration. They may even be used to prevent compli-
cations: for certain drugs, TDM allows presymptomatic 
­detection of potentially toxic concentrations of the drug.
Screening
Screening for disease implies attempting to detect disease 
before it becomes manifest through the development of a 
clinical disturbance. Inherent in the concept of screening 
is that appropriate management of subclinical disease is 
of potential benefit to the patient. Screening can involve 
clinical assessment and laboratory and other investiga-
tions. For some conditions (particularly inherited meta-
bolic diseases), screening may involve a single biochemical 
test. But the term is also used in relation to the perfor-
mance of a range of biochemical tests (often combined 
with other types of investigation) in healthy people, in an 
attempt to detect any of a number of conditions, in the be-
lief that a set of ‘normal’ results – that is, results within the 
appropriate reference limits – excludes these conditions. 
As will be seen in Chapter 2, considerable care is required 
both in the devising of screening tests and in their inter-
pretation. While a set of ‘normal’ results may appear reas-
suring and may, indeed, exclude the presence of certain 
diseases, it may also convey a false impression and even 
delay the diagnosis of early disease. Because of the way in 
which reference ranges are defined, the more tests that are 
performed, the more likely it is that an ‘abnormal’ result 
(i.e. outside the reference limits) will be generated that is 
not related to the presence of disease.
A positive result in a screening test on its own should 
not usually be regarded as being diagnostic. When 
the prevalence of a condition in the population being 
screened is low, the predictive value of a positive result is 
often lower than is generally supposed. A positive result 
in a screening test must always be confirmed by further 
investigation. The use of direct methods (e.g. oligonu-
cleotide probes, see Chapter 43) to detect mutations in 
DNA is an exception to this. Properly conducted, they 
are definitive with regard to the detection of mutations, 
although not necessarily for the development of disease.
Screening may be applied to a population, to groups 
sharing a common characteristic within a population 
or to individuals. According to the nature of the condi-
tion in question, screening may be carried out antena-
tally, shortly after birth, during childhood or during adult 
life. The strategy adopted will depend on the risk of the 
condition, the probability of its presence, the availability 
of suitable screening tests and, inevitably, the cost. The 
latter includes particularly the economic cost of the pro-
gramme but also the personal cost to individuals, for 
example those who test ‘false positive’ (individuals identi-
fied by the programme but on further investigation found 
not to have the condition in question) and, with inher-
ited diseases, the relatives of individuals detected by the 
programme.
Population screening
Economic and logistic considerations preclude the screen-
ing of whole populations for disease, although it has been 
advocated, for example, that all adults (some suggest only 
males, others males and females) should be screened for 
hypercholesterolaemia. Although this would undoubt-
edly lead to the identification of a significant number of 
individuals at greatly increased risk of coronary heart dis-
ease because of severe but asymptomatic hypercholester-
olaemia, such a programme, however desirable, would be 
very costly, and it has been argued that resources would 
be better devoted to measures to improve the general 
health of the population, by encouraging a healthy diet 
and lifestyle.
Selective screening
Selective biochemical screening for disease is already 
practised extensively in developed countries. The neona-
tal screening programmes for phenylketonuria, congeni-
tal hypothyroidism, sickle cell disease and cystic fibrosis 
are the best known examples. With the advent of tandem 
mass spectrometry, it is possible to screen for many more 
conditions such as medium chain fatty acid oxidation 
disorders, some organic acidaemias and the commonest 
form of congenital adrenal hyperplasia, using a tiny quan-
tity of blood and at reasonable cost. These complement 
the thorough clinical screening of the newborn for condi-
tions such as congenital cataract, imperforate anus etc.
Where a condition is particularly common in a de-
fined group, screening may be appropriate, even though 
it would not be for the population at large. Antenatal 
screening for Tay–Sachs disease in Ashkenazi Jews is one 
example.
For hypercholesterolaemia, selective screening is a 
more practicable procedure than population screening. It 
can be applied to people in whom there is a high probabil-
ity of hypercholesterolaemia being present, for example 
members of families in which there is a history of familial 
hypercholesterolaemia or premature heart disease. Such 
screening can also be directed towards people already at 
increased risk of coronary heart disease because, for ex-
ample, they are smokers or have hypertension or type 2 
diabetes, whose risk would be increased further by hyper-
cholesterolaemia. Other examples of selective screening 
are discussed in the relevant chapters of this book.
Individual screening
Examples of individual screening include antenatal screen-
ing of a fetus for an inherited disease when a previous 
child of the parents has been found to have the condition 
	
1  Uses of biochemical data in clinical medicine	
5
or when there is a strong family history of the condition. 
This has been practised for some time for certain inher-
ited diseases, but the number for which it can be done is 
growing rapidly now that the mutations responsible for 
inherited diseases are becoming known. Although, un-
doubtedly, it will become possible to treat some of these 
conditions in utero, at present, antenatal screening is 
mainly aimed at detecting conditions with consequences 
so severe that it is considered appropriate to terminate 
the pregnancy if the genetic abnormality is present. Given 
this possible outcome, it is clearly essential that if the diag-
nosis is to rest only on the result of the screening test, this 
should provide accurate and unequivocal results.
Other uses of biochemical investigations
All the uses of biochemical investigations that have been 
discussed thus far are potentially of direct benefit to the 
patient. Other important uses include the provision of 
information for teaching, research and public health. 
Usually, this will relate to one of the categories discussed. 
Although such data may not be of immediate benefit to 
the patient, these areas are of immense potential benefit 
to the population, providing information fundamental to 
the advancement of knowledge. This use has ethical im-
plications and is increasingly subject to scrutiny by bodies 
such as the network of research ethics committees in the 
UK. The use of biochemical investigations to assess or-
gan function in potential transplant donors is an example 
of the use of investigations primarily for the benefit of 
other people. Data collection in specific disorders, such 
as for the UK Renal Registry for patients on dialysis, can 
help to improve the standard of care given to selected pa-
tient groups by comparing results achieved by different 
centres against pre-defined targets.
Extensive biochemical investigations are usually car-
ried out during trials of drugs: these may be required as 
part of the assessment of a drug’s efficacy but are also es-
sential for the detection of possible toxicity.
Investigations may also be performed for the benefit 
of the doctor rather than the patient. Few doctors have 
not been guilty at some time, of requesting biochemical 
tests for reassurance. The supposition is that if the results 
of a range of test results are within reference limits, then 
the conditions in which abnormalities are known to occur 
cannot be present. As has been emphasized above, this 
supposition is erroneous and any reassurance may be un-
founded. Biochemical investigations should be requested 
for one of the reasons discussed in the relevant chapter 
of this book and not ‘routinely’. Neither should junior 
medical staff be put under pressure to request unneces-
sary tests to placate their seniors.
It is regrettable that there is an increasingly perceived 
need for doctors to carry out a comprehensive range of 
investigations in case of subsequent litigation. While this 
is understandable, it should not be necessary if investiga-
tions are requested and performed in response to the indi-
vidual clinical circumstances. There will always be other 
investigations that could have been done, but no blame 
should be attached to a doctor who failed to carry one 
out if it was not indicated clinically, either on the basis of 
the known natural history of the disease or the predicted 
response to, and known complications of, treatment.
CONCLUSION
Biochemical data are used extensively in medicine, both 
in the management of patients and in research. But be-
fore an investigation is requested, the rationale for testing 
should always be considered. Automated analysers can 
perform many tests at a very low cost in relation to the 
total expenditure on healthcare, but the cost is not negli-
gible. There may also be a cost to the patient. Repeated 
venepunctures to obtain blood for ‘routine’ tests are at 
best a nuisance, and at worst can, particularly in small 
children, cause a significant fall in the haematocrit. The 
laboratory handbook at one hospital of the authors’ ac-
quaintance used to contain the following advice to junior 
medical staff: ‘If you need advice or time to think, ask for 
it; do not ask for a full blood count and measurement of 
“urea and electrolytes”.’ In common with other investi-
gations, biochemical investigations should be requested 
to answer specific questions; if there is no question, the 
result cannot provide an answer.
Further reading
Asher R. Richard Asher talking sense. A selection of his papers edited by 
Sir Francis Avery Jones. London: Pitman Medical; 1972. 
A collection of essays by a clear thinking physician; his observations on the 
use of common sense in medicine, including the use of the laboratory.
Fraser CG. Interpretation of clinical chemistry laboratory data. Oxford: 
Blackwell Scientific; 1986. 
A concise but comprehensive account of the uses of laboratory data, their 
acquisition and interpretation, relevant to this and the succeeding chapter, 
which should be required reading for clinical biochemists.
NCBI. One size does not fit all: the promise of pharmacogenomics, 
http://www.auburn.edu/academic/classes/biol/3020/iActivities/
CGAP2/Pharmacogenomics%20Factsheet.htm; [Accessed 20.09.12].
A concise introduction to this topic.
6
C H A P T E R  2
Acquisition and interpretation 
of biochemical data
Helen Bruce  •  Marta Lapsley
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  6
THE TEST REQUEST  6
FACTORS AFFECTING TEST RESULTS  7
Preanalytical factors  7
Analytical factors  10
Postanalytical factors  12
INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS  13
Normal and abnormal  13
The meaning of normal  13
Reference values  14
Comparison of observed results with  
reference limits  15
Comparison of results with previous 
values  15
THE PREDICTIVE VALUE OF TESTS  16
Introduction  16
Prevalence and predictive value  18
Practical applications of the predictive value 
model  19
Receiver operating characteristic  
curves  19
Likelihood ratios  19
CONCLUSION  20
INTRODUCTION
It was emphasized in Chapter 1 that all investigations 
in medicine should be performed to answer specific 
questions. Biochemical data obtained must be consid-
ered in relation to the reason for the request, and against 
the background of an understanding of the relevant 
normal physiological and biochemical mechanisms and 
the way in which these respond to disease. One of the 
objectives of any laboratory is to ensure these data are 
available in a timely manner, and generated efficiently. 
The achievement of this goal requires careful attention 
to every step in the process, from the ordering of the 
investigation, the ­collection of the specimen(s) required, 
their transport to the laboratory and analysis, to the de-
livery of a report to the clinician, appropriate action be-
ing taken and the effects of this action being assessed. 
Amongst these many steps, the interpretation of data 
by clinical biochemists adds considerably to the value of 
the data. The workload of most laboratories is so great 
that it would be impossible (as well as being unneces-
sary) to add such comments to all reports (e.g. where 
the results are clearly normal). Interpretative comments 
(which may be individual or rule-based) are more likely 
to be required for more unusual tests, and for requestors 
who have only limited experience of the investigation 
in question. Typical reports requiring more detailed 
interpretation include those with borderline data, re-
sults that are not consistent with the clinical findings, 
apparently contradictory data and changes in biochemi-
cal variables during dynamic function tests.
THE TEST REQUEST
The first step in performing a biochemical ­investigation 
is for a request form to be completed, often electroni-
cally, which prompts the collection of the appropriate 
specimen(s) and instructs the laboratory on the investi­
gations(s) to be performed. Depending upon the reason 
for the request, the expertise of the clinician and the 
practice of the laboratory, the request may simply be 
for one or more specified analyses on a body fluid; for 
a set (often referred to as a ‘profile’) of standard in-
vestigations (e.g. ‘thyroid function tests’); for a more 
involved procedure such as a dynamic function test in-
volving the collection of serial samples following a spe-
cific ­stimulus, or an open request to perform whatever 
assays are deemed appropriate by the laboratory staff to 
answer the question posed in the request. The major-
ity of biochemical test requests fall into the first two 
categories.
The information that is required when a test is re-
quested is summarized in Table 2.1.
	
2  Acquisition and interpretation of biochemical data	
7
FACTORS AFFECTING TEST RESULTS
The generation of biochemical data is potentially subject 
to error at every stage in the process. It is essential that 
the sources of error are identified and understood, so that 
their effects can be minimized.
The sources of errors in biochemical tests are conven-
tionally described in three categories:
•	 preanalytical: that is, either outside or within the 
laboratory, but before the analysis is performed
•	 analytical: these may be random (e.g. due to the 
­presence of an interfering substance in the specimen) 
or systematic (e.g. because of a bias in the method)
•	 postanalytical: that is, occurring during data pro-
cessing or transmission, or in relation to the inter-
pretation of the data.
Preanalytical factors
Preanalytical factors may appear to be beyond the remit 
of clinical biochemists, but accreditation bodies are in-
creasingly expecting laboratories to take responsibility 
for all aspects of testing. Laboratories should ensure that 
clinicians requesting investigations and the staff respon-
sible for collecting the specimens understand the prob-
lems that can arise, so that specimens are collected and 
transported appropriately.
Preanalytical factors fall into two categories: those 
that relate to the specimen obtained for analysis (techni-
cal factors) and those that relate directly to the patient 
(biological factors).
Technical factors
These include:
•	 correct identification of the patient
•	 appropriate preparation of the patient where 
necessary
•	 collection of the specimen into an appropriate con-
tainer with the correct anticoagulant or preservative
•	 accurate labelling of the specimen container after 
the sample has been collected (not before, as this 
carries a higher risk of a specimen being put into a 
container bearing another patient’s name). Primary 
labelling of the sample with a barcode at source 
­reduces the risk of mislabelling in the laboratory
•	 rapid and secure transport to the laboratory. Some 
specimens need to be transported under special con-
ditions, for example arterial blood for ‘blood gases’ 
in a sealed syringe in an ice-water mixture; requests 
for blood, urine or faecal porphyrins must be pro-
tected from light.
Care must be taken during specimen collection to 
avoid contamination (e.g. with fluid from a drip), haemol-
ysis of blood or haemoconcentration (due to prolonged 
application of a tourniquet). Appropriate precautions are 
also required during the collection and transport of urine, 
faeces, spinal fluid or tissue. Specimens known to be in-
fective (e.g. from patients carrying the hepatitis B or HIV 
viruses) are occasionally handled specially, but it is good 
practice to handle all specimens as if they were potentially 
hazardous.
On receipt in the laboratory, the patient’s name and 
other identifiers on the specimen must be checked 
against these details on the request form, whether pa-
per or electronic. The specimen and form should then 
be labelled with the same unique number. As electronic 
requesting becomes more common, the majority of spec-
imens are now being labelled with a unique barcode at 
source. Secondary containers (e.g. aliquots from the pri-
mary tube) should also be identified with patient details 
and the same unique number as the primary container. 
Automated preanalytical robotics and track systems can 
minimize the number of manual interventions required 
during sample handling, thereby minimizing risk of 
­errors. All these processes are facilitated if computer 
­systems in hospitals or surgeries have electronic links to 
the laboratory information system.
Laboratories should have written protocols (standard 
operating procedures) for the receipt and handling of all 
specimens to ensure the positive identification of speci-
mens throughout the analytical process.
Biological factors
Numerous factors directly related to the patient can 
­influence biochemical variables, in addition to patho-
logical processes. They can conveniently be divided into 
­endogenous factors, intrinsic to the patient, and exoge-
nous factors, which are imposed by the patient’s circum-
stances. They are summarized in Table 2.2.
In addition, all biochemical variables show some in-
trinsic variation, tending to vary randomly around the 
typical value for the individual.
TABLE 2.1  Information required when  
requesting a biochemical investigation
Information
Reason
Patient’s name, identifying 
(e.g. hospital) numbera, 
date of birth and sex
Identification and (age, sex) 
interpretation of results
Home address for primary 
care patients
Address may be useful if 
grossly abnormal results 
are found
Return address (e.g. ward, 
clinic, surgery; telephone/
pager number if urgent)
Delivery of report
Name of clinician (and 
telephone/pager number)
Liaison
Audit
Billing
Clinical details (including 
drug treatment)
Justification of request
Audit
Interpretation
Selection of appropriate 
assays
Choice of analytical 
method (to avoid drug 
interference)
Test(s) requested
Instruction to analyst
Sample(s) required
Instruction to phlebotomist
Date (and timeb if 
appropriate)
Identification
Interpretation (with timed/
sequential requests)
aIn the UK, it is mandatory to supply the National Health Service 
Number.
bIt is good practice also to record the time at which the specimen 
and request is received in the laboratory.
8	
Clinical biochemistry
Endogenous factors 
Age. The reference values (mentioned in more detail later 
in the chapter) for many biochemical variables do not 
vary significantly with age during adult life. Some, how-
ever, are different during childhood, particularly in the 
neonatal period. A well-known example is plasma ­alkaline 
phosphatase activity, which is higher in ­children, partic-
ularly during the pubertal growth spurt, than in adults. 
Plasma cholesterol concentrations tend to ­increase with 
age, but may fall slightly over the age of 70; plasma urate 
concentrations tend to rise with age. Given that ­renal 
function tends to decline with age, it might be anticipated 
that mean plasma creatinine concentrations would rise 
with age, but the tendency for loss of muscle bulk in the 
elderly has a balancing effect. Other age-­related changes 
are discussed elsewhere in this book.
Sex. Apart from the obvious differences in plasma go-
nadal hormone concentrations between adult men and 
women, other analytes demonstrate sex-related differ-
ences in concentration, often because their metabolism is 
influenced by gonadal hormones. Thus, total cholesterol 
concentrations tend to be higher in healthy men than in 
women until the menopause, after which concentrations 
in women tend to rise. In general, sex-related differences 
in biochemical variables are less between boys and girls 
prepubertally, while the differences between adult males 
and females decrease after the menopause.
When age and sex are important determinants of the 
level of a biochemical variable, measurements in patients 
should be considered in relation to age- and sex-related 
reference values, if valid conclusions are to be drawn.
Changes in many biochemical variables occur during 
pregnancy and, where necessary, measurements must be 
compared with reference values appropriate to the stage 
of gestation. The clinical biochemistry of pregnancy is 
considered in detail in Chapter 22.
Ethnic origin. Plasma creatine kinase activity tends 
to be higher in people of sub-Saharan African descent 
than Caucasians (typically up to three times the upper 
reference limit; people of southern Asian origin may have 
intermediate values), but otherwise, there are no signifi-
cant differences in the typical values for most biochemical 
variables between individuals of different ethnic origin 
living in the same region.
Body mass. Obese individuals tend to have higher 
plasma insulin and triglyceride concentrations than lean 
individuals, with an increased risk of developing type 
2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. Creatinine produc-
tion is related to muscle bulk and plasma concentration 
may be above the usual reference range in a muscular 
individual, despite having a normal glomerular filtration 
rate. Twenty-four hour urinary excretion of many sub-
stances is greater in people of higher body mass. On the 
whole, however, body mass has little effect on the concen-
trations of substances in body fluids, although, of course, 
it is an important determinant of the total quantities of 
many substances in the body.
Exogenous factors. Many exogenous factors can have 
profound influences on the concentrations of biochemi-
cal variables even in healthy individuals. They include the 
time of day, stress, posture, fasting status, drugs, exercise 
and concurrent ­illness (see Tables 2.2 and 2.3).
Time-dependent changes. Rhythmic changes oc-
cur in many physiological functions and are reflected 
in changes in the levels of biochemical variables with 
time. The time base may be diurnal (related to the time 
of day, but usually nycthemeral, i.e. related to the sleep–
wake cycle), catamenial (relating to the menstrual cycle) 
or seasonal. In addition, some hormones are secreted in 
sporadic bursts (e.g. growth hormone); when this occurs, 
it may be helpful to collect several blood samples over a 
short period of time and to base clinical decisions on the 
mean value.
The best known analyte having a diurnal varia-
tion in ­concentration is cortisol. Its concentration is at 
a ­nadir at about midnight, rises rapidly to reach a peak 
at 08.00–09.00 h and then declines throughout the day. 
Observed values must be compared with reference ­values 
for specific times, with sampling at expected peak or 
trough times being the most informative. Other analytes 
TABLE 2.2  Some biological factors affecting 
biochemical variables
Factor
Example
Endogenous
Age
Cholesterol
Alkaline phosphatase
Urate
Sex
Gonadotrophins
Gonadal steroids
Body mass
Triglycerides
Exogenous
 
Time
Cortisol (daily)
Gonadotrophins (in women, 
catamenial)
25-Hydroxyvitamin D (seasonal)
Stress
Cortisol
Prolactin
Catecholamines
Posture
Renin
Aldosterone
Proteins
Food intake
Glucose
Triglycerides
Drugs
see Table 2.3 and text
TABLE 2.3  Some examples of in vivo effects of 
drugs on biochemical variables
Drugs
Effect
Mechanism
Glucocorticoids
Decreased plasma 
cortisol
Suppression 
of ACTH 
secretion
Thiazide diuretics
Decreased plasma 
potassium
Increased 
renal 
potassium 
excretion
Oestrogens
Increased plasma 
total thyroxine
Increased 
synthesis 
of binding 
proteins
Phenytoin, 
phenobarbitone, 
alcohol
Increased plasma  
γ-glutamyltransferase
Increased 
enzyme 
synthesis 
(enzyme 
induction)
	
2  Acquisition and interpretation of biochemical data	
9
showing a diurnal rhythm (but to lesser extents) include 
thyroid stimulating hormone, testosterone and prolactin.
Some analytes show regular variations with a different 
time base. In women, during the reproductive years, the 
menstrual cycle is associated with regular changes in the 
concentrations of gonadotrophins, oestrogens and pro-
gesterone. Measurements made for diagnostic purposes 
must be made at the appropriate time in the cycle: for 
example, an increase in plasma progesterone concentra-
tion seven days before the onset of the next menstrual 
period is due is taken as an indication that ovulation has 
occurred.
Plasma 25-Hydroxycholecalciferol concentration var-
ies with the season, being higher in summer than in 
winter.
Stress. Concern for the patient dictates that stress 
should be minimized at all times, but this is particularly 
important in relation to blood sampling for those ana-
lytes with concentrations that are responsive to (usually 
by increasing) stress. Pituitary and adrenal hormones are 
particularly affected. Thus plasma adrenocorticotropic 
hormone (ACTH), cortisol, prolactin, growth hormone 
and catecholamine concentrations all rise in response to 
stress. Indeed, this effect is utilized in investigations of 
pituitary function. However, avoidance of stress is vital 
when collecting specimens for the measurement of these 
hormones under other circumstances.
Posture. Posture has a significant effect on a wide range 
of analytes. The best known of these are plasma renin 
activity and aldosterone concentration. Both are higher 
in the standing than the recumbent (or even sitting) posi-
tion, particularly shortly after the change in posture, as a 
result of a decrease in renal blood flow.
The effect of posture on certain other analytes is less 
well appreciated. When people are upright, there is a 
greater tendency for fluid to move from the vascular to 
the interstitial compartment than when they are recum-
bent. Small molecules and ions in solution move with wa-
ter, but macromolecules and smaller moieties bound to 
them do not. As a result, the concentrations of proteins, 
including lipoproteins, and of protein-bound substances, 
for example thyroid and other hormones, calcium and 
iron, tend to be approximately 10% higher when an in-
dividual is in the upright position than when recumbent. 
Intermediate values occur when sitting. This effect may 
be relevant when values obtained from individuals when 
they are outpatients are compared with values obtained 
when they are inpatients.
Food intake. The concentrations of many analytes vary 
in relation to food intake. Frequently encountered exam-
ples include glucose, triglycerides and insulin, the plasma 
concentrations of which all increase following a meal, so 
that they should usually be measured in the fasting state, 
unless the effect of recent intake (as in the glucose toler-
ance test) is being examined. Some specific dietary con-
stituents can affect biochemical variables; consumption of 
red meat in the hours before venepuncture may increase 
plasma creatinine concentrations by as much as 30% from 
fasting values. A protein-rich meal results in increased 
urea synthesis and increases plasma urea concentration. 
Long-term dietary habits can also significantly affect bio-
chemical variables (e.g. cholesterol).
The urinary excretion of many substances is highly de-
pendent on their intake and, although some laboratories 
publish reference ranges for them, they are very wide. In 
assessing the significance of the excretion of substances in 
the urine, it is important to consider their intake and thus 
their expected excretion if renal function is normal. Thus, 
for example, a low urinary sodium excretion is a normal 
response to sodium depletion.
Drugs. Drugs, whether taken for therapeutic, social or 
other purposes, can have profound effects on the results 
of biochemical tests. These can be due to interactions oc-
curring both in vivo and in vitro.
In vivo interactions occur more frequently. They can 
be due to direct or indirect actions on physiological pro-
cesses or to pathological actions. There are numerous 
examples in each category. Some of the better known 
physiological interactions are indicated in Table  2.3. 
Others are discussed elsewhere in this book.
Pathological consequences of drug action in vivo can 
be idiosyncratic (unpredictable) or dose related. A mea-
surable biochemical change may be the first indication 
of a harmful effect of a drug, and biochemical tests are 
widely used to provide an early indication of possible 
harmful effects of drugs, both for those in established use 
(e.g. measurement of serum creatine kinase activity in pa-
tients being treated with statins) and in drug trials.
Drugs can also interfere with analyses in  vitro (this is 
strictly an analytical factor, but is mentioned here for com-
pleteness), for example by inhibiting the generation of a 
signal or by cross-reacting with the analyte in question and 
giving a spuriously high signal. This field is well documented, 
but the introduction of new drugs means that new examples 
of this source of error are continually being described.
Other factors. Exercise can cause a transient increase 
in plasma potassium concentration and creatine kinase 
activity; the latter used to be a potential confounding fac-
tor in the diagnosis of myocardial infarction in a patient 
who had developed chest pain during exercise before 
­cardiac-specific troponin measurement was introduced. 
Even uncomplicated surgery may cause an increase in 
creatine kinase as a result of muscle damage, and tissue 
damage during surgery can also cause transient hyper-
kalaemia. Major surgery and severe illness can elicit the 
‘metabolic response to trauma’ (see Chapter 20), which 
can lead to changes in many biochemical variables.
Intrinsic biological variation. The contributions to bio-
logical variation discussed thus far are predictable, and 
either preventable or can be allowed for in interpreting 
test results. However, levels of analytes also show ran-
dom variation around their homoeostatic set points. This 
variation contributes to the overall imprecision of mea-
surements and must also be taken into account in the in-
terpretation of test results. It is also relevant to the setting 
of goals for analytical precision (see below).
Intrinsic biological variation can be measured by col-
lecting a series of specimens from a small group of com-
parable individuals over a period of time (typically several 
weeks) under conditions such that analytical imprecision 
is minimized. The specimens should be handled identi-
cally and analysed in duplicate, using an identical tech-
nique (e.g. the same instrument, operator, calibrators and 
10	
Clinical biochemistry
reagents). This may either be done at the time the speci-
mens are collected or in a single batch. If the latter ap-
proach is adopted, the specimens must be stored in such 
a way that degradation of the analyte is prevented (e.g. by 
freezing at a sufficiently low temperature). Using a single 
batch procedure is preferable as it eliminates between-
run analytical variation.
If the specimens are analysed in a single batch, the ana-
lytical imprecision (see below) can be calculated from the 
differences in the duplicate analyses and is given by:
SD
differences
n
A =
(
)
∑
2
2
where SD is the standard deviation and n is the number 
of pairs of data. If, however, specimens are analysed at 
the time they are taken, the analytical imprecision must 
be calculated from replicate analyses of quality control 
samples.
The standard deviation of a single set of data from each 
individual is then calculated after excluding any outliers 
(‘fliers’) using an appropriate statistical test. This stan-
dard deviation will encompass both analytical variation 
and the intraindividual variation (SDI), such that:
SD
SD
SD
A
I
=
+
2
2
Since SDA is known, the intraindividual variation can 
then be calculated. It is also possible to calculate the 
­interindividual variation (SDG, due to the difference in 
the individual homoeostatic set points for the analyte be-
tween each member of the group) by calculating the SD 
for all single sets of data for all subjects in the group, since 
this SD is given by:
SD
SD
SD
SD
A
I
G
=
+
+
2
2
2
The calculations required can be performed using a 
nested analysis of variance technique as provided in many 
statistical software packages. An alternative approach 
is to calculate coefficients of variation (CV) (given by 
(SD × 100)/mean). Values for CV can be substituted for 
SD in these formulae because the means are similar.
Some typical values of biological variation for fre-
quently measured analytes are given in Table 2.4. (A ref-
erence to a more extensive list is provided in the Further 
reading section at the end of the chapter.) It should be 
noted that, while in most instances the interindividual 
variation is greater than the intraindividual variation, this 
is not always the case. When it is not, it means that the 
extent of natural variation around individuals’ homoeo-
static set points is more than the range of variation be-
tween these set points. The relative sizes of intra- and 
interindividual variation have important consequences 
for the interpretation of analytical data in relation to ref-
erence ranges, as will be discussed later in the chapter.
Analytical factors
It is clearly essential that every effort is made to reduce 
the possibility of errors arising during analysis. A rigorous 
quality assurance programme (discussed in Chapter 3), is 
required to ensure the quality of results. The production 
of reports and their transmission to the requesting clini-
cian are discussed below (see Postanalytical factors).
Test methods and procedures must be selected to allow 
adequate performance. Some of the important factors 
that impinge on performance will now be considered. 
The question of what is adequate performance will also 
be discussed. It should be appreciated that deciding on 
the standards for performance of individual assays re-
quires an appreciation of all the factors involved: efforts 
to reduce specimen volume (an important consideration 
in paediatric, and particularly neonatal, practice) may af-
fect accuracy and precision; these may also be influenced 
by a requirement to achieve a very rapid turnaround time. 
Cost, instrumentation and staff skill mix are other impor-
tant factors.
Analytical range. The test selected must be capable 
of measuring the analyte in question over the whole 
range of concentrations that may be expected to occur. 
Measuring large quantities of an analyte is usually eas-
ier than measuring small quantities (though dilution of 
the sample may be necessary to bring the concentration 
within the range of acceptable performance, i.e. to avoid 
nonlinearity of signal to concentration). Note, however, 
that if dilutions are to be employed, their validity must 
be established by appropriate studies to demonstrate that 
dilution, per se, does not affect the relationship between 
analyte concentration and the signal generated. It is not 
always possible to design an assay that has a low enough 
detection limit (i.e. the lowest level of the analyte that can 
be reliably distinguished from zero, usually taken as the 
mean signal generated by zero standards plus two stan-
dard deviations); this has been a particular problem with 
the analysis of certain hormones, the plasma concentra-
tions of which are in the nano- or even picomolar range, 
but is becoming less so with the introduction of more 
sensitive assay techniques.
For some analytes, the need to be able to measure 
concentrations over very wide ranges can pose technical 
problems, for example the ‘high dose hook effect’ with 
immunoassays for prolactin and human chorionic gonad-
otrophin. This term refers to the decrease in signal that 
occurs at high concentrations as a result of binding sites 
on the capture and labelled antibodies being occupied by 
separate molecules of the analyte rather than these caus-
ing crosslinking between them (the usual situation when 
the antibodies are in excess). For C-reactive protein 
(CRP) in serum, the requirement to be able to measure 
concentrations accurately in two different ranges (‘high 
sensitivity’ CRP as a cardiovascular risk marker or marker 
of neonatal sepsis and CRP as an inflammatory marker) 
has led to the introduction of separate assays for each of 
the two ranges of concentration.
Accuracy and bias. Accuracy reflects the ability of an assay 
to produce a result that reflects the true value. Inaccuracy 
is the numerical difference between the mean of a set 
of replicate measurements and the true value. The term 
‘bias’ is often preferred to ‘inaccuracy’ in ­laboratory medi-
cine as it implies a persistent characteristic rather than an 
	
2  Acquisition and interpretation of biochemical data	
11
occasional effect. It is due to systematic error (cf. precision, 
below) and can be positive (the result is higher than the 
true result) or negative (lower than the true result), and 
constant (being the same absolute value throughout the 
analytical range) or proportional (having the same relative 
value to the true result).
Ideally, analyses should be without bias, but, provided 
that its extent and characteristics are known, the predict-
ability of bias makes it less of a problem in the interpreta-
tion of laboratory data than imprecision.
Precision. Precision is a reflection of reproducibility. 
Imprecision is defined as the standard deviation for a se-
ries of replicate analyses (i.e. made on the same sample, 
by the same method, under identical conditions). For 
many analytes it is very low, giving coefficients of varia-
tion (CV, defined as (SD × 100)/mean value) of 1% or 
less. For others it is higher, giving CVs as high as 5%. 
The median imprecisions for some serum analytes, as 
achieved by a group of laboratories in the UK, are given 
in Table 2.4.
Imprecision in analysis can never be entirely elimi-
nated. Such analytical variation is an important factor to 
be borne in mind when interpreting the results of labora-
tory tests, as discussed later.
Analytical variation or imprecision can be measured by 
performing repeated analyses on a single sample and cal-
culating the standard deviation of the results, or by doing 
duplicate measurements on a series of samples as described 
in the section on biological variation, above. Imprecision 
tends to be highest when the signal generated by an assay 
(e.g. a colour change or electric potential) is low. To be 
of value in interpreting results, imprecision should be de-
termined over a range of concentrations and particularly 
in the region of critical values (decision levels), where a 
small change in a result can lead to a significant change in 
management of the patient.
Specificity and interference. Specificity is the ability of 
an assay to measure only the analyte it purports to mea-
sure. Most assays are highly specific, but exceptions do 
occur, both owing to endogenous substances and to drugs 
that can give a signal in the assay and cause the concentra-
tion/activity to appear higher or lower than it is. A detailed 
discussion of this topic is beyond the scope of this chapter. 
Some important examples are mentioned elsewhere in this 
book and further information is available from the bibli-
ography. Interference is a related, but separate problem, 
in that a substance alters the signal given by the analyte in 
question, but does not generate a signal itself.
Practicalities: what is desirable performance? In their 
enthusiasm to perfect analytical methods, clinical bio-
chemists must be careful not to lose sight of the appli-
cation of their work. A result is of no value if its bias or 
imprecision render it dangerously unreliable; neither is 
it of value if the method is practically too complicated or 
too expensive to be useful, or if it takes so long to perform 
that the need for the result has passed by the time it be-
comes available.
What is required of a test is that it should be capable 
of providing a result that will answer the question that is 
posed. To give a simple example, if the requirement is to 
confirm that a patient with the typical clinical features 
of diabetic ketoacidosis does indeed have this condition, 
what is needed is a rapid test that will confirm the pres-
ence of hyperglycaemia. In this context, it is of little rel-
evance whether the blood glucose concentration is 30 or 
35 mmol/L. But if a glucose tolerance test is required to 
establish (or refute) a diagnosis of diabetes because the 
TABLE 2.4  Biological and analytical variation and consequent desirable analytical performance  
parameters for some frequently measured constituents of plasma expressed as coefficients of variation 
(CV = (SD × 100)/mean)
Analyte
Intra-individual  
variation (%)
Inter-individual  
variation (%)
Typical  
analytical 
imprecision (%)
Desirable 
analytical 
precision (%)
Desirable 
analytical bias (%)
Sodium
0.7
1.0
1.1
0.4
0.3
Potassium
4.8
5.6
1.5
2.4
1.8
Calcium (total)
1.9
2.8
2.6
1.0
0.8
Magnesium
3.6
6.4
4.5
1.8
1.8
Phosphate
8.5
9.4
3.0
4.3
3.2
Bicarbonate
4.8
5.3
7.4
2.4
1.8
Urea
12.3
18.3
4.6
6.2
5.5
Creatinine
6.0
14.7
7.9
3.0
4.0
Urate
9.0
17.6
3.3
4.5
4.9
Glucose
4.5
5.8
2.5
2.3
1.8
Bilirubin (total)
23.8
39.0
6.0
11.9
11.4
Cholesterol (total)
5.4
15.2
3.0
2.7
4.0
Triglycerides
20.9
37.2
4.1
10.5
10.7
Total protein
2.7
4.0
3.7
1.4
1.2
Albumin
3.1
4.2
3.4
1.6
1.3
Alkaline phosphatase
6.4
24.8
4.7
3.2
6.4
Alanine aminotransferase
18.0
42.0
4.7
9.0
11.4
γ-Glutamyl transferase
13.8
41.0
4.2
6.9
10.8
Creatine kinase
22.8
40.0
4.2
11.4
11.5
Data from various sources, including UKNEQAS (UK National External Quality Assurance Scheme) website and Ricos et al. on Westgard QC 
website (see Further reading).
12	
Clinical biochemistry
clinical features are equivocal, time is of little concern, 
but the precision and accuracy are of paramount impor-
tance. Imprecision or bias may lead to the diagnosis being 
missed or a patient being classified as having diabetes and 
managed as if he had the condition when he does not.
In practice, it is rarely necessary to sacrifice accuracy 
and precision for the sake of a result being available rap-
idly. Providing that they are used competently, and in ac-
cordance with standard operating procedures, many rapid 
methods, including point-of-care (near-patient) testing 
instruments, using ‘dry chemistry’ techniques, are intrin-
sically as reliable as traditional laboratory-based proce-
dures. But, although clinical biochemists rightly strive 
to increase the accuracy and precision of assays, there 
must come a point where further efforts may not result 
in significant improvements in the reliability of data or 
their value when applied to patient care. The question: 
‘What is desirable performance?’ needs examination in 
some detail.
Analytical goals. Numerous strategies have been ap-
plied to the setting of desirable standards for the per-
formance characteristics of laboratory tests or ‘analytical 
goals’. These have been based, for example, on the opin-
ions of clinical users, of laboratory-based experts, on 
imprecision data, on arbitrary fractions of the refer-
ence range etc. The most widely accepted strategy for 
defining analytical goals is based on data on analytical 
imprecision in the assay and biological variation for the 
analyte. The desirable goal is that analytical imprecision 
should be less than or equal to half the intraindividual 
biological variation.
Expressing imprecision as coefficients of variation 
(CV), the goal is thus: CVA ≤0.5 × CVI, where CVA is the 
CV for analytical imprecision and CVI is the CV for intra­
individual variation. Since the overall imprecision is equal 
to the square root of the sum of the squares of individual 
imprecisions, i.e:
CV
CV
CV
TOTAL
A
=
+
2
1
2
it follows that if the goal is achieved, CVTOTAL ~ 1.12 × CVI. 
This means that if the goal is achieved, analytical impre-
cision will contribute only about 12% to the overall im-
precision of the result.
This concept has been extended to encompass goals 
for optimum performance (CVA ≤0.25 × CVI) and mini-
mum performance (CVA ≤0.75 × CVI). Clearly, the less the 
analytical precision, the less the overall precision, but at 
any level of biological imprecision, equal increments in 
analytical precision (that is, lower imprecision) will pro-
duce relatively smaller increments in the overall quality 
of the result. Striving for analytical perfection may, there-
fore, be an inappropriate use of resources, which does 
not provide additional clinical value in decision-making. 
Some examples of analytical goals are given in Table 2.4. 
The relevance of both analytical and biological variation 
to the interpretation of results must not be understated. 
High precision and accuracy must be obtained over the 
whole range of concentrations that are likely to be en-
countered, but particularly over the range(s) critical to 
decision-making.
This brief discussion of analytical goals has centred on 
imprecision. Bias may appear less important, since most 
results on most patients will be compared with their own 
previous values or with reference ranges obtained us-
ing the same method. But patients may move from one 
healthcare setting to another and analyses may be per-
formed by different methods in a variety of settings, so 
that accuracy (or lack of bias) to ensure comparability 
of results is also important. This is particularly the case 
when diagnoses and management decisions may be based 
on consensus opinions, for example the World Health 
Organization criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes, tar-
gets for glycated haemoglobin in the management of dia-
betes or the recommendations of various expert bodies 
for the management of hyperlipidaemias. An alternative 
approach to minimizing differences between methods is 
to develop nationally agreed guidelines or standards. In 
the UK, the introduction of the modified Modification 
of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) formula for calcu-
lating estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) that 
is traceable back to the reference method for measur-
ing creatinine (see Chapter  7), is an example of such 
standardization.
Desirable standards for bias have also been set and can 
be combined with those for precision to produce stan-
dards for total allowable error. For analytical bias (BA), 
the desirable goal is given by:
B
CV
CV
A
G
= <
+
(
)
√
0 25
1
2
2
.
This can be combined with the analytical goal for 
imprecision to produce the ‘total allowable error’ (TEa) 
given by:
TE
CV
CV
CV
a
G
= <
+
(
) +
×
(
)
√
0 25
1 65 0 5
1
2
2
1
.
.
.
The interested reader is referred to the detailed 
­discussion of this topic by Fraser (see Further reading, 
below). In practice, these concepts are less widely ap-
plied to assay performance than perhaps they should 
be, but ideally, their value should be assessed for indi-
vidual analytes on the basis of their influence on clinical 
outcome.
Postanalytical factors
Errors can still arise even after an analysis has been 
­performed, for example if calculations are required or if 
results have to be transferred manually, either directly 
from an analyser to a report or entered into a computer 
database. Even computers are not immune to error.
An error in the transmission of the report to the re-
sponsible clinician can also lead to an incorrect result be-
ing used for the management of the patient. Transcription 
errors can arise if results are telephoned, although it may 
be essential to do this if results are required urgently. 
Strict procedures should be followed when telephoning 
reports, both in the laboratory and by the person receiv-
ing the report. Although time-consuming, it is advisable 
for the person receiving the report to read it back to the 
person telephoning, to ensure that it has been recorded 
correctly.
	
2  Acquisition and interpretation of biochemical data	
13
Increasingly, data transfer is direct from the laboratory 
to the electronic patient record (EPR) and paper reports 
may not be printed routinely. Where paper reports are 
still used they must be transferred to the patient’s notes. 
Even at this stage (especially if there are patients with the 
same or similar names in the same area), care must be 
taken; misfiled reports are at best wasted and at worst, if 
acted on as if they referred to another patient, positively 
dangerous.
The final stage in the process is for the requesting 
clinician to take action on the basis of the report. The 
report must be interpreted correctly in relation to the 
clinical situation and the question that prompted the re-
quest. This interpretation may be provided by a member 
of the laboratory staff, by the requesting clinician or may 
be a matter for discussion between them. However, errors 
can arise even at this stage, leading to an inappropriate 
clinical decision. The interpretation of data is discussed 
in the next section. Requesting laboratory investigations 
can appear to be a simple process, but it should by now be 
apparent that there are many potential sources of error. 
All laboratories should engage in a programme of audit, 
whereby action is taken to maintain and improve perfor-
mance on a continuing basis, which will be discussed in 
Chapter 3.
INTERPRETATION OF RESULTS
Normal and abnormal
In interpreting the results of a biochemical investiga-
tion, one of two questions is likely to be posed: ‘Is the 
result normal?’ or, if it has been performed before, ‘Has 
the result changed significantly?’. Arguably, a more rel-
evant question to ask is, ‘What does this result add to 
my knowledge that will allow me to manage this clini-
cal situation better?’. The importance of considering this 
broader question should become apparent from a con-
sideration of the problems associated with answering the 
first two, narrower, questions.
When an investigation is performed on an individual 
for the first time, the result must be assessed against a 
reference point. Usually, it is assessed specifically against 
what is expected in a healthy individual, although it might 
be more relevant in a symptomatic individual to assess 
it against what is expected in a comparable patient with 
similar clinical features. The range of values expected in 
healthy individuals has often been termed the ‘normal 
range’, but for various reasons, the term ‘reference range’ 
(strictly, ‘reference interval’) is now preferred.
The meaning of normal
Normal ranges have traditionally been defined on the 
basis of measurements of the analyte in question in a suf-
ficiently large sample of individuals from an appropriate 
(in terms of, e.g. age, sex or ethnicity) healthy popula-
tion. For data having a Gaussian distribution, the nor-
mal range is defined as the range of values lying between 
the limits specified by two standard deviations below the 
mean and two standard deviations above (Fig. 2.1). This 
range encompasses 95% of the values found in the sam-
ple. The implication is that the great majority of healthy 
people will have a value for the analyte within this range.
‘Normal’ is a term used in statistics to describe a 
Gaussian distribution. Although the term ‘normal range’ is 
statistically valid only when the distribution is Gaussian, 
many analytes frequently measured in the laboratory have 
a skewed distribution – most frequently with a skew (tail) 
towards higher values. Examples include plasma alkaline 
phosphatase activity and the concentrations of triglycer-
ides and bilirubin. A further drawback to the use of the 
term ‘normal range’ is that the word ‘normal’ has sev-
eral different meanings in addition to its use in statistics. 
Given that the normal range, as defined above, encom-
passes only 95% of values characteristic of the chosen 
sample, 5% of individuals are bound to have values out-
side that range and might thus be considered ‘abnormal’. 
This is clearly absurd in relation to the more colloquial 
meanings of the word, for example ‘usual’, ‘acceptable’, 
‘typical’ or ‘healthy’.
Often there is not a definite cut-off associated with an 
analyte, but a continuum of increasing risk with increasing 
concentration. An excellent example of this is the risk of 
coronary heart disease associated with increasing plasma 
cholesterol concentration, which extends below even the 
value of 5.0 mmol/L, often regarded as being an appro-
priate target for healthy (low risk) individuals. Indeed, al-
though the curve of risk against cholesterol concentration 
becomes very shallow at low concentrations, it does not 
entirely flatten out (Fig. 2.2): that is, there is a continuum 
of increasing coronary risk associated with higher plasma 
cholesterol concentrations even in the lower part of the 
range of values typically found in adults in the UK. In this 
context, then, the term ‘normal range’ is potentially mis-
leading: it is more relevant to define target values, which 
will depend on the overall level of coronary risk.
Furthermore, even in patients with established dis-
ease, results may fall within the ‘normal range’. For most 
analytes, there is an overlap between the values usually 
FIGURE  2.1  ■ The normal (Gaussian) distribution. The normal 
range encompasses values falling between two standard devia-
tions above and below the mean and includes approximately 
95% of all the values.
14	
Clinical biochemistry
encountered in health and those encountered in disease 
(particularly if the disturbance is mild). Thus, it should 
not be assumed that all patients with values within the 
normal range for a particular analyte are free of the rel-
evant disease, just as it has been indicated that (by defini-
tion) not all patients with values falling outside the range 
are necessarily abnormal in any other way.
Reference values
Such considerations led to the development, in the late 
1960s, of the concept of reference values. The word ‘ref-
erence’ is free of the ambiguities associated with ‘nor-
mal’. A reference value is defined as the value for an 
analyte obtained by measurement in an individual (ref-
erence individual) precisely selected using defined crite-
ria, for example sex, age, state of health or other relevant 
characteristics.
The qualities required of a reference individual are 
only those specified: the term should not be taken as im-
plying the possession of any quality (e.g. ‘healthiness’) 
that has not been specified. If measurements are made on 
a representative sample (reference sample) from a popula-
tion of reference individuals (reference population) a dis-
tribution of values (a reference distribution) is obtained.
Reference limits can then be set and the range be-
tween these is defined as a reference interval. Typically, 
reference limits are set so that the interval encompasses 
values found in 95% of the reference samples, and this 
interval may then numerically be the same as the statisti-
cally defined normal range. Reference intervals are often 
colloquially termed ‘reference ranges’, but, strictly speak-
ing, this is incorrect usage, since the true reference range 
encompasses the whole range of values derived from the 
reference population. The term ‘reference range’ is used 
in this book in accordance with common practice as a 
more familiar synonym for the term ‘reference interval’.
Reference values can be obtained by carrying out mea-
surements on a carefully selected and precisely defined 
reference sample. If the distribution of values is Gaussian, 
the reference limits are the mean minus two standard 
deviations and the mean plus two standard deviations. 
When the distribution is non-Gaussian, the range can be 
calculated by ranking the values and deleting the lowest 
and highest 2.5%. Such a procedure has the considerable 
advantages that it requires no assumptions to be made 
about the characteristics of the distribution and does not 
require any transformation of the data to be made.
When the reference interval is derived from a sample 
of healthy individuals not known to be at increased risk 
of disease, the term effectively means ‘values character-
istically found in a group of healthy individuals and thus 
likely to encompass values found in other, comparable 
(with regard to age, sex etc.) healthy individuals’. It is 
sometimes called a ‘health-associated reference interval’. 
Note, however, that health is not essential to the defi-
nition. Reference values could as well be established for 
analytes in disease as in health, although in practice this 
has not often been done (and, as indicated above, their 
ranges would almost always overlap with the correspond-
ing health-related reference ranges).
Many strategies have been suggested for expressing 
observed values for biochemical variables in relation to 
the reference range: for example, the observed value can 
be expressed as a percentage of the mean of the refer-
ence interval or of the upper reference limit to give a 
‘centi-normalized unit’. Most such suggestions have not 
been adopted in clinical practice. For enzyme measure-
ments, however, where the values obtained can be highly 
method-dependent and can, in disease, be orders of mag-
nitude higher than reference values, it is sometimes help-
ful to express results as multiples of the upper reference 
limit. Measurements used in antenatal screening, e.g. 
α-fetoprotein and human chorionic gonadotrophin, are 
often reported as ‘multiples of the median’.
An alternative suggestion has been to quote a ‘refer-
ence change value’, which looks at a patient’s usual intra-
individual variation and expresses the observed value as a 
percentage of the mean individual reference interval. The 
development of sophisticated laboratory information sys-
tems has enabled alternatives to the reference range to 
become a realistic possibility.
Problems with reference intervals
Even reference intervals have disadvantages. However 
derived, they encompass the values from only 95% of the 
reference population. Thus, 5% of reference individu-
als will have values outside the reference limits. If two 
analytes that vary independently are measured, the prob-
ability of one of them being outside its reference limits is 
(1–0.952), that is 0.10. Of the reference individuals, 10% 
would be expected to have one of the measured values 
outside the reference limits. For ‘n’ analytes that vary in-
dependently, the probability is (1–0.95n), so that if 20 ana-
lytes were to be measured in an individual, there would 
be a 64% chance of one result being outside the reference 
limits. In practice, many tests are dependent on one an-
other to some extent (e.g. total protein and albumin), so 
that this probability is reduced, but the calculation serves 
to emphasize that, even where values characteristic of 
2.5
5.0
Serum cholesterol
concentration (mmol/L)
Coronary heart
disease risk
Number of subjects
7.5
FIGURE  2.2  ■ The distribution of serum cholesterol concentra-
tion in healthy subjects and risk of coronary heart disease. More 
than one-third of the values exceed the recommended highest 
acceptable concentration (5.0 mmol/L) and are associated with 
significantly increased risk. Note that the distribution is non-
Gaussian, being skewed to the right.
	
2  Acquisition and interpretation of biochemical data	
15
health and disease have a completely bimodal distribution 
(i.e. non-overlapping ranges, something that happens 
very rarely in practice), by no means all observed results 
outside the health-related reference limits would be as-
sociated with disease. On the other hand, common sense 
dictates that the further away from the reference limit an 
observed result is, the more likely it is to be pathological 
in origin.
Comparison of observed results 
with reference limits
The importance of comparing observed results with ap-
propriate (e.g. age- and sex-specific) reference intervals 
has already been emphasized.
As has been discussed, the appreciation of analytical 
and intrinsic biological variation for each analyte is also 
important. The implications for the interpretation of ob-
served data on patients are considerable. As an example, 
we can consider the measurement of creatinine in plasma, 
widely used as a test of renal function. Its (health-related) 
reference interval is of the order of 60–110 μmol/L, 
but this does not mean that this range of values will be 
­observed over time for a single healthy individual. The 
intraindividual biological variation of creatinine concen-
tration is around 4.6 μmol/L so that the reference inter-
val for individuals is approximately 18 μmol/L. Thus, 
two healthy individuals from the reference population 
might have typical creatinine concentrations that ranged 
­between, for example 60–78 μmol/L and 85–103 μmol/L, 
respectively. But, as will be discussed in the next section, a 
change in plasma creatinine concentration in an individual 
from 70 to 98 μmol/L would almost certainly signify a de-
crease in renal function, even though both results are well 
within the population-based reference interval.
When (as is usual) there is overlap, or even a con-
tinuum, of values of an analyte in health and disease, it 
may be necessary to define a cut-off value to determine 
if ­further action should be taken (e.g. initiating further 
­investigations). This is particularly true of screening 
tests, when there may be no other information to take 
into account in deciding the significance of a result. The 
considerations on which the selection of such a cut-off 
value depends are discussed later in this chapter.
In summary, it is important to appreciate that the in-
formation that can be provided by a single biochemical 
measurement is limited. In general, the results of com-
plementary or serial measurements are often of much 
greater value.
Comparison of results with previous values
The problem posed in the interpretation of a test result 
when the test has been performed previously, is a differ-
ent one. The relevant questions are, ‘Has there been a 
change and, if so, is it clinically significant?’.
In order to assess the relevance of any change to a 
pathological process, it is necessary to have a quantita-
tive indication of the possible contribution of analytical 
and intrinsic biological variation to the observed change. 
The probability that a difference between two results 
(whether an increase or a decrease) is significant at the 
95% level (i.e. that such a difference would only be ex-
pected to occur by chance alone on fewer than one in 20 
occasions), requires that the difference is 2.8 times the 
variation (SD) of the test (for the basis of this calculation, 
see Fraser 2001, in Further reading, below). Because of 
the contribution of both analytical and biological varia-
tion, the standard deviation of the test is given by:
SD
SD
SD
A
B
=
+
2
2
where SDA is the analytical variation and SDB is the bi-
ological variation. One set of estimates of the value of 
2.8 × SD, also known as the critical difference (more for-
mally called the ‘reference change value’), for some fre-
quently measured analytes, is given in Table 2.5. These 
values appear to differ little in health and disease and are 
valuable guides to clinical decision-making. Two caveats 
are important. First, the values quoted are mean values: 
individuals may show greater or lesser intrinsic biologi-
cal variation. Second, analytical performance (and hence 
analytical variation) varies considerably between labo-
ratories: ideally, laboratories should calculate their own 
values for critical differences, although in practice, this is 
seldom done.
It should be emphasized that, just because a change 
in the level of a biochemical variable exceeds the criti-
cal difference calculated from the known biological and 
analytical variation, it does not necessarily follow that it 
is clinically significant: that will depend on the precise 
clinical circumstances and needs to be assessed in rela-
tion to whatever clinical and other data are available. For 
example, restriction of dietary protein intake may cause 
a considerable reduction of plasma urea concentration 
TABLE 2.5  Critical differences: changes  
required in the plasma level of some  
frequently measured analytes to be of  
significance in an individual
 
Analyte
 
Concentration
Change 
absolute
Change 
(%)
Sodium
140 mmol/L
5.1
4
Potassium
4.2 mmol/L
0.6
14
Calcium (total)
2.4 mmol/L
0.2
9
Magnesium
1.0 mmol/L
0.2
16
Phosphate
1.2 mmol/L
0.3
25
Bicarbonate
26 mmol/L
6.4
25
Urea
5.0 mmol/L
1.8
37
Creatinine
60 μmol/L
16.7
28
Urate
260 μmol/L
69.8
27
Glucose
4.6 mmol/L
0.7
14
Bilirubin (total)
10 μmol/L
6.9
69
Cholesterol
5.8 mmol/L
1.0
17
Triglycerides
1.2 mmol/L
0.7
60
Total protein
75 g/L
9.6
13
Albumin
40 g/L
5.2
13
Alkaline phosphatase
60 U/L
13.3
22
Alanine 
aminotransferase
20 U/L
10.4
52
γ-Glutamyltransferase
40 U/L
16.2
40
Creatine kinase
150 U/L
97.4
65
Data from various sources, including UKNEQAS (UK National 
External Quality Assurance Scheme) website and Ricos et al. on 
Westgard QC website (see Further reading).
16	
Clinical biochemistry
in a patient with chronic renal disease, but this does not 
signify an improvement in renal function. The reverse is 
also true: the lack of a change does not necessarily im-
ply that there is no cause for concern. For example, the 
haemoglobin concentration of blood may initially remain 
within health-related reference limits for a short period, 
even after severe acute bleeding, because erythrocytes 
and plasma have been lost together.
Another important point in relation to critical dif-
ference values, is a possible difference between labora-
tory staff and clinical staff in ascribing significance to 
an apparent change. The choice of a probability of 0.95 
that two results are significantly different is arbitrary, 
although hallowed by practice. A probability of 0.99 is 
clearly more significant, but if two results differ with a 
probability of only 0.9, there is still a 9 in 10 chance that 
they are truly different. Decisions in medicine are still 
frequently made on much lower probabilities. It would 
be feasible to construct lists of critical differences at dif-
ferent levels of probabilities, but to publish such lists in 
laboratory handbooks would make them cumbersome 
and potentially confusing. However, laboratories should 
be able to provide guidance in this area to recently quali-
fied clinicians and for newly introduced investigations.
In practice, critical values for difference used by 
­clinicians are often empirical and not based on any ­formal 
­assessment. This does not invalidate their use; indeed, 
they have often been validated informally by long expe-
rience and observation of outcomes. However, they fall 
short of the requirements of ‘evidence-based clinical bio-
chemistry’ (discussed in Chapter 3).
Most instrument-based or laboratory-based man-
agement systems incorporate automatic procedures for 
identifying large (and potentially significant) changes in 
biochemical variables (‘delta checks’). Despite every ­effort 
to reduce analytical variation, such changes may arise 
because of unusual analytical imprecision or random er-
ror. Gross analytical errors (‘fliers’) will often be obvious 
because they are greater than typically occurs clinically. 
Smaller errors may not be obvious. Deciding whether a 
change in a variable is likely to represent a real change 
in the patient requires checks on the identity of the 
­specimen, internal quality control performance and the 
clinical details, if these are available on the request form 
or can be deduced from other information (the patient be-
ing located in the intensive therapy unit, for example), all 
of which the clinical biochemist will use in deciding what 
action to take. If the identity of the specimen is confirmed, 
the assay run was in control and the change is consistent 
with what is known about the ­patient, the result can be 
reported; if not, the original specimen may need to be re-
analysed or a further specimen obtained from the patient.
As well as ‘delta checks’, laboratories should be able to 
identify action limits, such that unexpectedly high or low 
results that may require an immediate change of man-
agement (e.g. low or very high serum potassium concen-
trations) are checked and communicated rapidly to the 
requesting clinician. Specific values may be set to trig-
ger further investigations on the basis of protocols agreed 
with the appropriate clinicians, for example magnesium if 
the corrected calcium concentration is low, or serum pro-
tein electrophoresis if the total globulin concentration is 
increased. All these procedures are of potential value to 
the patient and add to the clinical usefulness of the results 
in question.
THE PREDICTIVE VALUE OF TESTS
Introduction
It will have become clear that the interpretation of bio-
chemical data is bedevilled by the inevitable presence of 
analytical and intrinsic biological variation. It is still fre-
quently assumed that a result within reference limits indi-
cates freedom from disease or risk thereof, while a result 
outside reference limits at least requires that the patient 
be further investigated. What is lacking is any numerical 
indication of the probability that a particular result indi-
cates the presence or absence of disease.
The predictive value concept, introduced into clinical 
biochemistry in the mid-1970s by Galen and Gambino, 
represents an attempt to address these shortcomings. 
Essential to the concept of predictive values is that disease 
or freedom from disease can be defined absolutely, that 
is, that there is a test which can be regarded as the ‘gold 
standard’. For some conditions, this will be histological 
examination of tissue obtained at surgery or ­post-mortem, 
but it may be the eventual clinical outcome or some other 
more or less well-defined endpoint. It is against the gold 
standard that biochemical tests may be judged.
Definitions
If all the members of a population consisting of people 
with and without a particular disease are subjected to a 
particular test, the result for each of them will fall into 
one of four categories:
•	 true positives (TP) – individuals with disease, who 
test positive
•	 false positives (FP) – individuals free of disease, 
who test positive
•	 true negatives (TN) – individuals free of disease, 
who test negative
•	 false negatives (FN) – individuals with disease, who 
test negative.
Clearly, the number of individuals with disease equals 
(TP + FN) and the number without equals (TN + FP). 
The total number of positive tests is (TP + FP) and of 
negative (TN + FN).
These data can conveniently be arranged in a matrix 
(Table. 2.6). It is then easy to derive the other important 
TABLE 2.6  A matrix for classifying test results
 
Test result
Totals
Positive
Negative
Disease 
status
Positive
TP
FN
TP + FN
Negative
FP
TN
FP + TN
Totals
 
TP + FP
TN + FN
ALL
TP = true positive; TN = true negative; FP = false positive; FN = false 
negative.
	
2  Acquisition and interpretation of biochemical data	
17
parameters relating to test performance, that is, preva-
lence, sensitivity, specificity, predictive value and effi-
ciency (Table 2.7).
The predictive value model examines the performance 
of a test in defined circumstances. Clearly, it depends 
upon being able to determine the numbers of true and 
false positive and negative results, which depends upon 
there being an independent, definitive diagnostic test. 
The importance of the independence of the test under 
investigation from the definitive test may appear self-­
evident but, in practice, it is frequently overlooked.
Example
These concepts, and some of the pitfalls inherent in their 
use, can be illustrated with reference to a hypothetical 
example. Suppose that it is desired to assess the value of 
measurements of serum γ-glutamyltransferase activity to 
assist in the diagnosis of alcohol abuse in patients attend-
ing a drug-dependency clinic. It is decided that the test 
will be regarded as positive if the γ-glutamyltransferase 
activity exceeds the upper reference limit. Disease status 
is determined by a validated questionnaire.
Over the course of a year, 200 patients are tested. 
Enzyme activity is found to exceed the chosen limit in 73, 
but only 62 are judged to be abusing alcohol on the basis 
of the rigorous questionnaire. In 18 individuals judged to 
be abusing alcohol, enzyme activity is not elevated.
The results matrix can thus be completed as in 
Table 2.8. Calculation then shows that:
Prevalence = (62 + 18)/200 = 0.400 = 40%
Sensitivity = 62/(62 + 18) = 0.775 = 78%
Specificity = 109/(109 + 11) = 0.908 = 91%
PV(+) = 62/(62 + 11) = 0.849 = 85%
PV(−) = 109/(109 + 18) = 0.858 = 86%
Efficiency = (62 + 109)/200 = 0.855 = 86%
Thus, the test correctly identifies 78% of alcohol 
abusers; further, if a patient has an elevated enzyme activ-
ity, there is an 85% probability that he is abusing alco-
hol. However, it might be considered that a significant 
number of patients are being misclassified and that better 
performance might be achieved if the cut-off value for a 
positive test were to be set at a higher enzyme activity, say 
twice the upper reference limit.
The results matrix might then appear as in Table 2.9, 
from which:
Prevalence = (50 + 30)/200 = 0.400 = 40%
Sensitivity = 50/(50 + 30) = 0.625 = 63%
Specificity = 118/(118 + 2) = 0.983 = 98%
PV(+) = 50/(50 + 2) = 0.961 = 96%
PV(−) = 118 (118 + 30) = 0.797 = 80%
Efficiency = (50 + 118)/200 = 0.840 = 84%
The effect has been to decrease the sensitivity of the 
test, which now only correctly identifies 63% of alcohol 
abusers. On the other hand, if a patient tests positive, the 
TABLE 2.7  Important parameters relating to test performance
Parameter
Definition
Formula (expressed as %)
Prevalence
Number of individuals with the disease expressed as a  
fraction of the population
TP + FN/
(TP + FN + TN + FP)
Sensitivity
Number of true positives in all individuals with disease
TP/(TP + FN)
Specificity
Number of true negatives in all individuals free of the disease
TN/(TN + FP)
Positive predictive value
Number of individuals correctly defined as having disease
TP/(TP + FP)
Negative predictive value
Number of individuals correctly defined as free from disease
TN/(TN + FN)
Efficiency of test
Fraction of individuals correctly assigned as either having, or 
being free from disease
(TN + TF)/(TP + TF + FP + FN)
TP = true positive; TN = true negative; FP = false positive; FN = false negative.
TABLE 2.8  Results matrix using the upper reference limit as cut-off
 
Test result
Totals
Positive
Negative
Disease status
Positive
TP = 62
FN = 18
TP + FN = 80
Negative
FP = 11
TN = 109
FP + TN = 120
Totals
 
TP + FP = 73
TN + FN = 127
ALL = 200
TABLE 2.9  Results matrix using a higher upper reference limit as cut-off
 
Test result
Totals
Positive
 Negative
Disease status
Positive
TP = 50
FN = 30
TP + FN = 80
Negative
FP = 2
TN = 118
FP + TN = 120
Totals
 
TP + FP = 52
TN + FN = 148
ALL = 200
18	
Clinical biochemistry
probability that he is an alcohol abuser is now 96%. The 
overall efficiency of the test is little changed.
This example illustrates two important points about 
the predictive value model. The first is that sensitivity 
and specificity tend to vary inversely; second, appropri-
ate selection of the criterion for positivity or negativ-
ity (here the level of enzyme activity) allows either one 
to be maximized. If the cut-off is set very high, posi-
tive results will only occur in individuals with disease; 
there will be no false positives and specificity will be 
100%, although sensitivity will be low. On the other 
hand, if the cut-off is set low, no cases will be missed, 
but the false positive rate will be high; sensitivity will 
be 100%, but specificity will be low. This is illustrated 
in Figure 2.3.
Whether it is desirable to maximize sensitivity, speci-
ficity or efficiency depends on the nature of the condition 
being investigated, as discussed below.
Prevalence and predictive value
While sensitivity and specificity are dependent on the 
characteristics of the test and the nature of the condi-
tion being investigated, predictive values are dependent 
on the prevalence of the condition in the population un-
der examination. Consider the application of the mea-
surement of γ-glutamyltransferase activity to identify 
alcohol abuse during pregnancy. If 500 women were 
screened and the cut-off taken as the upper limit of the 
reference range, then the results matrix might show as in 
Table 2.10, from which:
Prevalence = (24 + 7)/500 = 0.062 = 6%
Sensitivity = 24/(24 + 7) = 0.774 = 77%
Specificity = 426/(426 + 43) = 0.908 = 91%
PV(+) = 24/(24 + 43) = 0.358 = 36%
PV(−) = 426/(426 + 7) = 0.983 = 98%
Efficiency = (426 + 24)/500 = 0.900 = 90%
The sensitivity and specificity are unchanged com-
pared with the previous example, but, because of the 
much lower prevalence of alcohol abuse in this group, 
the predictive value of a positive test is low: only 36% of 
those with a positive test are alcohol abusers. At the same 
time, the predictive value of a negative test is higher than 
in the patients attending the drug dependency clinic: this 
is again a consequence of the lower prevalence in preg-
nant women. It is instructive to note that the efficiency 
of the test appears greater in this context (90% in com-
parison to 84% in the drug abuse patients). Overall, the 
proportion of tests that correctly assign patients to the 
alcohol abuse or non-abuse categories is higher, although 
its performance in diagnosing abuse alone is poorer.
The effect of disease prevalence on predictive values 
is an important one. It means that the performance of 
a test in one group of patients cannot be translated to 
a different group. Although the predictive value of a 
new test may appear high in the typical experimental 
setting where equal numbers with and without dis-
ease are tested (the prevalence is 50%), it is likely to 
be much lower ‘in the field’. Thus, the performance 
of a new test must be analysed in groups of individu-
als comparable with those in whom it is to be used in 
practice. In the past, many exaggerated claims for tests 
have been made on the basis of their performance in a 
highly ­selected group.
FP
FN
TP
Number of subjects
Analyte
concentration
No
disease
Disease
TN
Negative test
Positive test
A
B
FP
TP
Number of subjects
Analyte
concentration
No
disease
Disease
TN
Negative test
Positive test
Cut-
off
Cut-
off
FIGURE 2.3  ■ The effect of moving the cut-off point that deter-
mines positivity/negativity of a test result. Hypothetical distri-
butions for the concentrations of an analyte with and without 
disease are shown. Because these overlap, if the cut-off is se-
lected to decrease the number of false positive (FP) results (and 
hence increase specificity), (A) there are a significant number of 
false negative (FN) results (decreasing the sensitivity). If the cut-
off is set lower (B), false negatives are eliminated (maximizing 
sensitivity), but at the expense of increasing the number of false 
positives (and decreasing specificity). The distribution for indi-
viduals with disease has been shown below the axis for clarity. 
TP, true positive; TN, true negative.
TABLE 2.10  Results matrix in a population with a lower disease prevalence
 
Test result
Totals
Positive
Negative
Disease status
Positive
TP = 24
FN = 7
TP + FN = 31
Negative
FP = 43
TN = 426
FP + TN = 469
Totals
 
TP + FP = 67
TN + FN = 433
ALL = 500
	
2  Acquisition and interpretation of biochemical data	
19
Practical applications of the predictive 
value model
High sensitivity in a diagnostic test is required when a 
test is being used to diagnose a serious and treatable con-
dition. The false negative rate (missed diagnoses) must 
be as low as possible, even though this inevitably means 
that false positives will occur. Individuals testing positive 
will be subjected to further, definitive tests and, provided 
that these cause no harm to those who test positive and 
turn out not to have the condition, this may be an ac-
ceptable price to pay for making the diagnosis in all those 
who have the condition. The programmes for neonatal 
screening for phenylketonuria and other harmful condi-
tions in the newborn exemplify tests requiring maximum 
sensitivity. In this context, it is instructive to note that al-
though the sensitivity of the screening test for phenylke-
tonuria is 100%, and its specificity approaches this value, 
because the condition has such a low prevalence (approxi-
mately 1 in 10 000), the predictive value of a positive test 
is only of the order of 10%.
High specificity (no false positives) is desirable in a 
test to diagnose a condition that is severe, but either it is 
­untreatable or the benefits of treatment are unpredictable, 
when knowledge of its absence is potentially beneficial. 
Multiple sclerosis is frequently cited as the classic example 
of such a condition. High specificity is also required when 
it is desired to select patients with a condition for a trial 
of some new form of treatment. If individuals without 
the condition were to be included in the treatment group, 
the results of the trial (assuming that the treatment is in 
some measure effective and does no harm to those with-
out the disease) would give a false view of its efficacy.
Diagnoses are rarely made on the basis of single tests. 
Ideally, a single test or combination of a small number 
of tests should be used to identify individuals in whom 
the probability of a condition is significantly higher than 
in the general population (the prevalence is higher), who 
can then be further investigated. The initial tests can be 
simple, cheap and unlikely to do harm, but the further 
tests may be more elaborate, expensive and possibly as-
sociated with some risk. In essence, if the performance of 
individual tests is known and the objectives of testing can 
be precisely defined, the predictive value model can be 
used to determine the appropriate sequence or combina-
tion of tests to achieve the desired objective.
Receiver operating characteristic curves
Another use of the predictive value model is to compare 
the performance of two tests. This can be done by de-
termining sensitivity and specificity for each test using a 
range of cut-off limits to define positivity and plotting 
one rate against the other. The resulting curves are known 
as receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves. The 
reader is warned that four variants of ROC curves may be 
encountered, according to the way the data are projected 
on the axes, but this does not affect their interpretation. 
Figure 2.4 shows hypothetical ROCs for two tests, A and 
B, each applied to the same group of individuals to make 
the same diagnosis.
It is clear that test A gives the better discrimination, 
since for any level of sensitivity its specificity is superior. 
This may be useful information, but these are by no means 
the only factors that may need to be taken into account in 
choosing a test. The economics and practicalities of the 
tests will also be of relevance to which one is chosen.
The interpretation of the ROC curves in Figure 2.4 is 
straightforward. In practice, the curves for two tests may 
cross; the relative performance must then include assess-
ment of the areas under the curves. The greater the area, 
the greater the efficiency.
Likelihood ratios
Although the predictive value model can be used to 
determine the most appropriate cut-off for a test re-
sult for clinical purposes, it can only classify results as 
positive or negative, and does not give any indication of 
the degree of abnormality, which may be of prognostic 
significance.
In contrast, likelihood ratios can be applied to indi-
vidual test results. The likelihood ratio states how much 
more likely a particular test result (or combination of 
results) is to occur in an individual with a disease than 
without it (positive likelihood ratio, LR(+)), or not to oc-
cur, again in individuals with a disease than without it 
(negative likelihood ratio LR(−)). The ratios are calcu-
lated thus:
LR(+) = sensitivity/(1 − specificity)
LR(−) = (1 − sensitivity)/specificity.
To give an example, an LR(+) of 10 implies that the 
given result will be obtained ten times more frequently in 
a population with the condition in question than in one 
without. A LR(−) of 0.01 implies that the given result will 
be obtained 100 times more often in individuals without 
the condition than in those who have it. Calculation of 
the LR(+) and LR(−) allows the post-test probabilities for 
1 – Specificity
Test B
Test A
Sensitivity
1
0
0
1
FIGURE  2.4  ■  Receiver operating characteristic curves for two 
tests being assessed for the diagnosis of the same condition in 
the same patients. Test A gives better specificity at any level of 
sensitivity.
20	
Clinical biochemistry
either a positive or negative result to be calculated. The 
post-test probability can be calculated as follows:
Post test probability
pre test probability
LR /
1
pre test pr
-
-
-
=
×
(
)
+
obability
LR
1
×
−
(
)
(
)
The pre-test probability is equal to the prevalence of 
the condition in comparable individuals (e.g. a population 
being screened).
Positive and negative likelihood ratios can be com-
bined to give the diagnostic odds ratio (DOR) for a par-
ticular test result:
DOR
LR
LR
TP
TN
FP
FN
=
+( )
−( ) =
×
(
)
×
(
)
/
/
The DOR expresses the odds of a result being positive 
in a patient with the condition being investigated com-
pared with one who does not have the condition, and is a 
measure of the overall accuracy of a test.
CONCLUSION
It is a simple matter to fill out a request form for a bio-
chemical test, but before doing so, it is essential to con-
sider why the test is being done and for what the results 
will be used. Many factors can affect the results of labo-
ratory tests, apart from the pathological process that is 
being investigated. Some of these are obvious, others less 
so. All need to be minimized by careful ­patient prepa-
ration, sample collection and handling, analytical proce-
dures and data processing, if the results are to be reliable 
and fit for whatever purpose they are to be used.
The interpretation of biochemical data requires ad-
equate knowledge of all the factors that can affect the 
test result. These include the physiological, biochemical 
and pathological principles on which the test is based, 
as well as the reliability of the analysis. It is also neces-
sary to understand the statistical principles that relate to 
the distribution of data in healthy individuals and those 
with disease, and how the test performs in the specific 
circumstances in which it is used. Such knowledge is 
also essential for the appropriate selection of laboratory 
investigations.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank William Marshall, who wrote this 
chapter for previous editions of the book.
Further reading
Ceriotti F, Hinzmann R, Panteghini M. Reference intervals: the way 
forward. Ann Clin Biochem 2009;46:8–17. 
A good review of current and potential methods to establish reference 
intervals.
Fraser CG. Biological variation: from principles to practice. 
Washington: AACC Press; 2001. 
An updated exposition of some of the topics discussed in the same author’s 
book: Fraser CG. Interpretation of clinical chemistry laboratory data. 
Oxford: Blackwell Scientific; 1986. These include a detailed discussion 
of biological variation and its consequences for analytical performance, 
reference ranges and analytical goals. However, the earlier book is likely to 
be more accessible – albeit less comprehensive – to readers who are uneasy 
with statistics and mathematics.
Fraser CG, Fogarty Y. Interpreting laboratory results. Br Med J 
1989;298:1659–60. 
Although written some 23 years ago for a general medical readership, this 
leading article is still worth reading. It was one of the first general articles 
to draw attention to the importance of taking analytical and biological 
variation into account when interpreting laboratory data.
Galen RS, Gambino SR. Beyond normality: the predictive value and 
efficiency of medical diagnoses. New York: John Wiley; 1975. 
The seminal text on the predictive value concept.
Jones R, Payne B. Clinical investigation and statistics in laboratory 
medicine. London: ACB Venture Publications; 1997. 
An accessible text, which manages successfully to explain statistical topics 
without overwhelming the reader with symbols and mathematics.
Ricos C, Alvarez V, Cava F. Essay: biologic variation and desirable 
specifications for QC, http://www.westgard.com/guest17.htm.
A comprehensive list of data on biological variation and related matters, 
based upon the original article.
Ricos C, Alvarez V, Cava F et  al. Current databases on biological 
variation: pros, cons and progress. Scand J Clin Lab Invest 
1999;59:491–500.
Swinscow TDV. Statistics at square one. 9th ed 1997. Available for 
free online at: http://www.bmj.com/about-bmj/resources-readers/
publications/statistics-square-one. 
An excellent statistics book that begins from first principles.
United Kingdom National External Quality Assessment Service (UK 
National External Quality Assurance Scheme), http://www.ukneqas.org.
uk/content/PageServer.asp?S=995262012&C=1252&CID=1&type=G.
21
C H A P T E R  3
Quality aspects of laboratory  
medicine
Helen Bruce  •  Marta Lapsley
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  21
WHAT IS QUALITY?  21
QUALITY STANDARDS  21
Quality assurance  21
Regulation of laboratories  22
Quality management systems  22
Personnel  22
Premises and environment  22
Information systems  23
Evaluation and audit  23
CLINICAL QUALITY INDICATORS  24
Clinical effectiveness  24
Key performance indicators  24
Demand management  25
EVIDENCE-BASED CLINICAL  
BIOCHEMISTRY  25
POINT-OF-CARE TESTING  25
CONCLUSION  26
INTRODUCTION
It was emphasized in Chapter  2 that every step in 
the process, from the ordering of the investigation, 
through collection of the specimen(s) required, their 
transport  to the laboratory and analysis, to the de-
livery of a report to the clinician, is vital in ensuring 
that results of ­investigations are used appropriately. 
Interwoven throughout each step is the requirement to 
ensure the quality of the whole process. Chapter 2 has 
already discussed the need to minimize analytical varia-
tion through the use of processes to reduce imprecision 
and bias. The use of standard operating procedures has 
also been alluded to, but this chapter will expand on the 
use of laboratory standards to maintain quality.
WHAT IS QUALITY?
Quality is difficult to define, and may be considered to 
be ‘doing the right test, for the right patient, at the right 
time for the right reason’, but may equally be defined as 
‘adhering to stringent processes in order to complete the 
task’. Ultimately, perhaps the question to ask is how to 
assess the quality of a laboratory service.
QUALITY STANDARDS
Quality assurance
Clinical biochemistry laboratories operate extensive 
quality assurance procedures to ensure that the results 
that they produce can be relied upon to support clinical 
decision-making. They include internal quality control 
(IQC) schemes, for example involving replicate analysis 
of clinical samples and the repeated analysis of reference 
samples of identical composition, and external quality as-
surance (EQA) schemes ­involving the analysis of identical 
samples by a large number of laboratories.
The measurement of IQC samples allows a prospec-
tive estimate of the precision of the analyses that are be-
ing performed. The frequency of measurement of such 
controls may depend upon each laboratory’s workload 
and the type of analysis undertaken. For example, it is not 
unusual to run quality control material at the start and 
the end of a sample batch measured by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
The measurement of EQA samples provides labora-
tories with a retrospective view of the accuracy of their 
measurements and the consistency of any bias that may 
be present. The data can be invaluable when trouble-
shooting possible assay problems, by allowing the labo-
ratory to compare their result with both the reference 
value (if available) and the method-specific mean. The 
review and interpretation of EQA reports is an impor-
tant skill for laboratory personnel to develop because 
of the variety of ways in which different EQA schemes 
choose to present their data. (Examples may be accessed 
via the website addresses of the various EQA providers 
included in Further reading, below.)
Not only the analysis itself, but also the interpretation 
of the result should be subjected to quality assurance: 
there exists a peer-reviewed EQA scheme for interpreta-
tive comments.
22	
Clinical biochemistry
Reviewing quality assurance procedures is an es-
sential part of the audit of laboratory performance (the 
assessment of overall performance with regard to the 
appropriateness of the use of tests, the interpretation 
of their results, adherence to standard procedures, cost-
effectiveness etc.). Laboratory data should also be in-
cluded in the medical audit, in which the effectiveness 
of all aspects of clinical care is examined. The ultimate 
test of the performance of laboratory data is provided by 
the clinical outcome when this has been determined, in 
whole or in part, by those data.
Regulation of laboratories
External regulation of laboratories has evolved over some 
time to include every aspect of the laboratory service. 
Independent regulatory bodies are empowered to award 
accredited status to laboratories meeting stringent stan-
dards and to fail to award or remove accreditation from 
laboratories which are found to have serious failings at 
inspection. Throughout the world, there are several or-
ganizations that fulfil this role: International Standards 
Organization (ISO), United Kingdom Accreditation 
Service (UKAS) and the Division of Laboratory Services 
and Standards in the USA, to name but a few. Their 
main aim is to ensure a laboratory’s quality and compe-
tence to perform specified tasks. It is important to note 
that all parts of the laboratory are inspected, including 
the environment in which the laboratory is based. Very 
dilapidated buildings (in which pathology departments 
are sometimes located) will be a cause of concern for 
the inspectors, as it may reflect the low priority given to 
laboratories within a wider healthcare setting, such as in 
a hospital.
Within the UK, for example, the current list of stan-
dards against which laboratories are judged comprises 
almost 60 pages. The broad areas covered are listed in 
Box 3.1. It is worth noting that the analytical process it-
self is just one out of eight categories examined by such 
an inspection.
Quality management systems
A system of ‘Quality Management’ is an all-encompassing 
term used to describe the steps a laboratory may take 
to maintain current procedures and to establish continual 
service improvement via quality objectives.
The majority of laboratories in the UK will have a 
designated Quality Manager, either exclusively within 
their own discipline or as part of a multidisciplinary 
team. The development of web-based document man-
agement systems (e.g. QPulse, i-Passport) has enabled 
laboratories to greatly improve document control and to 
track review dates, changes and the number of printed 
copies in circulation. Complete written procedures 
should be in place for all tasks performed in a laboratory. 
Manufacturers are obliged to publish ‘Instructions for 
Use’ with each reagent supplied that contains the ma-
jority of worthwhile data. These procedures, however, 
form only part of the process, as the essence of a quality 
management system is that it documents what should 
take place within the laboratory in its entirety. All mem-
bers of laboratory staff should be familiar with the qual-
ity management system, understand the requirement for 
such a system and the need to maintain the documents 
within it. Indeed, it is the effective implementation of 
the system, and adherence to it, that is likely to lead to 
quality improvement. Monitoring the effectiveness of 
the system is achieved by audit (see below) and by re-
viewing processes in a regular basis.
Many laboratories try to minimize the amount of 
printed material generated, owing to ever greater space 
and storage constraints. Improved reliability of informa-
tion technology and the need to minimize waste are also 
important driving factors towards operating a paperless 
Quality Management system.
Personnel
When contemplating quality, staffing issues may not im-
mediately spring to mind. Staff are, however, the most 
valuable assets of any laboratory. Staff morale and con-
tinuing professional development play a vital role in a 
‘good’ quality laboratory. Education and training of all 
levels of staff within the laboratory ensures that their 
knowledge and understanding of laboratory science is 
current and up-to-date. The competence of staff under-
taking laboratory tasks should be documented and regu-
larly reviewed. Formal individual review meetings are 
recommended to assess training needs and to promote 
further development.
Premises and environment
The control of access to laboratories and the efficient use 
of heating, lighting and space are important consider-
ations when evaluating a suitable working environment. 
Health and safety aspects of the premises and environ-
ment need to be reviewed, both in terms of staff safety 
(e.g. lone working, risk of slips and trips, adequate fire 
plan) and general laboratory safety such as electrical is-
sues (e.g. overloaded sockets, regular testing of electrical 
appliances, use of extension cables) and chemical safety 
(e.g. appropriate use of material safety data sheets and 
adequate storage facilities for acids, controlled drugs 
and toxins). The latter category may also include aware-
ness of laboratory waste disposal, which will encompass 
both biological and chemical waste. In the UK, for ex-
ample, NHS Trusts have financial incentives related to 
recycling and alternative methods of disposal other than 
incineration.
BOX 3.1	
The areas examined by the UK  
Accreditation Service
•	 Quality management system
•	 Personnel
•	 Premises and environment
•	 Equipment, IT and materials
•	 Pre-examination processes
•	 Examination processes
•	 Post-examination phase
•	 Evaluation and quality assurance
	
3  Quality aspects of laboratory  medicine	
23
Information systems
The development of sophisticated information systems 
has had a huge impact on numerous aspects of laboratory 
medicine. Pre-analytical improvements include the ability 
to display relevant test information and sample require-
ments via electronic requesting. Real-time availability of 
results and the possibility of report acknowledgement are 
also areas revolutionized by information systems.
Information systems affect the way in which laborato-
ries communicate with their users. Many laboratories now 
maintain an electronic laboratory handbook, as well as a 
paper copy. The advantages of an electronic version are 
that it reduces the cost of production (and paper waste) and 
it is easier to maintain and keep up-to-date. Patient infor-
mation leaflets and testing protocols such as dynamic func-
tion tests can easily be accessed via hyperlinks, if available.
The increasing use of e-mail has allowed laboratories 
to communicate electronically with end-users, although 
security must be assured before sending patient identifi-
able data. Future developments will increasingly allow pa-
tients to use this or other electronic means to access their 
own results directly. In the UK, some patient groups, such 
as those with kidney disorders, already have electronic ac-
cess to selected results via a nationally organized database.
The integration of laboratory information systems with 
electronic patient records in both primary and secondary 
care has revolutionized the delivery of pathology results over 
the past decades. The ability to view test results remotely 
and securely has improved the safe delivery of healthcare, 
especially in non-traditional settings, and has expedited the 
move of care from hospitals to within the community.
Evaluation and audit
The use of audit tools in laboratory medicine is wide-
spread. During formal assessment of the laboratory’s 
service, a combination of vertical, horizontal and examina-
tion audits are used to assess compliance with the quality 
standards set. Vertical audits generally look at the sample 
journey throughout the ­entire testing process, from test 
requesting and phlebotomy (if possible), to report gen-
eration and receipt by the requestor. Actual events are 
compared with written procedures to check adherence. 
A failure to follow any stated procedure may trigger a 
horizontal audit of that particular part of the testing pro-
cess. A rather extreme example would be that during the 
course of a vertical audit, it is discovered that no quality 
control material was run during analysis of a particular 
analyte such as glycated haem­oglobin; examiners may act 
upon this information and perform a horizontal audit of 
all recent analytical batches of glycated haemoglobin to 
see if this was an isolated occurrence or if there was a 
systematic failure to follow the stated procedure.
Ensuring that the audit cycle is complete is critical for 
continued quality improvement. Re-auditing previous 
processes, in which highlighted deficiencies have forced a 
change in practice, is vital to ensure that the changes in 
practice have resulted in the anticipated improvements. 
Figure 3.1 shows the key steps to completing an audit cycle.
Clinical audit is another key aspect of evaluating labo-
ratory effectiveness. Clinical audit plays an important role 
in trying to assess the impact of laboratory testing on pa-
tient pathways and outcomes. Ultimately, the role of the 
laboratory is to improve the healthcare of patients and, 
although difficult to measure, the contribution of labora-
tory testing should be documented. Collaboration with 
other clinical disciplines allows the laboratory to forge 
vital relationships with clinicians and other staff within 
the healthcare environment.
The third type of evaluation that the laboratory 
should undertake is an assessment of user satisfaction. 
It is important to engage all users of the laboratory ser-
vice, as each different group may have different needs 
and requirements. Clinicians, nurses, other healthcare 
professionals and other laboratories should be asked 
to contribute. All aspects of the service can be covered 
from the users’ opinions on the judicious use of inter-
pretative comments to turnaround times and phlebot-
omy services. User satisfaction surveys may eventually 
be circulated to patients (who may be the true end-users 
of the service), especially those with long-term chronic 
disease states (e.g. diabetes mellitus, chronic kidney dis-
ease), as they take greater ownership of their health and 
treatment targets. Box 3.2 gives a list of the other areas 
covered by questions commonly seen in user surveys.
Review
standards
Identify
area for
audit
Identify
areas for
improvement
and change
Data
analysis and
comparison
with standards
Re-audit
Set criteria
and standards
Implement
changes
Collect data
FIGURE  3.1  ■ The complete audit cycle. The process can be 
started at almost any point of the cycle, but often the first task 
is to identify an area of interest and then determine standards 
against which to conduct an audit.
BOX 3.2	
Examples of topics covered within 
user satisfaction surveys
•	 Availability of clinical advice
•	 Ease of requesting
•	 Availability of test information
•	 Frequency of phlebotomy collections (primary care)
•	 Online access to results (availability of)
•	 Out of hours service provision
24	
Clinical biochemistry
CLINICAL QUALITY INDICATORS
Laboratories are generally adept at maintaining qual-
ity standards within their own environment; however, 
the need to determine and measure objectively their 
clinical effectiveness is growing, owing to increasing 
pressure on limited resources. Clinical quality in-
dicators have recently been developed to aid in this 
process. The key to the use of these indicators is that 
they must be easily measureable and that the results 
can been collected in a timely manner (a yearly review 
would be of limited use in highlighting errors and im-
proving performance promptly). Several quality indi-
cators can be brought to mind, but if the mechanism 
for capturing the necessary data is too demanding or 
difficult to achieve, then the whole process becomes 
meaningless.
Quality indicators can fall into two broad categories: 
those that are designed to highlight improvement and those 
that are used to capture a possible deterioration in stan-
dards. An example of each may include the use of exter-
nal quality assurance to show improving assay precision 
and the monitoring of turnaround times from emer-
gency departments to detect peaks and troughs in service 
­provision. Turnaround times in particular, can be an area 
where the laboratory and requesting clinicians can have 
differing views, with clinicians considering turnaround 
time to be ‘vein-to-brain’ time rather than from receipt 
of sample in the laboratory to a clinically validated re-
sult. Table 3.1 lists other potential quality indicators that 
laboratories may be able to use to monitor their own 
performance.
Clinical effectiveness
In the context of laboratory medicine, this may be per-
ceived as the laboratory’s ability to introduce new tests 
and to dissuade clinicians from using tests deemed to be 
obsolete. Clinical biochemists may be involved in the 
development of specific testing protocols in Emergency 
Departments, for example, or in the interpretation of 
data in complex cases. Another way in which laborato-
ries contribute to effective clinical care, is the identifica-
tion of artefactual causes of altered biochemical analytes, 
such as the effect of thrombocytosis on potassium con-
centration. The implementation of national guidelines 
and the adoption of agreed testing strategies or more 
precise analytical methods (such as the measurement of 
creatinine by enzymatic methods), are all examples of 
ways in which the clinical effectiveness of laboratories 
has been improved.
Key performance indicators
In an attempt to objectively assess the quality and ef-
fectiveness of predominantly pre- and postanalytical 
processes within the laboratory, the Royal College of 
Pathologists in the UK has established Key Performance 
Indicators. These suggested standards cover a wide range 
of areas, from the percentage of staff in training to the 
speed at which a laboratory can respond to a request for 
clinical advice (what defines clinical advice may be a con-
tentious issue). Table 3.2 lists some of the other additional 
performance standards suggested by the Royal College 
of Pathologists. These are still in their infancy and some 
TABLE 3.1  Examples of potential quality indicators
Category
Example quality indicator
Preanalytical
Investigation strategies and protocols
Introduction and maintenance of reference (critical) change values
Analytical
Matching analytical performance to clinical requirements
Postanalytical
Data interpretation
Addition of appropriate further tests
Direct clinical services
Patient/ward interventions, e.g. review of patients with metabolic disease, 
electrolyte or fluid balance problems
Participation in multidisciplinary team meetings
Education
Undergraduate and postgraduate teaching; participation at hospital-wide 
events such as Grand Round meetings; newsletters
TABLE 3.2  Some key performance indicators recommended by the UK Royal  
College of Pathologists
Category
Performance standard and method of measurement
Training
15–30% of the biomedical scientist, clinical scientist and medical staff 
should be in training posts
User surveys
The laboratory should include patients in the annual user satisfaction 
survey
Turnaround times
The percentage of investigations from A&E to be completed within 1 h. 
Target: 90% from April 2014
Results communication
The percentage of critical results phoned to the requesting clinician within 
2 h of availability. Target: 97% by April 2014
	
3  Quality aspects of laboratory  medicine	
25
will require further clarification. However, they do pro-
vide an excellent basis on which a laboratory can assess its 
current performance. In order for these key performance 
indicators to have an impact on commissioning patterns 
and thereby possibly reward the best-performing labora-
tories, each participating laboratory should be expected 
to publish some of their results on a regular basis, thus 
allowing comparison with their peers.
Demand management
In the past, clinicians were often allowed unrestricted ac-
cess to all available assays within the laboratory, but as costs 
increase, test repertoires expand and undergraduate train-
ing in laboratory medicine decreases, laboratories now find 
themselves attempting to manage the increasing demand 
placed on them. Considerable work has been done to as-
certain sensible repeat testing intervals for analytes which 
are too frequently requested in secondary care. Some ex-
amples include bone and liver profiles, vitamin D and thy-
roid function testing. Electronic order requesting enables 
the laboratory to communicate warning messages to the 
clinician prior to further repeat requesting and also to edu-
cate the users about the most efficient use of laboratory ser-
vices. Another form of demand management may involve 
the manual vetting of requests from within the laboratory. 
This may be for specialist tests that are referred to other 
laboratories or for analytes that have a specific clinical role, 
such as tumour markers. Vetting performs a dual purpose; 
first, it enables the lab to control costs and second, it allows 
the lab to open a dialogue with the requestor regarding the 
need and suitability of the test.
EVIDENCE-BASED CLINICAL BIOCHEMISTRY
The later years of the 20th century saw the establish-
ment and development of the concept of evidence-based 
medicine, in essence the use of the best available data 
from robust clinical studies to inform the management 
of patients, including diagnosis, prognosis and treat-
ment. This has led to the promulgation of the concept of 
evidence-based clinical biochemistry (and evidence-based 
laboratory medicine in general) in which, for example, 
the relationship between investigations and clinical 
outcomes is rigorously analysed, using tools such as likeli-
hood ratios (see p. 19), to determine which investigations 
are the most appropriate (in terms of being valid and in-
formative) in individual clinical situations and evaluating 
their subsequent use.
In evidence-based medicine, the gold standard for 
providing evidence is the systematic review of evidence 
adduced from clinical trials, preferably randomized and 
double blinded. Such reviews should be designed to min-
imize bias, random errors and confounding. Systematic 
reviews may include meta-analysis – a statistical analy-
sis of the results from a series of independent studies 
designed to produce a single statement about outcome, 
whether it be the efficacy of a particular treatment or the 
value of a particular diagnostic investigation.
Although the number of systematic reviews of diag-
nostic investigations published annually is increasing, 
there are none for many well-established biochemical 
tests, and there is no requirement to conduct studies 
of the efficacy and validity of new tests before they are 
introduced to the market, as there is with therapeutic 
agents. For example, numerous new tumour mark-
ers have been developed in recent years, but for many, 
there is only limited evidence (and only in specific con-
texts) of their clinical value. The context in which an 
investigation is used is an essential consideration. For 
example, there is no doubt that the measurement of 
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) is of value in monitoring 
the response of patients with prostatic cancer to treat-
ment, but basal values have little prognostic significance 
and there remains no definite evidence that screening 
older men for prostatic cancer by measuring PSA has 
any ­effect on outcome.
Evidence-based clinical biochemistry is gathering mo-
mentum. It starts with the technical evaluation of a test 
and encompasses the assessment of diagnostic perfor-
mance and clinical utility, as discussed in Chapter 2. One 
of its important products is the development of guide-
lines for the investigation of patients with specific condi-
tions. But just as there is continued clinical surveillance 
of drugs after they have been introduced to the market 
(resulting, in some cases, in their later being withdrawn 
or having their licences altered), so the impact of guide-
lines and other products of evidence-based laboratory 
medicine must be reviewed to ensure that they are ap-
propriate and effective, and remain so with the passage of 
time. The process of clinical audit – defining standards; 
examining processes against these standards; identifying 
deficiencies; modifying the processes to correct them, 
and repeating the cycle to check for improved perfor-
mance – is fundamental to this.
POINT-OF-CARE TESTING
There is a current trend to deliver a more patient-centric 
service with some laboratory testing taking place within 
the community, at point-of-care. This desirability, under 
some circumstances, to provide biochemical services at 
the bedside or in the clinic or doctor’s surgery, has led 
to the development of techniques and analytical instru-
ments that can be used reliably by individuals who do not 
necessarily have rigorous laboratory training. Examples 
include hydrogen ion and blood gas analysis in inten-
sive therapy units, principally as an aid to the manage-
ment of patients on ventilators; dipstick analysis of urine 
samples; blood glucose measurements on hospital wards 
and in patients’ homes, and bilirubin analysis in neonatal 
intensive therapy units. The advantages of such testing 
include the rapid availability of results at the location 
where management decisions are made and an ability to 
perform the test frequently; both these facilitate rapid 
responses to changes in the patient’s condition. Certain 
sources of error may be eliminated (although care must 
be taken not to introduce others) and there may be 
­financial savings, for example in relation to the transport 
of specimens or of patients; however, the cost per test is 
frequently much higher for point-of-care tests (PoCTs) 
than for the central laboratory.
26	
Clinical biochemistry
This is not a new concept. In Victorian times, phy-
sicians would perform simple pathological tests at the 
bedside and it was the increasing complexity of the 
tests that led to the setting up of centralized labora-
tory facilities. Point-of-care testing offers consider-
able advantages over laboratory-based testing under 
some circumstances, as is apparent from the examples 
cited above. However, it is important that the tests 
and instruments are reliable; that only staff who have 
been trained to use them are allowed to do so; that 
the results are subject to appraisal through a quality 
assurance scheme (preferably supervised by a clinical 
biochemist) and that there is adequate skilled tech-
nical and analytical back-up, should problems arise. 
Laboratories are expected to be at the forefront of 
these developments and work with the PoCT user to 
establish a set of quality standard analogous to those 
used in the main laboratory. The international stan-
dard, ISO 22870, sets out the specific standards that 
should be met when such testing takes place within a 
hospital environment.
There are however, ongoing clinical governance issues 
regarding the use of PoCT. Two key areas of concern 
are the assimilation of the PoCT result into the patient 
record and the need to ensure adherence to rigorous 
testing processes (a complete audit trail). As an example, 
the latest blood glucose meters available on the market 
have the capability of connecting to both laboratory and 
hospital information management systems. These me-
ters control access by requiring unique identification of 
individual users. Additionally, connected meters can be 
controlled remotely from the laboratory to ensure that 
the meter has had quality control checks prior to mea-
surement of patient samples. Remote access to these me-
ters can also ensure that use by untrained individuals is 
prevented.
These developments are excellent examples of the 
progress that has been made by manufacturers in this 
area. The need to establish good working relationships 
with the manufacturer and colleagues that use the system 
is vital to ensure success.
As the use of PoCT devices becomes more prevalent, 
regulation will become stricter and it is envisaged that the 
laboratory will take a greater role in their provision and 
management, possibly through service level agreements 
with community practitioners.
CONCLUSION
Laboratories are obliged to provide a good-quality ser-
vice, which should be independently assessed and regu-
lated. As quality standards have evolved, so has the need 
to include inspection of procedures to cover the entire 
sample journey, from phlebotomy to receipt of the final 
report. Laboratories should review the needs of their 
end-user, be it clinician, nurse or patient and try to adapt 
their service accordingly.
The need to monitor the clinical effectiveness of labora-
tories to demonstrate continuous quality improvement and 
better patient outcomes has resulted in the development of 
clinical quality indicators. These indicators should be used 
to provide laboratories with sufficient data to identify areas 
of good practice and areas where further improvement is 
necessary and to promote a culture where continuous qual-
ity improvement is integrated into routine activity.
FURTHER READING
Barth J. Clinical quality indicators in laboratory medicine. Ann Clin 
Biochem 2012;49:9–16.
Barth J. Selecting clinical quality indicators for laboratory medicine. 
Ann Clin Biochem 2012;49:257–61.
Moore AR. Evidence-based clinical biochemistry. Ann Clin Biochem 
1997;34:3–7. 
A concise introduction to this topic.
National External Quality Assurance Scheme, UK NEQAS. www.
ukneqas.org.uk.
Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine. http://www.cebm.net/?0=1162.
The website of the Oxford Centre for Evidence-based Medicine. This page 
illustrates the use of likelihood ratios to modify diagnostic probabilities, but 
there are many other useful pages.
Price CP, Christensen RH, editors. Evidence-based laboratory 
medicine: principles, practice and outcomes. 2nd ed. Washington: 
AACC Press; 2007. 
A series of essays discussing the acquisition and use of evidence for diagnostic 
investigations, clinical audit and the development and evaluation of guidelines.
Randox External Quality Assurance Scheme, RIQAS. www.riqas.com.
Royal College of Pathologists. How to assess the quality of a pathology 
service. London: Royal College of Pathologists; 2011.
United Kingdom Accreditation Service. www.ukas.com
Welsh External Quality Assurance Scheme, WEQAS. www.weqas.com
27
Sodium, water and potassium
Michael D. Penney
CHAPTER OUTLINE
PHYSIOLOGY  27
Introduction  27
Extracellular fluid and sodium  28
Intracellular fluid and water  30
Extracellular fluid, intracellular fluid and 
potassium  32
DISORDERS OF SODIUM METABOLISM  33
Sodium deficiency  33
Sodium excess  36
DISORDERS OF WATER METABOLISM  39
Polyuria  39
Nocturnal polyuria  43
Hypernatraemia  44
Hyponatraemia  46
DISORDERS OF POTASSIUM METABOLISM  52
Hypokalaemia  52
Hyperkalaemia  57
CONCLUSION  61
APPENDICES  62
PHYSIOLOGY
Introduction
Water is the most abundant molecule in the human body 
and is the major solvent (the only other of consequence 
is fat). The physiological control of the composition and 
distribution of the fluid spaces is a highly sensitive and 
complex homoeostatic process necessary to maintain a 
constant milieu interieur. Two main fluid spaces exist: the 
intracellular fluid (ICF) and the extracellular fluid (ECF). 
The latter is further separated into the intravascular space 
(plasma), the interstitial space (which includes lymph) 
and transcellular fluid (pleural, pericardial, peritoneal, 
cerebrospinal and gastrointestinal fluids), formed by the 
transport activity of cells. Table 4.1 summarizes the water 
content of the body and the distribution of fluid between 
the main body spaces; the proportion of body water to 
total body weight is affected by age, gender and body fat 
content.
The electrolyte compositions of the ECF and the ICF 
are different – in essence, the extracellular space is a pre-
dominantly sodium-containing solution and the intracel-
lular space a potassium-containing solution (Table 4.2). 
This fundamental difference in electrolyte composition is 
maintained by cell membrane transport pumps (energy-
consuming ATPases). Electrolyte and protein concen-
trations of blood are now most commonly measured in 
serum. In this chapter, unless specified, the term plasma 
is used for describing in vivo concentrations and the term 
serum for measured in vitro concentrations.
Body water moves between the main body spaces 
through water channels (aquaporins), predominantly un-
der the influence of the osmotic pressures resulting from 
dissolved particles in the ECF and ICF on either side 
of the cell membrane. Under steady-state physiologi-
cal conditions, the osmotic pressure of the ICF equates 
exactly with the plasma osmotic pressure. Osmolality 
represents the molal concentration of solute in a litre of 
solvent (water) and is expressed as mmol/kg, as opposed 
to a molar (or calculated osmolar) solution, which is the 
concentration in the space of a litre of solution (which 
includes solute space) and is expressed as mmol/L. This 
apparent nicety in definition does have its uses in differ-
entiating certain real from apparent electrolyte disorders 
(see p. 46).
The measured osmolality in ECF cannot, however, 
always be equated with transcellular osmotic pressure. 
The cell membrane is selectively permeable to a vari-
ety of solutes, but certain natural solutes such as urea, or 
exogenous solutes such as alcohol, are freely permeable. 
Thus, an increase in plasma osmolality due to sodium 
implies an increase in osmotic pressure across the cell 
membrane, tending to withdraw water from the cell to 
equalize osmolalities. However, an increase in plasma os-
molality due to urea does not have this effect because of 
the free permeability of urea between the ICF and ECF. 
This leads to the concept of effective osmolality or tonic-
ity, which, under physiological conditions, is primarily 
dependent on plasma sodium concentration, but under 
pathological or iatrogenic conditions, may be dependent 
on other solutes, for example, the effect of glucose in 
untreated diabetes mellitus or mannitol following its 
intravenous infusion (used therapeutically precisely for 
this effect).
The distribution of water between different body 
spaces is thus dependent on the permeability of the rel-
evant membrane barriers to water, and the quantity of 
C H A P T E R  4
28	
Clinical biochemistry
solute within each space. Because water is freely perme-
able across all cell membranes (except some highly spe-
cialized membranes in the nephrons and sweat glands), 
the water content of body spaces is dependent on the 
solute content of the space. The Gibbs–Donnan effect 
is an important force that influences the distribution of 
solutes. If the barrier separating two compartments is 
permeable to water and small ions, but impermeable 
to large ionized molecules, and the larger molecules 
are confined to one compartment, the concentration of 
small ions will differ between compartments at equilib-
rium, and the compartment containing the protein will 
exert an osmotic force.
Oncotic pressure (colloid osmotic pressure) is the os-
motic pressure resulting from the difference within the 
ECF between the protein contents of plasma and inter-
stitial fluid. The major contribution to oncotic pressure 
under physiological conditions is plasma albumin con-
centration. The hydrostatic pressure of the plasma across 
the afferent capillary membrane creates a counter force 
to the oncotic pressure: the combination of the chang-
ing hydrostatic and oncotic pressure gradients across the 
capillary bed is known as the Starling forces.
Because the total solute content of cells under physi-
ological conditions is essentially fixed and water is freely 
permeable across most cell membranes, the volume 
of the ICF is determined by the body water content. 
Intracellular fluid tonicity will in turn determine ECF 
tonicity, but ECF volume is essentially dependent on its 
sodium content.
Extracellular fluid and sodium
The sodium content of a normal adult is 55–65 mmol/
kg body weight. The concentration of sodium in plasma 
is ~140 mmol/L (~152 mmol/kg). Under physiological 
conditions, the control of the ECF volume is through 
the control of functioning or effective plasma volume 
(that part of the plasma volume actively perfusing tis-
sues). There are a variety of afferent mechanisms to 
monitor effective plasma volume (and thus ECF vol-
ume), which ­include intrathoracic volume receptors 
such as atrial stretch ­receptors, hepatic volume recep-
tors, arterial baroreceptors, intrarenal baroreceptors 
and, possibly, tissue receptors monitoring tissue perfu-
sion. Whatever the actual or relative function of all these 
sensory ­systems, their resultant influence is fine control 
over the renal conservation of sodium and the appetite 
for oral sodium intake.
Sodium intake varies considerably between different 
human cultural and ethnic groups. Variations in intake 
between 5 and 500 mmol/24 h have been recorded and 
physiological mechanisms balance this with the renal 
excretion of sodium. Sodium delivery to the renal tu-
bules is a function of plasma sodium concentration and 
the glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Every 24 h, the 
kidneys of an average healthy adult male will filter in 
excess of 24 000 mmol of sodium, most of which is reab-
sorbed in the tubules so that, in health, sodium balance 
is achieved. In a healthy individual, renal sodium con-
servation can be extremely efficient, with urine sodium 
concentration falling to <1 mmol/L urine. Conversely, 
when sodium intake is excessive, the capacity to excrete 
sodium can result in urine sodium concentrations up to 
300 mmol/L urine.
Renal control of sodium output
Intrinsic renal control of tubular reabsorption of 
sodium. Under normal physiological conditions, ap-
proximately 80% of the sodium in the glomerular filtrate 
is reabsorbed in the proximal tubules. The protein con-
centration of the blood within the post-glomerular peri-
tubular capillary beds is believed to exert a strong oncotic 
pressure on fluid in the proximal tubules, and this in turn 
helps to regulate the volume of fluid reabsorbed. This 
process contributes to the autoregulation of filtration and 
reabsorption known as glomerulo–tubular balance. There 
has been considerable physiological interest in the con-
trol of proximal tubular sodium reabsorption and other 
intrinsic renal control mechanisms, such as redistribution 
of filtering activity from superficial nephrons (relatively 
salt-losing) to juxtamedullary nephrons (relatively salt-
retaining). However, to date, the major humoral influ-
ences on sodium reabsorption appear to reside in the 
distal tubules and collecting ducts.
Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone axis. Aldosterone is 
a steroid hormone released from the zona glomerulosa 
of the adrenal cortex. The major control of aldosterone 
secretion is through angiotensin II, an octapeptide pro-
duced in the circulation as a final product of the action of 
renin. Renin is a proteolytic enzyme secreted by a group of 
TABLE 4.1  Body fluid distribution in relation  
to age and gender
 
Infant 
age 
1 year
Adult 
male age 
40 years
Adult 
female 
age 
40 years
Weight (kg)
7
70
60
Total body water (L)
4.90
42
30
ICF volume (L)
3.15
28
18
ECF volume (L)
1.75
14
12
of which  
intravascular (L)
0.35
2.8
2.4
TABLE 4.2  Representative molal concentration 
of electrolytes within the body fluid spaces
Other predominant intracellular counter anions are 
sulphates and proteinates
Electrolyte
ECF (mmol/kg)
ICF (mmol/kg)
Sodium
152
10
Potassium
4.3
160
Calcium
2.7
1.0
Magnesium
1.1
13
Chloride
109
10
Bicarbonate
29
10
Phosphate
1.5
50
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
29
cells (the juxtaglomerular apparatus) situated between the 
afferent and efferent glomerular arterioles, and specialist 
chemoreceptor cells found within the distal convoluted 
tubular epithelium of the kidneys – the macula densa. 
Renin release is stimulated by decreased sodium deliv-
ery to the distal tubules (sodium depletion, ECF volume 
contraction), renal artery hypotension (due to systemic 
hypotension or renal artery stenosis) and by sympathetic 
nerve activity via β1-adrenergic receptors. The substrate 
for renin is angiotensinogen, an α2-globulin produced by 
the liver. Renin releases an amino-terminal decapeptide 
from angiotensinogen known as angiotensin I, which in 
turn is acted upon by angiotensin-converting enzyme 
(ACE), predominantly within the pulmonary ­capillaries. 
The ­action of ACE is to cleave the carboxy-terminal 
­dipeptide of angiotensin I to produce angiotensin II. 
The renin–­angiotensin–aldosterone axis is summarized 
in Figure 4.1. The major physiological influences on al-
dosterone are body sodium content and renal perfusion 
pressure, although hyperkalaemia can stimulate aldoste-
rone release directly.
Aldosterone acts through the specific nuclear miner-
alocorticoid receptor, which is protected from cortisol 
(for which it has equal affinity) through the intracellular 
production of 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11β-
HSD). This enzyme converts cortisol to cortisone, for 
which the receptor has weak affinity. The response within 
the principal cells lining the distal tubules and collecting 
ducts is the apical influx of sodium via epithelial Na+ 
channel (ENaC) stimulation and its efflux via basolateral 
Na+,K+-ATPase. The net effect is active sodium reabsorp-
tion in exchange for potassium. In addition, angiotensin 
II has direct vasoconstrictive actions, thus having an im-
mediate influence on effective plasma volume.
Natriuretic peptides. Glomerular filtration and the ac-
tion of aldosterone do not constitute the complete control 
over renal sodium excretion within mammalian systems. 
The existence of a third factor (or factors) had been pro-
posed for 20 years prior to the identification of a specific 
natriuretic factor in 1981. This factor was originally iden-
tified in rat cardiac atria and was termed atrial natriuretic 
factor (now known as atrial natriuretic peptide, ANP). 
Since then, a further two natriuretic peptides have been 
identified in humans. Circulating ANP is a 28 amino acid 
(AA) peptide with a 17 AA ring structure formed by a di-
sulphide bridge between cysteines at positions 7 and 23: 
the gene for the ANP precursor molecule is located on 
the short arm of chromosome 1. Three exons code for a 
151 AA peptide (preproANP) which, following removal of 
the signal peptide, results in a 126 AA peptide (proANP) 
– the main storage form. On secretion into the circula-
tion, proANP is cleaved into the N-terminal 1–98 peptide 
(NT-proANP), and the biologically active 99–126 peptide 
(ANP). The major stimulus to the secretion of ANP is 
atrial stretch and the major sites of synthesis are the atria.
In 1988, a second natriuretic peptide was identified, 
in porcine brain, and termed brain natriuretic peptide 
(BNP). It was later shown to be produced predominantly 
in the ventricles of the heart. Circulating BNP is a 32 
Natriuretic peptides
BNP
ANP
ANP
BNP
Natriuretic
peptides
The circulation
Renin
Angiotensin-
converting-
enzyme
Sodium retention
FIGURE 4.1  ■ The renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system. +, stimulatory signal; −, inhibitory signal; ANP, atrial natriuretic peptide; 
BNP, brain natriuretic peptide.
30	
Clinical biochemistry
AA peptide, also with a 17 AA ring structure formed by 
a disulphide bridge between cysteines at positions 10 
and 26. The ring structure has a high level of homology 
with the ring of ANP. Also like that of ANP, the gene for 
BNP is located on the short arm of chromosome 1. Three 
exons code for a 134 AA peptide (pre-proBNP) which, 
following removal of the signal peptide, results in a 108 
AA peptide (proBNP). Further cleavage on release into 
the circulation results in the N-terminal 1–76 peptide 
(NT-proBNP) and the biologically active 77–108 peptide 
(BNP). Both ANP and BNP share a common receptor 
that mediates a natriuretic response in the kidneys by caus-
ing an increase in glomerular filtration rate and blocking 
sodium reabsorption in the inner medullary ­collecting 
ducts. They also influence sodium reabsorption through 
antagonism of the renin–angiotensin–­aldosterone axis. 
Both ANP and BNP reduce sympathetic tone in the pe-
ripheral vasculature. The basic physiology of ANP and 
BNP is summarized in Figure 4.2.
In 1990, a further ‘natriuretic peptide’ was described 
in porcine brain and termed C-type natriuretic peptide 
(CNP). The gene for CNP is coded on chromosome 4. 
Although CNP has been identified in human plasma, this 
peptide is mediated through a different receptor and does 
not have direct natriuretic function, but acts primarily as 
an antiproliferative regulator in the vascular cell system 
and as a neuropeptide.
There is no doubt that ANP, and to a lesser extent 
BNP, has important physiological functions in relation to 
sodium balance. Simple experiments can readily demon-
strate changes in ANP and BNP concentrations in rela-
tion to dietary sodium intake, and the interaction of ANP 
and BNP with the renin–angiotensin–­aldosterone axis 
results in a dual ‘fine-tuning’ system of sodium control, 
using afferent information obtained from the heart and 
kidneys simultaneously. However, unlike the situation 
with the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone axis, no primary 
disorders of natriuretic hormone excess or deficiency 
have yet been identified with certainty. Because the major 
stimulus to the release of ANP and BNP is cardiac wall 
stretch, the major current clinical utility of measuring 
these peptides, particularly BNP and NT-proBNP, is in 
the diagnosis and monitoring of cardiac failure.
Sodium appetite
The renal conservation of sodium is remarkably effi-
cient, but when sustained, non-renal losses occur under 
physiological conditions, such as through sweating due 
to prolonged vigorous physical activity or as a result of 
prolonged exposure to high ambient temperature, then a 
mechanism for increasing sodium intake comes into play – 
the salt appetite. That such a mechanism exists in hu-
mans can be observed in pathological states of impaired 
sodium conservation such as Addison disease. However, 
accurately defining the sodium appetite in humans under 
physiological conditions is a subjective and difficult task. 
Salt intakes are largely conditioned by traditions of food 
intake and cultural habits of seasoning food with salt. The 
impulse to add salt to prepared food appears to be au-
tomatic in many people, who do so even before tasting. 
Animal experiments have implicated an entirely separate, 
brain-based, renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system as a 
controlling influence on active salt-seeking behaviour.
Intracellular fluid and water
Water crosses cell membranes by simple diffusion 
through the lipid bilayer and through specific water chan-
nels known as aquaporins. The existence of specific wa-
ter channels had been suspected for many years, not least 
to explain the dramatic changes that can occur in water 
permeability in the epithelial cells of the renal collect-
ing ducts during hydration or dehydration. However, it 
was not until 1992 that the first aquaporin was character-
ized in human red cells – aquaporin 1 (AQP 1). To date, 
13 different mammalian aquaporins have been identified 
(AQP 0–12). Specific human disease has been associated 
with mutations in the genes coding for AQP 0 (congeni-
tal cataracts) and AQP 2 (autosomal recessive nephro-
genic diabetes insipidus – see p. 41). Although mutations 
in the gene for AQP 1 have been described, affected in-
dividuals remain asymptomatic. In addition, the condi-
tion neuromyelitis optica (NMO), a rare demyelinating 
and inflammatory disease of the central nervous system 
(CNS), is caused by autoantibodies directed against the 
main water channel of the CNS – AQP 4. The regulation 
of the gene expression of aquaporins may have important 
pathophysiological consequences in disease states associ-
ated with water retention or cerebral oedema.
Under physiological conditions, the solute content 
of cells is constant and, therefore, cell volume is depen-
dent on solvent, not solute, content. The majority of 
cells ­behave as ‘effective’ osmotic meters – swelling when 
body water increases and contracting when body water 
decreases. Normally, the ECF and hence ICF osmolality 
are maintained at about 285 mmol/kg.
Control of renal water output
Osmoregulation. There is a minimum obligatory loss 
of water by the kidneys each day that is dependent upon 
NT-proANP
NT-proBNP
BNP
ANP
Kidney
GFR↑
UNaV↑
Renin↓
Peripheral
vasculature
Vasodilatation
Adrenal
Aldosterone↓
FIGURE 4.2  ■ The physiology of ANP and BNP. N-terminal pro-
peptides are co-secreted with the active natriuretic peptides. 
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and brain natriuretic peptide 
(BNP) share a common receptor to increase glomerular filtration 
rate (GFR) and urine sodium excretion (UNaV), and to reduce 
renin and aldosterone secretion.
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
31
the maximum achievable urine concentration and the os-
motic load for excretion. The maximum renal loss of wa-
ter occurs when, for a given osmotic load, the minimum 
urine concentration is achieved.
The control of water output by the body is through 
secretion of antidiuretic hormone (arginine vasopressin, 
AVP) and its renal action. Arginine vasopressin is a nona-
peptide synthesized in magnicellular neurons within two 
paired nuclei in the hypothalamus – the supraoptic and 
paraventricular nuclei. The gene for AVP in humans is 
located on the short arm of chromosome 20. Three exons 
code for a pre-pro-vasopressin that, following removal 
of the signal peptide, results in pro-vasopressin, which is 
subsequently packaged into neurosecretory granules. The 
granules are then transported by axonal flow to nerve ter-
minals in the posterior pituitary. During transport, pro-
vasopressin is further cleaved to AVP, neurophysin II and 
a glycoprotein. The neurophysin II forms tetramers, with 
one AVP molecule bound to each neurophysin moiety 
and the whole possessing a further AVP binding site. The 
stimulus to release AVP into the circulation results in the 
simultaneous release of AVP, neurophysin II and the gly-
coprotein. Closely associated cells within the hypothala-
mus (the osmoreceptor cells), by virtue of their swelling 
or shrinking in response to changes in ECF osmolality, 
control the release of AVP from the posterior pituitary. 
The effect of changing plasma sodium concentration 
(and hence osmolality) on plasma AVP concentration is 
shown in Figure 4.3. Other solutes confined to the ECF, 
for example exogenously administered mannitol, have a 
similar effect. By contrast, urea produces no significant 
stimulation of AVP because it freely permeates cell mem-
branes. The osmoreceptor response is often characterized 
by its set point (variously defined by the plasma osmolal-
ity at which a measurable AVP response commences or 
by the basal state osmolality) and by its responsiveness 
(gain or sensitivity as judged by the slope of the response). 
Thus, in situations of water depletion, ECF osmolality 
will increase, osmoreceptor cells will contract and plasma 
AVP secretion will increase. Hydration will reverse these 
events and suppress AVP. This system constitutes the os-
moregulatory control of AVP release.
Non-osmotic control of arginine vasopressin. In 
addition to osmoregulation, certain non-osmotic con-
trols over the secretion of AVP exist, including ECF 
hypovolaemia, hypotension, nausea and an oropharyn-
geal response. The AVP response to hypovolaemia and 
hypotension is relatively insensitive when changes are 
proportionally small (5–10% reductions), but increases 
exponentially as further reductions occur. Thus, a re-
duction in ECF volume or blood pressure of 20% or 
more will result in a plasma AVP concentration far in 
excess of that observed during normal osmoregulation. 
The influence of baroreceptor or volume receptor af-
ferent input appears to modulate the osmotic response 
but does not abolish it: modulation occurs by decreasing 
the threshold for AVP release and increasing the gain of 
the systems.
Nausea is the single most powerful stimulus to AVP 
­secretion. It overrides osmoregulatory control, and 
plasma AVP concentrations may increase 100-fold or 
more. A short-lived oropharyngeal suppression of AVP 
can occur following oral ingestion of fluid and prior 
to any reduction in serum osmolality, thus direct stud-
ies of osmoregulation of AVP need to avoid any such 
stimulus.
Renal responsiveness to arginine vasopressin. The 
apical (luminal) surface of the specialized cells lining 
the collecting ducts is essentially impermeable to ­water, 
­except when AVP occupies its specific receptors on 
the ­basolateral (contraluminal) surface – the V2 recep-
tor (AVPR2). Stimulation of AVPR2 results in AQP 2 
­channels, located in vesicles beneath the apical mem-
brane, fusing with that membrane and rapidly delivering 
water channels to the cell surface. A schematic represen-
tation of this model is shown in Figure 4.4. Under these 
conditions, water is absorbed into the collecting duct cells 
as a result of medullary hyperosmolality and is thence 
absorbed into the bloodstream: concentrated urine is 
formed. During states of overhydration, when AVP secre-
tion is suppressed, the luminal surfaces of the collecting 
duct cells remain impermeable to water. Luminal fluid 
rendered hypotonic in the diluting ­segments of the neph-
rons is not exposed to the medullary hypertonicity and, 
hence, no water is absorbed into the bloodstream; dilute 
urine is formed. The renal response to AVP is thus depen-
dent on an intact receptor–effector mechanism within the 
­collecting duct cells, resulting in an alteration in luminal 
membrane ­permeability, and upon the presence of a re-
nal medullary osmotic gradient. Human urine osmolality 
varies between approximately 50 and 1400 mmol/kg.
Control of water intake
Osmoregulation. The physiological stimulus to water 
intake is thirst. However, the act of drinking in human 
societies in temperate regions is predominantly a social 
10
8
6
4
2
0
100
0
270
280
290
300
310
Serum osmolality (mmol/kg)
Plasma AVP (pmol/L)
Subjective thirst (visual analogue scale, mm)
Limits of normal response for AVP
Limits of normal response for thirst
FIGURE 4.3  ■  Osmoregulation of arginine vasopressin (AVP) and 
thirst.
32	
Clinical biochemistry
or habitual act not dependent on thirst. The control of 
water balance under non-pathological conditions is thus, 
in many individuals and for much of the time, achieved by 
control of output.
The osmoregulation of water output by the kidneys 
can only modulate and restrict an established deficit, but 
to reverse such a deficit, a specific water input mecha-
nism – thirst – is required. The osmoregulation of thirst 
is similar in principle to that of AVP and appears to 
be primarily governed by alteration in osmoreceptor 
cell size. The osmoreceptor cells controlling thirst are 
considered to be closely linked to, but distinct from, 
those controlling AVP secretion. A common method of 
study in human subjects is the measurement of subjec-
tive thirst during continuous osmotic stimulation with 
hypertonic saline infusion, and a typical range of nor-
mal responses is shown in Figure 4.3. Controversy ex-
ists as to the exact relationship between the onset of 
effective renal water conservation and the onset of ef-
fective thirst – that is, a sensation of thirst sufficient 
to cause active seeking and intake of water. However, 
physiologically, the onset of AVP secretion (and hence 
water conservation) differs from the onset of thirst and 
normally precedes it. The magnitude of this difference 
in water output and input effector controls will deter-
mine whether an individual controls physiological wa-
ter balance primarily by thirst and water intake or by 
renal conservation of water.
Non-osmotic control of thirst. Non-osmotic thirst 
occurs when extracellular fluid is lost without corre-
sponding cellular dehydration, the osmotic pressure of 
the extracellular fluid remaining unchanged. In this re-
spect, the overall control of thirst parallels the control of 
AVP, with both osmotic and hypovolaemic stimuli. There 
is good evidence from animal experiments of both neural 
and hormonal mediators controlling non-osmotic thirst. 
Angiotensin II is the most potent human thirst stimulant 
and may act directly upon the brain, but even when the 
effects of angiotensin II are blocked, significant hypovo-
laemia will still stimulate thirst.
Thirst following haemorrhage is a commonly reported 
clinical observation but, like the AVP responses to extra-
cellular hypovolaemia, often a considerable degree of 
haemorrhage (15–20% of total blood volume) is neces-
sary before the sensation becomes strong. Thus for day-
to-day water balance, the primary physiological control 
of thirst is osmotic.
Extracellular fluid, intracellular fluid  
and potassium
In health, plasma potassium concentrations range 
­between 3.1 and 4.6 mmol/L, with values in serum 
­approximately 0.3–0.4 mmol/L greater, owing to release 
of potassium during clot formation (mean serum con-
centration 4.0 mmol/L). The intracellular concentra-
tion of ­potassium is ~160 mmol/kg, and 98% of the total 
body potassium is present in the intracellular fluid. There 
are two aspects to the physiological control of potassium, 
namely, the total body content and its distribution be-
tween intra- and extracellular spaces.
Extracellular and intracellular fluid distribution  
of potassium
The potassium content of cells is determined by the 
balance of activity between uptake of potassium due to 
membrane-bound Na+,K+-ATPase and the passive loss 
or leakage of potassium out of the cell. Many factors can 
influence the distribution of potassium, for example acid–
base status, hormones (insulin, catecholamines), osmolal-
ity and the cellular content of potassium. The influence 
of acid–base status is widely recognized as an important 
contributor to potassium distribution, with an association 
between hypokalaemia and alkalosis and between hyper-
kalaemia and acidosis, particularly when the acidosis is 
induced by mineral rather than organic acids.
Insulin promotes active uptake of potassium by cells, 
probably by direct stimulation of Na+,K+-ATPase, and 
this activity appears to be independent of the effect of 
insulin on glucose uptake. The importance of the ef-
fects of insulin in controlling plasma potassium under 
physiological conditions is not understood, but its ac-
tion has an important therapeutic role in the treatment 
of hyperkalaemia.
Catecholamines have an effect on potassium distri-
bution, with β-adrenergic actions essentially promot-
ing cellular uptake and α-adrenergic actions resulting 
in increases in plasma potassium concentration, but 
again the significance of these effects under physiologi-
cal conditions is not understood. The net effect of cat-
echolamines on cellular uptake of potassium probably 
explains the transient hypokalaemia frequently observed 
in acutely ill patients.
An acute increase in extracellular tonicity, such as 
occurs following hyperosmotic infusions of saline or 
mannitol, results in an increase in plasma potassium 
Collecting duct cell
H2O
H2O
Tubule
Blood
Osmotic gradient
AQP 2
cAMP
ATP
V2
AVP
AQP 3
FIGURE  4.4  ■  Renal action of arginine vasopressin (AVP). 
Interaction of AVP with its V2 receptor located on the basolat-
eral membrane results in the generation of cAMP, which sub-
sequently causes the fusion of AQP 2 laden vesicles with the 
otherwise impermeable apical membrane. Under the influence 
of the medullary osmotic gradient, water is drawn across the 
cell and is taken up within the blood via AVP-independent AQP 
3 water channels.
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
33
concentration. This results from leakage of potas-
sium from cells, a phenomenon that is not related to 
extracellular acidosis, but may be linked to cellular de-
hydration, altered cell membrane function or altered 
cell metabolism. An increase in extracellular tonicity 
is also observed in patients with hyperglycaemia in the 
absence of insulin and has important therapeutic rele-
vance in the provision of potassium replacement during 
the treatment of hyperglycaemia. The effects of tonic-
ity under physiological conditions are probably of no 
significance.
Potassium depletion results in a greater loss of potas-
sium from the ECF than the ICF, and potassium excess 
results in a greater proportional rise of ECF than of ICF 
potassium concentration. The controlling influences over 
these changes are not defined, but the result is a signifi-
cant alteration in membrane potential: this is increased 
with potassium depletion and decreased with excess. The 
effects on neuromuscular function of either condition 
constitute the most important clinical complications of 
disorders of potassium metabolism.
Renal control of potassium output
Intrinsic tubular control. The traditional understand-
ing of potassium handling by the kidneys is that potas-
sium is freely filtered by the glomeruli, but that up to 
95% has been reabsorbed before the tubular fluid reaches 
the distal convoluted tubules. The predominant control 
of potassium excretion appears to reside in the control of 
distal tubular reabsorption and secretion.
Plasma potassium itself has a major effect on potas-
sium secretion in the distal tubules, tending to correct 
any imbalance. Acute changes in sodium delivery to the 
distal tubules may also influence potassium excretion – 
restricted sodium delivery impairs potassium excre-
tion, but a tendency to natriuresis is accompanied by a 
kaliuresis. However, chronic effects on potassium ex-
cretion as a result of changes in sodium intake are not 
seen because of the influence of the renin–angiotensin–­
aldosterone axis.
Aldosterone. Potassium directly influences aldosterone 
secretion from the adrenal cortex. A high plasma potas-
sium concentration stimulates aldosterone secretion and 
a low concentration suppresses secretion. In addition to 
its effects on sodium reabsorption by the principal cells, 
aldosterone stimulates hydrogen ion secretion by the 
α-intercalated cells of the distal tubules and collecting 
ducts. Acidosis is associated with reduced potassium se-
cretion and alkalosis with enhanced secretion. The net ef-
fect of aldosterone is to stimulate exchange of potassium 
and hydrogen ions for sodium ions. Therefore, the rela-
tive proportions of potassium and hydrogen ions within 
the cells of the distal tubules, together with the ability to 
secrete hydrogen ions, will determine the effect of sys-
temic acidosis or alkalosis on potassium excretion. Acting 
alone, an acidosis will promote potassium retention and 
an alkalosis will promote a kaliuresis.
Urine potassium concentration can vary between 
about 5 mmol/L and 150 mmol/L. Adaptation of urinary 
excretion to a variation in input tends to be slow, taking a 
few days to achieve a new balance. In this respect, urinary 
control of potassium is less sensitive than the control of 
sodium.
DISORDERS OF SODIUM METABOLISM
As sodium is predominantly an extracellular cation, the 
control of sodium balance will control the volume of the 
ECF. The tonicity of body fluids is under osmoregula-
tory control, therefore sodium deficit or sodium excess 
presents clinically with primary changes in ECF volume 
rather than changes in sodium concentration within the 
ECF. Hyponatraemic and hypernatraemic states are dis-
cussed in the section on water metabolism.
Sodium deficiency
Clinical presentation
Sodium is always lost from the body in association with 
water. As the sodium concentration of all body fluids is 
equal to or less than plasma (except on occasions of high 
sodium intake, when urine sodium concentration may ex-
ceed plasma concentration), loss of any body fluid except 
plasma will generally result in an excess loss of water over 
sodium. Any loss of sodium, however, will result in a re-
duction of ECF volume, including a reduction in circu-
lating plasma volume. Clinical presentation will depend 
on the severity of the decrease. When the changes are 
mild, patients are often described clinically as being de-
hydrated, a description that should be confined to pure 
water deficiency but, unfortunately, in general usage is 
not. Except in rare instances, truly dehydrated (water de-
pleted) patients are extremely thirsty; patients with all but 
the most severe salt and water deficiency are not.
Reduced intravascular volume, when mild, will result 
in postural hypotension and a compensatory increase in 
pulse rate; central venous pressure is reduced and this can 
be assessed clinically by observation of neck vein filling or 
directly measured following insertion of a cannula into a 
central vein. When the volume reduction is more severe, 
hypotension and eventually shock will result in oliguria; 
the central venous pressure is further reduced. Reduction 
in interstitial fluid volume results in reduced skin turgor 
and transcellular fluid reductions result in dry mouth and 
reduced intraocular pressure.
Causes of sodium deficiency
The causes of sodium deficiency can be classified broadly 
into extrarenal, primary renal (resulting from renal dis-
ease) and secondary renal (resulting from disturbed 
hormonal control of renal sodium retention or from in-
appropriate use or abuse of diuretics). In addition, and 
somewhat difficult to classify, is the sodium deficiency 
that can occur when isolated jejunal segments are incor-
porated into urinary diversion operations (jejunal conduit, 
jejunal continent diversion, see p. 55). These procedures 
are now rarely performed, as alternative sources of do-
nor intestine are preferred. When jejunum is used in such 
procedures, there is a risk of postrenal loss of sodium.
34	
Clinical biochemistry
Extrarenal sodium loss. Extrarenal fluids have sodium 
concentrations that may approach the concentration 
in plasma (Table  4.3). The major causes of extrarenal 
­sodium deficiency are summarized in Box 4.1. The com-
monest clinical presentations result from gastrointestinal 
disease. The clinical history may considerably underplay 
the degree of deficit, especially in chronic conditions or 
conditions resulting in sequestration of fluid.
Primary renal sodium loss. The major causes of pri-
mary renal sodium loss are summarized in Box 4.2. The 
recovery phase of acute kidney injury is often associated 
with a polyuria, kaliuresis and natriuresis. Usually this 
stage is short lived, lasting only a few days, but it may 
occasionally be prolonged. A natriuresis may occur fol-
lowing successful renal transplantation and this may be 
in part due to transient tubular dysfunction; the recovery 
phase usually lasts only a few days, but occasional patients 
show prolonged natriuresis.
Relief of urinary tract obstruction, most commonly 
seen in patients with prostatic enlargement, is often 
followed by a short period of diuresis and natriuresis. 
The exact mechanism of this is not fully understood, 
but is probably related to a urea-induced osmotic di-
uresis, together with elimination of excess sodium re-
tained during the obstruction phase. The natriuresis in 
these cases is corrective and is not strictly a primary re-
nal condition: it is unlikely to lead to sodium depletion. 
Normally, this phase of post-obstructive natriuresis and 
diuresis lasts between one and seven days, but occasion-
ally a more prolonged natriuresis occurs, leading to so-
dium deficiency. This rare event is secondary to tubular 
damage occurring during obstruction. Salt wasting has 
been described in association with meticillin-induced 
acute interstitial nephritis. Full resolution of the condi-
tion may be delayed for several months, during which 
time minimum obligatory losses of sodium may exceed 
100 mmol/24 h.
Chronic kidney disease is generally associated with 
a reduced capacity to excrete sodium. Considerable ad-
aptation occurs to increase the natriuretic capacity of 
the remaining functioning nephrons, which paradoxi-
cally impairs the overall sodium conserving function. 
On a Western type diet, sodium intake normally ­exceeds 
­minimum obligatory urine sodium loss, but if dietary 
salt is restricted or non-renal losses of sodium are in-
creased, the obligatory loss may induce sodium defi-
ciency. Minimum obligatory losses may be as little as 
40 mmol/24 h and even lower if enough time is given 
for adaptation, but occasionally patients have minimum 
obligatory losses exceeding 150 mmol/24 h (3 mmol/kg 
body weight in children). The term salt-losing nephropathy 
is appropriate for this group of patients.
Salt-losing nephropathy is a clinical state, rather than 
a specific disease. It is normally associated with chronic 
kidney disease due to tubulointerstitial disease or to glo-
merulonephritis with significant interstitial abnormali-
ties. A common example of a toxic nephropathy inducing 
a salt-losing state is analgesic abuse, in which there is 
typi­cally also reduced concentrating ability and renal 
­tubular acidosis.
TABLE 4.3  Examples of fluid composition of extrarenal fluids
 
Sodium (mmol/L)
Potassium (mmol/L)
Chloride (mmol/L)
Bicarbonate (mmol/L)
Gastric juice (with parietal cell 
secretion)
  20–70
  5–15
  80–160
  0
Pancreatic juice
140
  6–9
110–130
25–45
Bile
130–165
  3–12
  90–120
30
Ileal fluid
105–144
  6–29
  42–60
50–70
Stool water
  32–40
75–90
  12–18
30–40
Sweat
  5–80
  5–15
  5–70
–
BOX 4.1	
Causes of extrarenal sodium loss
Gastrointestinal
•	 Gastric, e.g. vomiting, aspiration, fistula, blood loss
•	 Midgut, e.g. ileostomy, pancreatic and biliary fistulae
•	 Hindgut, e.g. diarrhoea, bleeding, excess mucus 
production
Skin
•	 Sweating, e.g. thermal or increased sodium content 
(cystic fibrosis)
•	 Burns
•	 Exudative skin disease
Sequestration
•	 Gastrointestinal, e.g. ileus, small bowel obstruction
•	 Other transcellular spaces, e.g. peritonitis, pleural 
effusion
BOX 4.2	
Causes of primary renal sodium 
loss
Acute
•	 Diuretic phase of acute kidney disease
•	 Postrenal transplantation
•	 Following relief of urinary tract obstruction
•	 Acute interstitial nephritis
Chronic
•	 Chronic kidney disease with salt restriction
•	 Salt-losing nephropathy
•	 Chronic pyelonephritis
•	 Medullary cystic disease
•	 Toxic nephropathies, e.g. chronic analgesic abuse, 
cisplatin
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
35
Secondary renal sodium loss. The disruption of ex-
trinsic controls over renal sodium handling can give 
rise to a secondary renal sodium loss. Patients present 
with a variety of symptoms, some specifically related 
to a contracted ECF volume, such as postural hypo-
tension and an increased sodium appetite. Causes of 
secondary renal sodium loss, presented in Box 4.3, are 
essentially hormone or diuretic induced. In Addison 
disease, the synthesis and secretion of aldosterone are 
reduced because of adrenal gland destruction, leading 
to distal renal tubular sodium wasting. Congenital ad-
renal hyperplasia (CAH) with associated sodium wast-
ing is a result of impaired mineralocorticoid synthesis, 
most commonly as a consequence of 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency, but also, less commonly, 3β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase ­deficiency. In either condition, the de-
gree of sodium wasting is variable: it is present in about 
two-thirds of patients with 21-­hydroxylase deficiency 
(see Chapter 18). Very rare forms also exist, including 
cholesterol desmolase deficiency (lipoid adrenal hyper-
plasia) and corticosterone methyl oxidase deficiency – 
a deficiency in the mixed-function oxidase catalysing 
the final steps of aldosterone synthesis. Corticosterone 
methyl oxidase deficiency is not strictly a type of CAH, 
as the synthesis of cortisol is unaffected and, conse-
quently, the adrenals are not hyperplastic. In all these 
conditions, the associated hypovolaemia stimulates re-
nin production, and all may be associated with hyper-
kalaemia. Treatment is primarily by glucocorticoid and 
mineralocorticoid replacement.
It might be predicted that deficient production of 
renin would also lead to renal sodium loss because of 
a secondary deficiency of aldosterone. The condition 
hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism is invariably as-
sociated with renal insufficiency, but the characteristic 
feature is hyperkalaemia rather than hypovolaemia. As 
in the majority of patients with renal insufficiency, inap-
propriate renal sodium loss will induce hypovolaemia if 
the patient is placed on a low sodium intake, but it is 
unclear if this is more severe in hyporeninaemic hypoal-
dosteronism. Although this condition is a cause of sec-
ondary renal sodium loss, its main importance is in the 
differential diagnosis of hyperkalaemia and it is discussed 
in more detail later in this chapter (see Syndromes of 
­hypoaldosteronism, p. 60).
Pseudohypoaldosteronism (type 1) is a rare congenital 
disease existing in two forms, caused by an end organ fail-
ure of response to aldosterone within the principal cells 
lining the renal collecting ducts. It is caused by either a 
loss of function mutation in the mineralocorticoid recep-
tor (MR) gene (autosomal dominant form) or a mutation 
resulting in loss of function in the epithelial Na+ ­channel 
(ENaC – autosomal recessive form). Infants present 
with dehydration, hyponatraemia, hyperkalaemia, met-
abolic acidosis, failure to thrive and weight loss. Renal 
sodium wasting is unresponsive to exogenous mineralo-
corticoids. Pseudohypoaldosteronism is also discussed 
in more detail later in this chapter (see Syndromes of 
­hypoaldosteronism, p. 60).
Diuretic abuse, especially when surreptitious, may 
present a difficult diagnostic problem. The major po-
tent diuretics, such as furosemide or bumetanide, may 
induce significant renal sodium loss and the differen-
tial diagnosis includes Bartter syndrome. Chronic abuse 
with thiazide diuretics may produce a clinical picture 
similar to Gitelman syndrome. In all cases, however, the 
major and persistent finding is significant hypokalaemia 
(see p. 55).
Laboratory investigation of sodium deficiency
No single laboratory finding is diagnostic of sodium de-
ficiency, which, therefore, remains primarily a clinical 
diagnosis. There may be uraemia, particularly of a prer-
enal pattern (with urea concentration disproportionately 
elevated in relation to that of creatinine). Serum sodium 
concentration may be normal, decreased (usually in as-
sociation with uraemia) or even increased when the so-
dium deficit is proportionately less than the water deficit. 
Serum sodium and urea concentrations cannot indicate 
accurately the degree of sodium depletion or reduction 
in ECF volume.
Measurement of the haematocrit may help to estab-
lish the degree of reduction in ECF volume, especially 
if the  individual’s normal haematocrit is known (see 
Appendix 4.1a). Similarly, serum protein measurements 
may s­uggest ECF volume contraction. In a steady state, 
hyponatraemia in association with clinical evidence of 
­sodium deficit can also be used to estimate the extent 
of sodium deficit (see Appendix 4.1b). Either method 
provides only a rough guide to subsequent replacement.
Urine electrolytes will help to establish whether the 
loss has been renal or extrarenal. If there has been gas-
trointestinal loss of sodium or another extrarenal loss, 
renal sodium retention should be maximized. Random urine 
sodium concentrations will show conservation of sodium 
with a concentration <10 mmol/L. The mature, fully 
functioning renal system can reduce urine sodium concen-
tration to <1 mmol/L, but this capacity is less in the very 
young and old. Twenty-four hour urine sodium output will 
show significant sodium retention, with 24 h urine sodium 
excretion as low as 1 mmol and invariably <15 mmol, even 
in the elderly. Serum osmolality measurements are of no 
value in the differential diagnosis of sodium depletion, 
adding nothing to the information obtained from serum 
electrolytes, urea and creatinine measurements. Urine os-
molality will generally show an overall significant increase 
towards maximum, reflecting the oliguric state, especially 
when sodium depletion is sufficient to cause a non-osmotic 
increase in arginine vasopressin (AVP).
BOX 4.3	
Causes of secondary renal salt loss
•	 Hyper-reninaemic hypoaldosteronism
•	 Addison disease
•	 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
•	 Corticosterone methyl oxidase deficiency types I 
and II
•	 Hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism
•	 Pseudohypoaldosteronism (type 1)
•	 Diuretics
•	 Bartter syndrome
•	 Gitelman syndrome
36	
Clinical biochemistry
Only when a renal loss of sodium is present without 
evidence of renal impairment should secondary hormonal 
or diuretic-related sodium depletion be considered. For 
the majority of hypoaldosterone-related disorders, there 
will be associated hyperkalaemia (for specific investiga-
tion of hypoaldosteronism, see Chapter  18). Diuretic 
abuse can provide an intriguing puzzle as, along with 
Bartter syndrome and Gitelman syndrome, it provides 
the major differential diagnosis of renal sodium loss in 
association with hypokalaemia.
Management of sodium deficiency
The essential steps in treating sodium deficiency and 
ECF volume depletion are to attempt to treat the causes 
of sodium and water loss and to adequately replace the 
fluid already lost. The amount of fluid replacement must 
be balanced against measured or estimated losses, both 
intra- and extracorporeal. The measurement of body 
weight is a useful adjunct to monitoring; an increase 
in weight may indicate accumulation of interstitial or 
transcellular fluid. Accurate fluid balance charts (see 
Table 4.4) should indicate a positive or negative balance, 
but even the most assiduously prepared charts (many are 
not) ­provide only an approximate estimate of balance, 
especially when ­confounding problems such as pyrexia 
(increasing insensible losses) or hypermetabolic states 
(increasing metabolic water) intervene. Vital signs: pulse, 
blood pressure and central venous pressure (if measured), 
all provide additional useful information to improve the 
practice of the art.
The type of replacement will be dependent on 
cause and severity. Mild forms of sodium deficit, such 
as caused by overtreatment with diuretics or chronic 
salt-losing nephropathy, may be adequately treated 
with oral sodium and water supplementation. For more 
severe forms of sodium deficit, intravenous infusion 
is required; the types of fluids available are shown in 
Table 4.5. All of them are iso- or hypoosmolal to nor-
mal plasma. Hyperosmolal fluids, such as 1.8% or 5% 
sodium chloride or 2.74% or 8.4% sodium bicarbon-
ate, are not appropriate treatments for sodium depletion 
with clinical evidence of reduced ECF volume, even in 
the presence of hyponatraemia, as infusions of such flu-
ids will increase ECF volume in part by shifting fluid 
from the ICF volume.
Hypoosmolal fluids may be used when sodium deficit 
is associated with a greater degree of water deficit, that is, 
sodium deficit in association with hypernatraemia.
Sodium excess
Clinical presentation
Sodium excess is almost invariably associated with water 
excess (and is usually an iso-osmolal sodium excess). The 
clinical presentation will depend on the severity of the ex-
pansion of ECF volume and its relative distribution within 
the ECF volume compartments. In practice, the clinical 
presentation is with oedema (peripheral or pulmonary) or 
effusions (pleural, ascites) or with hypertension.
Peripheral oedema, due to sodium retention, is char-
acteristically ‘pitting’ when digital pressure is applied to 
the affected part (lymphoedema, due to lymphatic ob-
struction, is characteristically non-pitting, while in myxo-
edema, the swelling is brawny in nature). Measurement 
or clinical observation of the central venous pressure may 
suggest an associated increase in intravascular volume, as 
may the demonstration of hepatic congestion or the pres-
ence of pulmonary crepitations.
Hypertension is a common clinical finding, but hyper-
tension specifically due to chronic iso-osmolal sodium 
excess is rare. Causes of this form of hypertension are 
discussed later, but all are associated with an increased 
mineralocorticoid effect in the initial stages, promoting 
renal sodium conservation and renal loss of potassium. 
The association of muscle weakness (caused by hypoka-
laemia) with hypertension is an important clinical pointer 
to such a cause of sodium retention.
TABLE 4.4  Ideal components of a fluid balance 
chart
Input
Output
Extravasation
Oral fluid
Urine output
Body weight
Intravenous fluid
Gastrointestinal 
losses
 
Water generated 
in metabolism 
(~500 mL/24 h)
Surgical drains etc.
 
 
Insensible losses 
(~900 mL/24 h)
 
TABLE 4.5  Iso- and hypoosmolal fluids for treatment of sodium and water deficiency
 
Na+ 
(mmol/L)
K+  
(mmol/L)
CI− 
(mmol/L)
H O
C
3
−
 
(mmol/L)
Glucose 
(mmol/L)
Ca2+ 
(mmol/L)
Osmolality 
(mmol/kg)
0.9% saline
154
–
154
–
–
–
290
0.45% saline
77
–
77
–
–
–
145
0.18% saline
31
–
31
–
–
–
58
Dextrose saline
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2.5/0.45%)
77
–
77
–
140
–
290
(4.0/0.18%)
31
–
31
–
222
–
290
Ringer’s solution
147
4.2
156
–
–
2.2
290
Hartmann’s 
solution
131
5.4
112
29
–
1.8
290
Sodium lactate
167
–
–
(≡167)
–
–
290
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
37
Causes of sodium excess
Sodium excess with oedema. The causes of sodium 
excess in association with oedema formation are shown 
in Box 4.4. Congestive cardiac failure (CCF) is a com-
mon clinical example of sodium excess, presenting with 
dependent oedema, congested liver, increased jugular 
venous pressure and pulmonary crepitations due to oe-
dema. The ‘backward failure’ hypothesis suggests that 
increased transcapillary pressure resulting from increased 
central venous pressure causes oedema and hence reduces 
intravascular volume. Reduced intravascular volume will 
in turn stimulate sodium retention. Although readily un-
derstandable, this theory is inadequate because patients 
generally have increased intravascular volumes. The ‘for-
ward failure’ hypothesis suggests inadequate perfusion of 
the kidneys because of reduced cardiac output, which in 
turn promotes sodium retention. However, high cardiac 
output failure demonstrates that sodium retention can 
be independent of cardiac output. The reduced ‘effective 
circulating volume hypothesis’ lacks precise definition, 
but suggests that only a proportion of the volume is ‘ef-
fective’, that is, circulating volume appears to be reduced 
in that the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone mechanism 
is activated, as is the release of AVP. The onset of CCF 
causes ANP and, particularly, BNP, release, leading to 
markedly elevated plasma concentrations. However, the 
natriuretic effect of the hormones is severely blunted and 
corrective natriuresis does not occur without therapeutic 
intervention, with diuretics or with exogenous natriuretic 
peptide administration in pharmacological doses.
The nephrotic syndrome is characterized by severe 
glomerular proteinuria, hypoalbuminaemia and oedema. 
The classic hypothesis explained the oedema and second-
ary sodium retention, on the basis of reduced oncotic 
pressure owing to hypoalbuminaemia. However, the rare 
condition congenital analbuminaemia is not associated 
with significant oedema, and nephrotic patients infused 
with albumin do not consistently respond with a natri-
uresis and reduction of oedema. Sudden remission of 
minimal-change glomerulonephritis may result in clini-
cal resolution prior to an increase in plasma albumin, and 
the presumed reduced circulating volume in nephrotic 
syndrome is less commonly found when sought than 
normal or increased circulating volume. These observa-
tions imply an intrarenal mechanism of sodium retention 
in the nephrotic syndrome. Sodium retention does not 
appear to be primarily driven by the renin–angiotensin–­
aldosterone system; moreover, ANP concentrations are 
moderately increased, not decreased, and the natriuretic 
effect of the hormone is maintained.
Chronic liver disease frequently results in a state of 
sodium retention leading to oedema and ascites. Again, 
the physiology of sodium retention is multifactorial, 
resulting from decreases in glomerular filtration, en-
hanced proximal tubular reabsorption and increased 
renin–­angiotensin–aldosterone production, presum-
ably from decreased ‘effective’ intravascular volume. As 
in CCF, the plasma ANP concentration is significantly 
increased, but again the natriuretic response is blunted. 
The concentration of AVP may also be significantly 
increased.
Pregnancy. Pregnancy demands a retention of between 
700 and 1000 mmol of sodium in order to expand the ma-
ternal plasma volume and interstitial space and to provide 
the fetus with sodium. Sodium retention occurs progres-
sively during pregnancy, even though the glomerular fil-
tration rate is greatly increased, so that the reabsorption of 
filtered sodium must be substantially increased above the 
non-pregnant level. The renin–angiotensin–aldosterone 
system is stimulated during pregnancy, a finding that sup-
ports the theory of renal sodium retention as a response 
to reduced ‘effective’ vascular volume (due to redistribu-
tion of ECF volume to the growing fetus and its maternal 
circulatory support). However, many studies have shown 
increased plasma ANP concentrations during pregnancy, 
a finding somewhat at odds with the presumed reduced 
‘effective’ vascular volume. Thus, the kidneys may retain 
sodium in response to some other stimulus (such as the 
effect of oestrogens), and the increase in ANP may rep-
resent the response to the resultant increased atrial pres-
sure from expanded vascular volume. However, these two 
apparently conflicting theories are not mutually exclusive 
and it seems likely that the resultant increase both in the 
activity of the renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system and 
the secretion of ANP forms the basis for an enhanced 
control over sodium balance. Enormous differences in 
daily sodium intake (from <10 mmol to >300 mmol) can 
be adequately accommodated during pregnancy.
Dependent leg oedema is extremely common dur-
ing pregnancy, especially during the third trimester, and 
much of this is attributable to the mechanical pressure of 
the uterus upon the venous return from the lower limbs. 
However, there is a general tendency to an increased 
BOX 4.4	
Causes of sodium excess
Sodium excess with oedema
•	 Congestive cardiac failure
•	 Nephrotic syndrome
•	 Liver disease
•	 Pregnancy
•	 Menstrual cycle
•	 Idiopathic oedema
Sodium excess without oedema
•	 Acute sodium loading (excess i.v. or oral saline)
•	 Renal sodium retention
•	 Primary hyperaldosteronism: adenoma, idiopathic 
hyperplasia, carcinoma, glucocorticoid suppressible
•	 Secondary hyperaldosteronism with hypertension: 
renin secreting tumour, renovascular hypertension, 
accelerated hypertension
•	 Glucocorticoid excess (mineralocorticoid function): 
Cushing disease, ectopic adrenocorticotropic hor-
mone (ACTH) secretion, exogenous glucocorticoids
•	 Exogenous mineralocorticoids: prescribed miner-
alocorticoids, glycyrrhizic acid (liquorice), glycyr-
rhetinic acid (carbenoxolone)
•	 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia: 11β-hydroxylase 
deficiency, 17α-hydroxylase deficiency
•	 Pseudohyperaldosteronism: 
Liddle 
syndrome, 
apparent 
mineralocorticoid 
excess 
(cortisol 
11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency)
38	
Clinical biochemistry
interstitial fluid content because of reduced oncotic pres-
sure (as a result of reduced plasma protein concentration) 
and because of the effects of oestrogens, which enhance 
the hydration of the mucopolysaccharide ground sub-
stance of connective tissue. This general tendency to in-
creased interstitial fluid content may also produce a more 
generalized oedema.
Excessive sodium retention occurs in pre-eclampsia. 
Total body sodium is increased, but plasma volume is 
usually decreased, with shifts of fluid to the intersti-
tium. The reduced plasma volume is the result of intense 
­vasoconstriction, which also results in hypertension. 
In pre-eclampsia, renin activity and aldosterone con-
centrations in plasma in the third trimester are less than 
those observed during normal pregnancy. Furthermore, 
ANP concentrations are significantly increased above 
those found in normal pregnancy, or indeed those found 
in pregnancy associated with essential hypertension. 
Atrial natriuretic peptide appears to be released into the 
maternal circulation in response to vasoconstriction and 
an increased volume load to the cardiac atria. Thus in 
pre-eclampsia, as compared with normal pregnancy, re-
nin, aldosterone and ANP all act as if to promote na-
triuresis, but, for reasons which are not understood, 
natriuresis is impaired.
Menstrual cycle. Despite intensive study over 50 years 
or so, the question of whether the normal menstrual cycle 
is associated with sodium retention remains unresolved. 
There is widespread belief that the majority of women 
retain sodium premenstrually, giving rise to premenstrual 
oedema in some. Plasma aldosterone and renin concen-
trations are elevated during the luteal phase of the ovula-
tory cycle, but this elevation is coupled with an increase 
in progesterone, which is thought to antagonize the renal 
actions of aldosterone. Studies have shown that plasma 
ANP concentrations remain the same during the follicu-
lar and luteal phases. It has also been demonstrated that, 
in healthy females, the ANP response to volume expan-
sion is no different in the follicular and luteal phases of 
the menstrual cycle, and the proportional suppression of 
renin and aldosterone is also identical between the two 
phases of the cycle. When these findings are coupled with 
the observations that body weight, creatinine clearance 
and basal sodium excretion do not alter during the phases 
of the cycle, it is apparent that there is little evidence of 
renal sodium retention. This remains an area for further 
research, particularly as inappropriate treatment of per-
ceived symptoms may lead to further complications of 
sodium balance (see below).
Idiopathic oedema. Idiopathic oedema, sometimes 
known as cyclical oedema, is a condition that occurs 
in females postpuberty. Oedema of the face, hands and 
legs can develop rapidly, and weight gains up to 4 kg in 
24 h have been described. The aetiology of this condi-
tion is unknown, but one suggestion is that diuretics 
may be used to produce rapid weight loss and that ces-
sation of this self-medication leads to rebound sodium 
retention. The diuretic is subsequently recommenced 
for cosmetic reasons to reduce oedema formation and 
weight gain. Thus, a vicious cycle of sodium depletion 
followed by sodium retention and oedema is set in place. 
However, in some patients prior diuretic use cannot be 
demonstrated.
Many patients with idiopathic oedema show exagger-
ated sodium retention on assuming an upright posture 
with a marked reduction in renal blood flow and GFR. 
Oestrogens do not appear to play an important role, as 
the condition has been demonstrated in a patient who had 
previously undergone bilateral oophorectomy. The role 
of renin–angiotensin–aldosterone is not fully understood, 
with a proportion of patients having increased plasma re-
nin and aldosterone concentrations, particularly when in 
an upright posture, but with suppression of concentra-
tions by a high salt diet. Limited studies of ANP have 
been performed, but no abnormalities have been demon-
strated: normal basal values are found and are stimulated 
by volume expansion.
Sodium excess without oedema. The causes of sodium 
excess without oedema are shown in Box 4.4. Acute so-
dium loading is a rare event, invariably caused by inap-
propriate sodium administration to highly dependent 
individuals, for example those in intensive therapy units, 
especially the very young, the old and the highly incapac-
itated. Acute hypernatraemia is a powerful stimulus for 
thirst and thus, to maintain the condition, the intake of 
fluid must be prevented by an inability, for whatever rea-
son, to express or act upon the desire to drink. Examples 
of acute sodium loading include administration of high 
sodium concentration oral feeds to infants (either acci-
dentally or as a form of abuse), the use of oral hypertonic 
sodium chloride solutions as emetics, excessive admin-
istration of intravenous hypertonic sodium bicarbonate 
and the voluntary consumption of excessive quantities of 
table salt. In the past, the accidental introduction of hy-
pertonic sodium into the circulation during therapeutic 
abortion has been a cause of acute sodium excess. Acute 
sodium loading associated with hypernatraemia is a life-
threatening condition and should be treated promptly 
with free water administration.
Mineralocorticoid excess has a variety of causes (see 
Box 4.4). Although this is a condition of excess sodium 
retention, the usual clinical presentation is hypertension 
with hypokalaemia. The severity of hypokalaemia is in 
turn dependent on sodium intake, being reduced in se-
verity if sodium intake is reduced. All of these conditions 
are discussed elsewhere in this book, either as part of the 
pathology of the adrenal glands (see Chapter 18) or in 
relation to hypokalaemia (see p. 55). The fascination of 
these conditions with respect to sodium is why sodium 
retention does not usually progress to increase the vol-
ume of all the ECF spaces sufficiently to cause oedema.
As the ECF volume expands, the filtered load of 
­sodium increases and the fraction reabsorbed by the re-
nal tubules decreases. This mechanism constitutes the 
‘escape’ for sodium (but not potassium) from mineralo-
corticoid effects. The underlying mechanism of escape 
has been the subject of investigation since it was first 
­described over 50  years ago. The mechanism appears 
multifactorial with a haemodynamic response to in-
creased intravascular volume resulting in reduced proxi-
mal reabsorption of sodium. There is good evidence 
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
39
that natriuretic peptides may account for a part of the 
escape mechanism – ANP concentrations are elevated 
in primary hyperaldosteronism and return to normal 
when the effects of hyperaldosteronism are reversed or 
antagonized. Evidence also exists of a decrease in the thi-
azide-sensitive Na+-Cl− co-transporter (NCCT) within 
the distal convoluted tubules. In addition intrarenal sub-
stances such as prostaglandins, kinins and nitric oxide 
may also promote natriuresis.
Laboratory investigation of sodium excess
The investigation of sodium excess is confined almost 
exclusively to the investigation of oedema and of hy-
pertension; hypernatraemia is not a feature of sodium 
excess except in rare instances of acute sodium loading, 
when the cause is usually clear from the clinical history.
In practice, the purpose of the investigation of 
­oedema is primarily to differentiate reduced oncotic 
pressure from other causes, usually by the mea-
surement of serum protein concentration and the 
­confirmation of any route of protein loss, for ex-
ample the measurement of urine protein excretion. 
The ­diagnosis of oedema secondary to CCF and liver 
disease is primarily ­clinical; detailed sodium balance 
studies are not normally justified or, indeed, practi-
cable. Idiopathic oedema is also a condition that is 
initially diagnosed from the clinical history, although 
periods of ­continuous sodium loading with simultane-
ous ­sodium balance studies may reveal a propensity for 
sodium retention.
The laboratory investigation of sodium excess as a con-
tributor to hypertension involves the demonstration of 
increased mineralocorticoid action, the simplest pointer 
being the association of hypokalaemia and hypertension. 
Investigation of primary hyperaldosteronism, conditions 
of increased glucocorticoid secretion and conditions of 
sodium retention due to congenital adrenal hyperplasia 
are covered in Chapter 18. Other causes of hypokalaemia 
and hypertension are discussed in the section on potas-
sium metabolism (see p. 55).
Management of sodium excess
For those conditions associated with oedema, the man-
agement will be aimed primarily at ameliorating the 
primary cause. This primary treatment, when applica-
ble, needs to be coupled with attempts to control sodium 
and water retention by the restriction of dietary 
sodium and, when appropriate, the use of diuretics. 
The laboratory’s role in management is to monitor the 
potential complications of diuretic treatment, notably 
hypokalaemia (especially with the use of loop diuret-
ics), hyperkalaemia (with the use of potassium-sparing 
diuretics such as spironolactone) and hyponatraemia 
(when over-diuresis results in non-osmotic stimulation 
of AVP with secondary water retention). In addition, the 
laboratory’s function is to monitor the effects of natri-
uresis on renal function by monitoring serum urea or 
creatinine concentrations.
For conditions of sodium excess without oedema, the 
initial management is to increase renal sodium excretion, 
either by attention to iatrogenic causes (such as exoge-
nous mineralocorticoid treatment) or by treatment with 
diuretics such as spironolactone. This treatment is com-
bined, when appropriate, with antihypertensive therapy. 
The laboratory’s role in management is to monitor for 
possible complications, particularly with respect to po-
tassium homoeostasis. For those patients with surgically 
correctable conditions, such as primary hyperaldosteron-
ism due to an adrenal adenoma, the definitive treatment 
is surgery.
DISORDERS OF WATER METABOLISM
As water is distributed throughout all body spaces, the ef-
fects of pathological excess or deficiency will be reflected 
in the relative functional sensitivities of each space. For 
example, a 10% excess or reduction in total body water 
(TBW) is unlikely to result in clinical features of altera-
tions in ECF volume. However, ICF volume changes may 
considerably impair cellular function; in particular, rapid 
changes may significantly impair brain cell function.
Disorders of water metabolism include three catego-
ries of conditions. First are conditions in which polyuria 
is the major feature. Polyuria is defined as a urine out-
put in adults in excess of 50 mL/kg body weight/24 h. In 
polyuria, one aspect of water homoeostasis is defective 
but may be compensated by another: either a reduced 
ability to concentrate the urine is compensated by a sec-
ondary increase in thirst, or an excessive water intake is 
compensated with a secondary increase in urine output. 
In either case, patients are usually normonatraemic unless 
the compensatory mechanism is compromised.
Second are those of water deficiency in which ho-
moeostasis is defective and normal body water content 
cannot be maintained: patients present with hypernatrae-
mia (serum sodium above 145 mmol/L).
Third are conditions of primary water excess in which 
homoeostasis is defective: patients present with hypona-
traemia (usually defined as a serum sodium <130 mmol/L) 
or clinical features of water intoxication.
Polyuria
Primary polyuria with secondary polydipsia
Polyuria is an early feature of diabetes mellitus as a result of 
the osmotic effects of an increased filtered load of glucose. 
Polyuria can also be a feature of renal failure due to the loss 
of medullary hypertonicity and the reduction in the pro-
duction of AQP 2. Thus polyuria due to diabetes ­mellitus 
or renal failure should be differentiated at the outset. A pri-
mary inability to concentrate urine with secondary polydip-
sia is known as diabetes insipidus (DI), and may be due to 
either impaired release of AVP from the posterior pituitary 
(cranial diabetes insipidus, CDI) or to impaired renal re-
sponse to AVP (nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, NDI).
The major causes of CDI and NDI are shown in 
Box 4.5. There are four causes of inherited CDI, all ex-
tremely rare. Autosomal dominant CDI is caused by mu-
tations involving the pre-pro-vasopressin gene excluding 
the region coding for AVP itself. The disorder is due to 
40	
Clinical biochemistry
a progressive degeneration of magnicellular neurons, 
probably due to the accumulation of abnormal AVP-
neurophysin II complexes. Presentation may be in the 
neonatal period or delayed until later in childhood. An 
even rarer autosomal recessive form exists in which the 
coding for AVP is mutated; presentation is in the early 
neonatal period. The two other causes of inherited CDI 
are Wolfram syndrome and congenital septo-optic dys-
plasia, with about one-third of patients with each condi-
tion exhibiting overt symptoms of CDI. Wolfram syndrome 
may present with a combination of diabetes insipidus, dia-
betes mellitus, optic atrophy and deafness – hence the al-
ternative name of DIDMOAD syndrome. Patients with 
either CDI or NDI may retain a partial ability to concen-
trate the urine, which can lead to diagnostic confusion. 
The osmoregulatory set point for AVP release and thirst 
is maintained in both conditions. Thus, in developing 
CDI, as the number of active cells releasing AVP from the 
posterior pituitary diminishes, the slope of the osmoregu-
latory response will decrease (see Fig. 4.5). With a plasma 
osmolality for thirst normally set slightly above that for 
AVP release, the urine concentration that can be achieved 
at the onset of thirst will diminish. When CDI is severe, 
thirst will be stimulated even though the urine is close 
to maximum dilution. Intermediate stages can, therefore, 
provide confusion, as an increase in plasma ­osmolality 
due to water deprivation despite thirst can be associated 
with a normally concentrated urine. Diagnostic confu-
sion may be further compounded by two additional fea-
tures not shown in Figure 4.5:
•	 an upregulation of renal responsiveness to AVP in 
CDI in which the kidney becomes more responsive 
to circulating vasopressin
•	 a secondary loss of urine-concentrating ability once 
the sustained polyuria has resulted in medullary 
washout, with a reduction of the concentration gra-
dient within the medulla of the kidneys.
The former phenomenon may mask a developing 
CDI. The latter feature may result in a very blunted re-
sponse to endogenous and exogenously administered AVP 
(or analogue), thus suggesting a primarily nephrogenic 
basis to the polyuria, whereas in fact the loss of renal con-
centrating ability is secondary to the severe polyuria.
Congenital NDI is a rare condition. About 90% of 
cases are X-linked and due to a loss of function mutation 
within the gene coding for the V2 AVP receptor (AVPR2). 
Affected males present within the first six months of life 
with failure to thrive, irritability, severe thirst and ex-
cessive wetting. Often the diagnosis is made during the 
BOX 4.5	
Causes of diabetes insipidus
Cranial diabetes insipidus
Hereditary
•	 Autosomal dominant
•	 Autosomal recessive
•	 Wolfram (DIDMOAD) syndrome
•	 Congenital septo-optic dysplasia.
Acquired
•	 Traumatic
•	 Post-hypophysectomy
•	 Tumour (primary or secondary)
•	 Granuloma (e.g. sarcoid, tuberculosis, histiocytosis)
•	 Infection
•	 Vascular impairment
•	 Autoimmune
•	 Idiopathic
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
Hereditary
•	 X-linked (loss of function mutation AVPR2)
•	 Autosomal (loss of function mutation AQP 2)
Acquired
•	 Hypokalaemia
•	 Hypercalcaemia
•	 Drug induced (e.g. lithium, demeclocycline, methoxy-
flurane, amphotericin)
•	 Renal disease (e.g. medullary cystic disease, obstructive 
uropathy)
Vasopressinase-related diabetes insipidus
•	 Pregnancy
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
280
290
300
1200
1000
800
600
400
200
Serum osmolality (mmol/kg)
Urine osmolality (mmol/kg)
Thirst
threshold
Developing
CDI
Corresponding urine osmolality
when thirst stimulated
Plasma AVP (pmol/L)
FIGURE 4.5  ■ The relationship between the osmoregulatory control over arginine vasopressin (AVP) secretion and the renal response 
to its action. For illustrative purposes, thirst is shown as a single point threshold. Normally, thirst does not become active until urine 
concentration approaches maximum. In developing cranial diabetes insipidus (CDI), as the number of cells releasing AVP diminishes, 
so thirst becomes active at correspondingly reduced urine osmolality. Polyuria leads to polydipsia.
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
41
first acute hospital admission because of impaired con-
sciousness or convulsions, due to severe water depletion 
leading to significant hypernatraemia. The kidneys are 
completely unresponsive to AVP or AVP analogues. The 
female carriers of the condition are of interest, as many 
show evidence of polyuria, especially during pregnancy. 
Originally, this polyuria was considered to be due to the 
mimicking of affected males within the family, but this 
explanation is now disproven, with many females having 
demonstrably impaired renal responses to AVP – a par-
tial form of congenital NDI – but some being almost as 
severely affected as males with congenital NDI. Of the 
remaining 10% of congenital NDI, inherited as autoso-
mal recessive conditions, about 7% are due to mutations 
in the AQP 2 gene and the remaining 3% currently have 
no identified cause.
Both lithium and demeclocycline may produce clini-
cally severe NDI with marked degrees of polyuria. 
Patients receiving lithium should be monitored strictly, 
to ensure effective but safe plasma concentrations of 
­lithium to reduce the incidence of unwanted effects, 
including polyuria. Demeclocycline, once used to treat 
acne vulgaris, is no longer used as an antibiotic in man, 
but has, in the recent past, occasionally been used to con-
trol ­water-retaining states (see p. 51). The NDI of hypo-
kalaemia and hypercalcaemia is generally less severe, with 
polyuria rarely greater than 4 L/24 h in adults. Recent 
work has suggested that NDI secondary to lithium, hy-
pokalaemia and obstructive uropathy may all be related 
to alterations in AQP 2 expression.
Pregnancy and polyuria
There are several subtle alterations to normal osmoregu-
lation in pregnancy, with the osmotic thresholds for both 
thirst and AVP secretion falling ~10 mmol/kg around the 
6th week of gestation and remaining at these lower lev-
els throughout pregnancy, so that a new steady state is 
achieved. The postpartum rise of these thresholds to nor-
mal occurs within approximately three weeks.
The major potential complication of osmoregula-
tion in pregnancy is polyuria with secondary polydipsia. 
Pregnancy is discussed separately from other causes of 
polyuria because, although partial forms of CDI and NDI 
may be unmasked, one underlying cause is unique to preg-
nancy. This is due to the massive increase in the clear-
ance of AVP, in both the placenta and the circulation, as 
a result of the release from the placenta of vasopressinase 
(cystine aminopeptidase, oxytocinase). In addition, there 
is evidence of increased clearance of AVP by the liver and 
kidneys related to increased blood flow to both organs. 
The increased clearance of AVP produces a form of dia-
betes insipidus that is unresponsive to exogenous phar-
macological doses of AVP, but is responsive to the now 
commonly prescribed vasopressin analogue desamino- 
8-D-arginine vasopressin (dDAVP, desmopressin), which 
is resistant to enzymic degradation by vasopressinase. 
The response to a standard water deprivation test is thus 
identical to that found in CDI. Diabetes insipidus related 
to excessive vasopressinase activity resolves quickly fol-
lowing birth, with normal osmoregulation resuming 
within two weeks.
Polyuria secondary to primary polydipsia
Primary polydipsia is found in association with a variety 
of psychiatric and other CNS disorders. The commonest 
form is the ‘compulsive water drinking’ found in up to 
7% of psychiatric inpatients. One possibility is that these 
patients have a reduced osmoreceptor setting for thirst, 
which is at or below the setting for AVP release. However, 
a subgroup of compulsive water drinkers use excessive 
water intake as a form of purging or self-therapy, and thus 
formal assessment of thirst thresholds using subjective vi-
sual analogue scales may be difficult, if not impossible, to 
interpret. This latter group has sometimes been classi-
fied as having psychogenic polydipsia, although the terms 
‘compulsive water drinking’ and ‘psychogenic polydipsia’ 
are often used synonymously. The mechanisms are fur-
ther complicated by the fact that many of the drugs used 
in psychiatry have powerful anticholinergic effects and 
may cause dryness of the mouth with a subsequent desire 
for oral fluids.
Primary polydipsia due to a hypothalamic disorder is 
rare, but can be dramatic. Even immediately following 
ingestion of large volumes of water, patients may possess 
such cravings for further water intake that they will go 
to extreme lengths to obtain it, such as consuming bath 
water or even lavatory water. Hypothalamic disorders can 
occasionally give rise to a water-retaining state and, if ex-
cessive thirst is also present, severe acute hyponatraemia 
may result (see p. 46).
Excessive thirst is a rare feature of conditions in which 
the renin–angiotensin system is stimulated, possibly be-
cause the concentration of angiotensin II, a powerful cen-
tral thirst stimulant, is increased. Thus, pathological thirst 
has been described in renal artery stenosis, Wilms tumour, 
end-stage renal disease and even congestive cardiac failure. 
There is some evidence that when thirst occurs in these 
conditions, it can be controlled by angiotensin-converting 
enzyme (ACE) inhibitors. The mechanisms, however, 
are not well understood, as paradoxically, some animals 
develop increased thirst in response to ACE inhibitors; 
this is presumed to be because of increased angiotensin 
I delivery to thirst-stimulating areas of the brain that are 
inaccessible to ACE inhibitors, and at which conversion to 
angiotensin II subsequently occurs.
Laboratory investigation and treatment  
of polyuria
The first step is to confirm polyuria. Patients (and doc-
tors) may confuse frequency of micturition with polyuria. 
True polyuria is invariably associated with polydipsia, and 
nocturnal polydipsia is an important pathological symp-
tom. Fasting plasma glucose, serum potassium, calcium 
and urea measurements in the basal state may reveal dia-
betes mellitus, hypokalaemia, hypercalcaemia or renal 
impairment. Serum sodium may provide a pointer to the 
final diagnosis, tending towards the upper reference limit 
in secondary polydipsia and DI, but towards the lower 
reference limit in primary polydipsia. However, overlap 
of serum sodium concentrations between the diagnos-
tic groups means that a water deprivation test is often 
necessary.
42	
Clinical biochemistry
Water deprivation test. A standard protocol that can be 
performed on outpatients or day cases in the majority of 
patients is provided in Appendix 4.2a. The test is concep-
tually simple to understand but is often incorrectly per-
formed. Weighing the patient prior to and during water 
deprivation is a most important component of the test. 
Weighing allows the detection of surreptitious water in-
take – weight loss during the test should approximate to 
urine output (1 L = 1 kg). Weighing is also necessary to 
prevent gross dehydration in patients with severe DI; a 
weight loss of 3% body weight is normally the maximum 
that should be allowed, and if this is achieved, the test 
is concluded with dDAVP administration. However, care 
should be applied with respect to the weight loss limit 
as certain patients, often but not invariably with pri-
mary polydipsia, may prepare for the test by consider-
able water loading. Alternatively, patients with severe DI 
may start the test grossly dehydrated. Basal serum and 
urine osmolality should be measured before the test is 
started, as a low serum sodium and/or osmolality ([Na]s 
<135 mmol/L, [Osm]s <275 mmol/kg) may imply prior 
water loading and therefore the limit on weight loss can 
be extended, whereas an elevated serum sodium and/or 
osmolality ([Na]s >145 mmol/L, [Osm]s >295 mmol/kg) 
with dilute urine at the start of the test should preclude 
initiation of water deprivation.
If the water deprivation part of the test is concluded 
without adequate urine concentration being achieved 
(urine osmolality <600 mmol/kg or urine:serum os-
molality ratio <2:1), dDAVP should be administered 
intravenously or intramuscularly. A sample of urine is 
collected after 2 h and, if necessary, at intervals during 
the next 16 h to determine maximum achievable urine 
concentration. Patients are allowed to drink during this 
time, but intake should be limited: a total input over 
16 h of not more than 1000 mL is recommended. This 
is particularly important in patients who have primary 
polydipsia, as otherwise water intoxication could ensue. 
For patients with severe NDI, however, this limit may 
be inadequate and some extension may be required, 
matching output to input. Problematic patients should, 
therefore, be admitted to hospital and kept under strict 
observation.
Some care is required in interpretation of the fi-
nal results of urine concentration achieved following 
dDAVP. Any patient with a history of prolonged poly-
uria of whatever cause will have some impairment of 
urine concentrating ability because of renal medullary 
washout. Attempts have been made to establish diag-
nostic criteria based upon the percentage increase of 
urine concentration following exogenous AVP prepara-
tions and that achieved by water deprivation alone. Such 
fixed criteria do not take into account serum osmolal-
ity measurements during or after water deprivation and 
may lead to misclassification. The majority of patients 
under investigation will be patients who have CDI or 
primary polydipsia. These patients may only achieve 
urine concentrations of 400 mmol/kg following dDAVP 
but, in the case of CDI, serum osmolality at the end of 
water deprivation would be at or above the physiological 
range. If diagnostic confusion exists, then further infor-
mation may be achieved by plasma AVP measurements 
during a repeat water deprivation test. Alternatively, a 
hypertonic saline infusion with serial plasma AVP mea-
surements may be necessary.
Hypertonic saline infusion. A protocol for hyper-
tonic saline infusion is given in Appendix 4.2b. This 
test involves producing an acute elevation in serum so-
dium (~10 mmol/L) with frequent monitoring of plasma 
AVP concentration. Although acute extracellular os-
motic changes should generally be avoided, the degree 
of change induced by the procedure is sufficient to in-
duce significant and easily detectable increases in plasma 
AVP without complications; the morbidity of the test is 
extremely low. The major function of this test is to dif-
ferentiate partial forms of CDI from primary polydipsia 
and from partial NDI. In CDI, the slope of the relation-
ship between the plasma ­osmolality and the plasma AVP 
is reduced, but thresholds for thirst and AVP release are 
normal (see Fig. 4.5). The slope of this relationship re-
mains normal in primary polydipsia and NDI.
Management of polyuria
The treatment of CDI has been revolutionized following 
the introduction of dDAVP. This analogue of AVP has 
a prolonged action and virtually no pressor activity. It is 
simple to administer either orally or nasally (by metered 
dose nasal spray). Patients tolerate the treatment ex-
tremely well and soon become practised in altering doses 
to meet their social requirements. Dilutional hyponatrae-
mia is a potentially serious side-effect, but, in practice, is 
rarely encountered.
Because of the efficacy and patient acceptance of 
dDAVP, other forms of treatment have virtually disap-
peared. Lysine vasopressin (porcine antidiuretic hor-
mone, available in oil as Pitressin) suffers the major 
disadvantage of native AVP in that, to achieve reason-
able duration of action, a dose high enough to produce 
pressor effects may be required. Other drugs, which act 
by either enhancing renal responsiveness to AVP, for ex-
ample chlorpropamide, or inhibiting renal diluting ca-
pacity, for example thiazide diuretics, are no longer used 
for CDI.
Primary polydipsia is a difficult condition to treat, but, 
in many instances, requires no primary treatment other 
than reasonable restriction of access to water. The major 
problem in this condition is the avoidance of antidiuresis 
and thus the potential for acute water intoxication.
The treatment of NDI is dependent on the cause. 
Acquired forms, such as those resulting from hypokalae-
mia or hypercalcaemia, require correction of the primary 
metabolic disturbance. Lithium treatment is probably the 
commonest cause of NDI, although the prevalence has 
fallen considerably since the recommended therapeutic 
range for serum lithium in the treatment of bipolar af-
fective disorder has been reduced. Some reduction of 
polyuria can often be attained by reduction of lithium 
dose or by dividing doses of lithium to avoid very high 
peak serum concentrations. The renal resistance to AVP 
is related to serum lithium concentration. For intractable 
cases of lithium-induced polyuria, alternatives to lithium 
therapy should be sought.
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
43
Congenital NDI poses considerable problems of 
management. The severe polyuria may lead to en-
larged bladder, hydroureter and hydronephrosis, and 
eventually to renal impairment, which ironically will 
reduce the symptoms. In addition, any failure to re-
spond to the secondary polydipsia, such as may oc-
cur during illness or any degree of incapacity, will lead 
rapidly to hypernatraemia. The main treatment avail-
able until now has been thiazide diuretics, which in-
hibit the function of the diluting segment of the distal 
tubule, coupled with sodium restriction (<1.5 mmol/
kg per 24 h). This treatment can be used in combina-
tion with amiloride in older children, but is less well 
tolerated in the infant. Alternative combinations in-
clude a thiazide with a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drug such as indometacin or a combination of thiazide 
with a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor. Treatments such as 
these can reduce urine flow rates to about one-third 
of pretreatment levels. New treatments are now un-
der active investigation. Many of the loss of function 
mutations of AVPR2 lead to intracellular retention 
of the receptor (impaired trafficking to the basolat-
eral membrane) rather than actual reduced affinity for 
AVP. Molecular chaperones, also known as ‘pharmaco-
chaperones’, show promise as future therapies for such 
mutations. In addition, AVP-independent targeting of 
AQP 2 insertion into the apical membrane by selective 
E-prostanoid receptor agonists, may also prove to be 
a useful therapy.
Nocturnal polyuria
The study of renal diurnal rhythms of water and electro-
lyte excretion consistently demonstrates that, in health, 
both urine flow and electrolyte excretion are attenuated 
during sleep. Thus, it is expected that, unless significant 
water and/or electrolyte loading occurs immediately 
prior to retiring to bed, physiologically there will be no 
interruption to sleep due to the need to urinate. The 
terms nocturia and nocturnal polyuria are poorly defined. 
Nocturia as a descriptive symptom simply means the vol-
untary voiding of an indeterminate volume of urine at 
night (as opposed to enuresis, which is involuntary void-
ing). As a symptom, it can be extremely debilitating, as 
the frequent and persistent interruption of sleep can lead 
to severe fatigue. Nocturia is a common complaint of in-
creasing prevalence with age in both men and women. 
One reason for the lack of consistency in the definition 
or investigation of nocturia, and in particular noctur-
nal polyuria, is that patients can present to a variety of 
medical and surgical specialties dependent on age, gender 
and on associated conditions, symptoms and subjective 
assessment.
Any disease process that reduces the functional capac-
ity of the bladder or reduces the ability of the kidney to 
concentrate urine may give rise to daytime frequency and/
or polyuria and nocturia. For some patients, however, 
nocturia is not associated with either daytime ­frequency 
or polyuria, but is associated with relative polyuria only 
at night. Box 4.6 lists the common causes of nocturnal 
polyuria.
Laboratory investigation and treatment  
of nocturnal polyuria
To diagnose nocturnal polyuria, it is first necessary to 
exclude daytime polyuria and urodynamic causes of 
­frequency. The investigation of the osmoregulation of a 
patient with suspected nocturnal polyuria is difficult, not 
least because there are no universally accepted investiga-
tion protocols. Moreover, it is likely now that investi­gations 
would be expected to take place in an outpatient setting, 
rather than on a fully staffed and equipped clinical in-
vestigation unit. The simplest demonstration of the ex-
istence and severity of nocturnal polyuria is to perform 
a 12 h-split 24 h urine collection, with one 12 h session 
incorporating the whole period of sleep, for example col-
lection one 09.00–21.00 h, collection two 21.00–09.00 h. 
A 12 h urine collection overnight normally contains 
­approximately one-half of the total 24 h creatinine excre-
tion, but much less than half the volume of overall solute 
excretion. More detailed study is possible but requires 
a high degree of patient cooperation in the outpatient 
setting. Patients can be instructed to collect a complete 
24 h urine collection, while maintaining an accurate di-
ary of voiding times, ­collecting individual aliquots of 
each voiding and, if possible, an accurate volumetric 
measurement of each voiding. Alternatively, ­estimates of 
the volume of each voiding can be made from the relative 
creatinine concentration of each timed voiding, particu-
larly if the patient is willing to reduce diurnal variations 
in creatinine excretion by avoiding meat consumption 
over the period of study. Providing the patient is will-
ing and capable of following such a protocol, detailed 
diurnal patterns of excretion of volume, sodium and 
osmoles (or, indeed, any measurable urine constituent) 
can be constructed. Figure  4.6 demonstrates the diur-
nal pattern of sodium excretion in a man presenting with 
severe nocturnal polyuria and a 12 h split urine volume 
of 0.57 L (daytime) to 1.75 L (night-time). This man 
was subsequently shown to suffer from severe obstruc-
tive sleep apnoea. Following treatment with continuous 
positive airways pressure (CPAP), the nocturnal polyuria 
resolved completely as the nocturnal natriuresis was re-
versed. Other causes of nocturnal polyuria, for which 
treatment of the primary cause is not possible or is in-
sufficient to ameliorate symptoms, have been managed 
either with a loop diuretic taken 6 h prior to retiring to 
BOX 4.6	
Causes of nocturnal polyuria
Sequestered fluid excreted at night
•	 Congestive heart failure
•	 Nephrotic syndrome
•	 Autonomic failure
•	 Severe varicose veins
Failure to conserve fluid at night
•	 Poor control of diabetes mellitus at night
•	 Suboptimal treatment of diabetes insipidus at night
•	 Non-dipping hypertension (sustained hypertension at 
night)
•	 Obstructive sleep apnoea
•	 Chronic renal failure
44	
Clinical biochemistry
bed (to induce a relative sodium depletion at night) or in 
combination with night-time dDAVP.
Hypernatraemia
Mild hypernatraemia (serum sodium >145 mmol/L) is 
not uncommon in hospital patients, especially in the el-
derly, but severe hypernatraemia (>154 mmol/L) has an 
incidence of less than 0.2% of hospital admissions per an-
num. The causes of hypernatraemia are shown in Box 4.7.
Spurious hypernatraemia may occur due to sampling 
error, for example sampling from the same limb receiv-
ing a hypertonic sodium infusion such as 8.4% sodium 
bicarbonate. Spurious hypernatraemia may also occur 
because of post-collection contamination of the sample 
with sodium salts or because of evaporative losses after 
collection.
Acute sodium poisoning may also result in severe 
hypernatraemia (see p. 38), which is not initially due to 
water depletion, but will induce water depletion through 
natriuresis and diuresis, and will require correction with 
free water administration.
The major clinical causes of hypernatraemia are due 
to water deficit, either physiologically, when the desire 
to drink cannot be expressed, e.g. in neonates, the old 
or incapacitated or unconscious patients, or pathologi-
cally, e.g. with a history of polydipsia and thirst that is, 
for whatever reason, not satisfied.
Water deficiency with thirst
Adult patients with water deficiency, whose ability to in-
gest water is impaired by incapacity, will be oliguric 
(<400 mL/24 h). The urine will be concentrated (osmolality 
>1000 mmol/kg), although the capacity for urinary concen-
tration is restricted in the neonate to ~500 mmol/kg and, 
in the adult, urine concentrating capacity declines in the 
elderly and may fall to <700 mmol/kg over the age of 70.
In patients whose water deficiency is due to com-
plete DI (cranial or nephrogenic), the urine is not con-
centrated. However, if the water deficiency is sufficient 
to reduce ECF volume and thus renal function signifi-
cantly, the urine may not be maximally dilute, but will 
approximate to the osmolality of serum. In addition, in 
partial forms of DI, severe water deficiency may result 
in near maximally concentrated urine. In order to avoid 
diagnostic confusion, it is, therefore, advisable to correct 
any water deficiency prior to establishing the diagnosis 
with a water deprivation test.
Water deficiency without thirst
Patients rarely may present with severe hypernatraemia 
but no thirst or polyuria. The cause is a group of condi-
tions known collectively as adipsic hypernatraemia and hy-
podipsic or essential hypernatraemia. The hypothalamic 
disorder causing hypodipsic hypernatraemia may be due 
to trauma, a primary or secondary tumour, a granuloma 
(e.g. sarcoid or histiocytosis) or vascular impairment, or 
the condition may be idiopathic. The aetiological similar-
ity to those conditions causing CDI underlines the close 
proximity of osmoreceptors for AVP and thirst control 
within the hypothalamus. Four subtypes of hypodipsic 
hypernatraemia have been recognized (Fig. 4.7).
In type 1 (Fig.  4.7, line A), normal osmotic control 
over AVP release is retained but thirst appreciation is 
­absent – primary adipsia. This disorder is rare, but dem-
onstrates the separate osmoregulation of thirst and AVP. 
An example of this defect in a male patient with a his-
tory of chronic hypernatraemia is shown in Figure 4.8. 
During hypertonic saline infusion, he retained normal 
osmotic control over plasma AVP release, but subjective 
thirst assessment remained absent throughout. He had 
undergone hypothalamic surgery for severe behavioural 
disturbance and his serum sodium was found to be con-
sistently >150 mmol/L without any experience of thirst. 
Adipsic hypernatraemia has been described in up to 20% 
of patients surgically treated for craniopharyngioma.
In type 2 hypodipsic hypernatraemia (Fig.  4.7, line 
B), the plasma AVP response is similar to that seen in 
patients with severe CDI, with a substantial loss of in-
cremental gain of plasma AVP as serum osmolality rises. 
100
80
60
40
20
0
07·00
13·00
19·00
01·00
07·00
Time (24 hour clock)
Cumulative 24 hour urine
sodium excretion (%)
Period of sleep
FIGURE 4.6  ■  Diurnal pattern of urine sodium excretion in a man 
presenting with severe nocturnal polyuria due to obstructive 
sleep apnoea. The shaded area shows the mean and 95% confi-
dence limits of normal cumulative 24 h sodium excretion (… …, 
pre-treatment; … …, post-treatment with continuous positive 
airways pressure).
BOX 4.7	
Causes of hypernatraemia
Spurious
•	 Sampling error
•	 Contamination
•	 Evaporation
Acute sodium poisoning
•	 Oral
•	 Parenteral
Water deficiency with unsatisfied thirst
•	 With polyuria (cranial diabetes insipidus, nephrogenic 
diabetes insipidus)
•	 Without polyuria (confusion, coma, immobility)
Water deficiency without conscious thirst
•	 Hypodipsic hypernatraemic syndromes
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
45
Unlike the situation in CDI, however, the osmotic thirst 
response is severely blunted. This group of patients is 
of interest, as the renal responsiveness to AVP is often 
considerably enhanced and patients are thus not polyuric. 
Urine ­concentration may approach the maximum when 
­hypernatraemia is severe and patients retain the ability to 
dilute urine.
In type 3 (Fig. 4.7, line C), plasma AVP concentra-
tion is unresponsive to changes in serum osmolality, 
but is fixed at a low level. Osmotic thirst is entirely ab-
sent. Patients are, therefore, at risk of developing either 
hypernatraemia or hyponatraemia, depending on the 
prevailing fluid intake.
Type 4 hypodipsic hypernatraemia (Fig. 4.7, line D) 
represents true resetting of the osmostat for both plasma 
AVP response and thirst: the incremental gain for both 
remains normal and patients can concentrate and dilute 
urine normally, but around a higher setting of plasma so-
dium and hence serum osmolality. Severe hypernatraemia 
is generally not a feature, as dehydration does result in 
thirst. Thus, hypodipsia in these patients is only relative 
to the degree of thirst seen in normal subjects with cor-
responding degrees of hypernatraemia; the full range of 
thirst appreciation is maintained.
Management of hypernatraemia
Hypernatraemia in the incapacitated patient is invariably 
due to water depletion and should be corrected. Care 
should be exercised in the rate of correcting severe hy-
pernatraemia in which the duration is greater than 48 h, 
and the rules on the rate of correction are directly com-
parable with those applicable to the correction of chronic 
dilutional hyponatraemia (see p. 51). The response of 
brain cells to persistent severe dehydration is to gener-
ate intracellular solutes, sometimes termed idiogenic os-
moles or osmolytes. These are organic solutes that can be 
synthesized without apparent detrimental effect on cell 
structure or function. Recent nuclear magnetic resonance 
spectra of hypernatraemic human brains in  vivo have 
identified myoinositol, scylloinositol, N-acetylaspartate 
and choline as osmolytes. Oral hydration with plain wa-
ter is the simplest regimen (for estimate of deficiency, 
see Appendix 4.1c), but if oral or enteral fluids cannot be 
given, then hypotonic sodium or isotonic glucose solu-
tions should be infused. It is strongly recommended that 
serum sodium is corrected at a rate of no greater than 
12 mmol/L per 24 h; once corrected, any underlying 
polyuria should then be investigated as outlined in the 
previous section. A conscious patient with hypernatrae-
mia, but without expressed thirst, is by definition suffer-
ing from one or other form of hypodipsic hypernatraemic 
syndrome. Although it is possible to differentiate pure 
adipsia (type 1) from other types of the syndrome by the 
use of tests of water deprivation and water loading (see 
Appendix 4.2), in practice the diagnosis can only be con-
firmed by the study of plasma AVP secretion and thirst in 
response to hypertonic saline infusion.
Management of hypodipsic hypernatraemia syn-
dromes. The treatment of hypodipsic hypernatraemic 
syndromes varies considerably with type. Type 1, in 
which AVP release is normal but thirst is absent, and type 
2, with a reduced pituitary release of AVP, enhanced renal 
response to AVP and blunted thirst response, both re-
quire a fluid intake regimen of more than 2 L/24 h for an 
adult to avoid hypernatraemia. Concentration of the urine 
should be avoided and at least one dilute urine should 
be passed each day. Type 3 poses the greatest ­problem 
of management, as fluid output and urine concentration 
cannot be used by the patient to gauge fluid balance. 
A standard regimented fluid intake is required and body 
weight needs to be accurately monitored each day to 
A
D
B
C
Serum osmolality
(mmol/kg)
280
290
300
310
320
330
FIGURE  4.7  ■  Relationship between plasma arginine vasopres-
sin (AVP) and serum osmolality in patients with hypodipsic hy-
pernatraemia: (A) normal regulation of AVP release; (B) partial 
defect in AVP release; (C) total defect; (D) reset osmostat. The 
dashed line represents the limit of detection of current AVP as-
says. Adapted from Robertson et al. 1982.
FIGURE 4.8  ■  Osmoregulation in a patient with type 1 hypodipsic 
hypernatraemia syndrome. (A) Normal osmotic control of argi-
nine vasopressin (AVP) release. (B) Complete absence of thirst 
stimulation despite significant osmotic stimulus. Shaded areas 
represent 95% confidence limits of normal response.
Serum osmolality (mmol/kg)
A
285
295
305
315
Thirst
Serum osmolality (mmol/kg)
B
46	
Clinical biochemistry
monitor fluid status. Frequent plasma monitoring is re-
quired to avoid the progressive development of hyper- or 
hyponatraemia. Type 4 requires no specific treatment, as 
alterations in fluid regimens will simply be handled in a 
physiologically normal way except at a higher osmotic 
setting than in normal individuals.
Hyponatraemia
Hyponatraemia 
(serum 
sodium 
concentration 
<130 mmol/L) is common in hospital inpatients, with a 
prevalence of 2–3%. The lower reference limit for serum 
sodium is reduced by ~5 mmol/L in hospitalized patients 
as opposed to healthy controls. The majority of cases of 
hyponatraemia are mild, self-limiting and require neither 
treatment nor extensive investigation.
By definition, hyponatraemia implies an excess of wa-
ter in comparison with sodium, although primary water 
excess is not always responsible for hyponatraemia. For 
example hyperglycaemia or the infusion of mannitol 
may induce significant fluid shifts from the ICF to the 
ECF. An estimate of the expected fall in serum sodium 
in relation to hyperglycaemia is given in Appendix 4.1d. 
However, this section is primarily concerned with states 
of water excess and with acute and chronic dilutional hy-
ponatraemia: dilutional hyponatraemia is also defined as 
hyponatraemia with clinically normal ECF volume or 
normovolaemic hyponatraemia. The full classification of 
hyponatraemia is shown in Box 4.8.
Spurious hyponatraemia is due to in vivo or in vitro 
contamination of the specimen with water or fluid con-
taining sodium at a concentration that is less than that of 
plasma. The commonest example seen in hospital prac-
tice is venesection from a limb concurrently receiving a 
dextrose infusion.
Pseudohyponatraemia (molar concentration) is due to 
the replacement of a portion of the plasma water space 
with either lipid or protein. This can occur in patients with 
severe endogenous or exogenous hypertriglyceridaemia 
and in patients with high plasma protein concentrations 
(usually due to paraproteinaemia). The concentration of 
sodium in plasma water (molal concentration) is normal, 
but each litre of plasma now contains less water. Serum 
osmolality (molal concentration) is normal.
Patients with hypovolaemic or hypervolaemic hypo-
natraemia present with signs of ECF volume depletion 
or excess. These conditions are discussed under disor-
ders of sodium metabolism; they are usually differenti-
ated clinically from dilutional hyponatraemias and also by 
the presence of biochemical evidence of the underlying 
cause, for example renal or hepatic dysfunction.
Although acute and chronic hyponatraemia may share 
certain common causes and the definition is somewhat 
arbitrary (acute hyponatraemia is of <48 h duration), 
these conditions present and are managed in quite sepa-
rate ways. This is because of the adaptation of cells, in 
particular brain cells, to chronic hypotonicity. The nature 
of this adaptation is summarized in Figure 4.9 and can, in 
part, be attributed to the reduction of cerebral osmolytes 
(see p. 45).
Acute dilutional hyponatraemia
The main causes of acute dilutional hyponatraemia are 
shown in Box 4.9. Self-inflicted acute hyponatraemia has 
been described, but is extremely difficult to induce due to 
the enormous human capacity for renal water excretion – 
urine flow rates of 27.5 mL/min (equivalent to 39.6 L of 
urine in 24 h) have been described, although low osmotic 
loads for excretion or renal impairment can severely re-
duce water clearing capacity.
Psychogenic polydipsia (and the much rarer hypo-
thalamic polydipsia) may result in acute hyponatrae-
mia. However, the commonest cause of acute dilutional 
hyponatraemia seen in hospitalized patients is inap-
propriate postoperative fluid regimens involving the in-
travenous infusion of excessive volumes of low-sodium 
fluid (e.g. ‘dextrose saline’). The acute hyponatraemia 
following transurethral prostatectomy (TURP), known 
as the transurethral resection syndrome (TURS), is also 
worthy of specific mention, as it is the most serious acute 
hyponatraemia likely to present at the current time. In 
the development of TURS, irrigant fluid (1.5% glycine) 
is absorbed into the circulation via the open venous si-
nuses of the prostatic bed; glycine is used as it provides 
a non-electrolytic medium that will not dissipate the en-
ergy of cautery used in the resection, and the slightly 
hypotonic concentration provides an ideal optical in-
terface. Risk factors for the development of the syn-
drome include a prolonged operative procedure, high 
irrigant hydrostatic pressure and significant blood loss. 
Strict control over these risks has resulted in a marked 
reduction in the incidence of this complication in recent 
years. If, however, sufficient irrigant is absorbed, this 
fluid will reduce plasma sodium concentration by sim-
ple dilution, but osmolality will not initially be reduced 
by an equivalent extent. An osmolal gap (see Appendix 
4.1e,f ) will initially develop as a result of high plasma 
glycine concentrations (up to 15 mmol/L), but unless 
the resultant free water is subsequently excreted, the os-
molal gap will disappear as the glycine is metabolized. 
High plasma concentrations of both glycine and am-
monia (which may result from the rapid metabolism of 
glycine) have been proposed to contribute to the severe 
deterioration in mental state that occurs in full-blown 
TURS. However, patients with hypoosmolal hypona-
traemia respond rapidly to measures designed to treat 
acute water intoxication alone.
BOX 4.8	
Classification of hyponatraemia
•	 Spurious (sampling error)
•	 Pseudohyponatraemia
•	 Hypovolaemic hyponatraemia
•	 Renal sodium loss (diuretic excess, adrenal failure, 
sodium losing nephropathy)
•	 Non-renal sodium loss (gastrointestinal, haemor-
rhage, burns)
•	 Hypervolaemic hyponatraemia
•	 With oedema (cirrhosis, CCF, nephrotic syndrome)
•	 Without oedema (acute or chronic renal failure)
•	 Normovolaemic hyponatraemia
•	 Acute dilutional hyponatraemia (see Box 4.9)
•	 Chronic dilutional hyponatraemia (see Box 4.10)
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
47
Acute hyponatraemia of sufficient severity to present 
clinically, with symptoms of headache, confusion and 
drowsiness, is a medical emergency, as the condition may 
lead to coma and death. Progressive clinical symptoms 
may be associated with signs of raised intracranial pres-
sure, decerebrate posturing, fixed dilated pupils, brady-
cardia, hypertension and convulsions. All cells swell in 
size when placed in hypotonic medium: the change in 
size is particularly important with respect to brain cells 
confined within the fixed volume of the cranium (see 
Fig. 4.9). In acute hyponatraemia, adaptation of brain cell 
size cannot occur quickly enough to prevent the effects 
of cellular swelling and subsequent tentorial herniation 
with dramatic clinical sequelae. Females of reproductive 
age appear to be particularly prone to the effects of acute 
hyponatraemia.
Chronic dilutional hyponatraemia
Chronic dilutional hyponatraemia is common and has 
many possible causes (Box 4.10). The majority (excluding 
chronic hyponatraemia associated with beer potomania; 
see p. 49) can be related to a failure of water excretion, 
presumed to be due to a failure to suppress AVP secre-
tion. There is good evidence that certain tumours (e.g. 
small cell (oat cell) carcinoma of the bronchus) possess 
the capacity to synthesize and secrete AVP, but in the ma-
jority of cases, the origin of the AVP is presumed to be 
the hypothalamic-posterior pituitary axis.
Patterns of plasma AVP response to increasing plasma 
sodium concentration induced by hypertonic saline infu-
sion have been studied in chronic hyponatraemia. Four 
patterns of response have been described, as shown in 
Figure 4.10.
1.	 In type A, there is no relationship between plasma 
AVP concentration and plasma sodium (osmolal-
ity); AVP is released either at fixed concentration or 
shows random variation. This pattern is often seen 
in association with ectopic production of AVP by 
tumours.
2.	 In type B, there is a normal response of AVP re-
lease to osmotic stimulation but it occurs at a 
much lower setting – a resetting of the osmostat. 
Theoretically, this condition could result from the 
adaptive response to chronic hyponatraemia as the 
osmotic content of brain cells falls. This condition 
has been described in association with tumours and 
various neurological disorders.
3.	 In type C, there is a constant low-level release of 
AVP, even when osmolality is suppressed below the 
normal threshold, but a qualitatively and quantita-
tively normal response above the threshold. This 
pattern may be seen transiently following pituitary/
hypothalamic trauma.
4.	 In type D, there is suitable suppression of AVP 
concentration when the patient is hypoosmolal, 
suggesting either that immunologically distinct 
antidiuretic material is being secreted or that the 
renal tubules are somehow rendered more sensitive 
to extremely low concentrations of circulating AVP. 
This pattern of response is seen in patients with 
gain of function mutations of the AVPR2 gene.
Plasma 
Sodium
140 mmol/L
Brain cell 
Volume
100% 
Plasma 
Sodium
110 mmo/L 
Brain cell 
Volume
127% 
Acute
hyponatraemia
Chronic
hyponatraemia
Plasma 
Sodium
110 mmol/L 
Brain cell 
Volume
104% 
Osmolality
285 mmol/kg
Osmolality
285 mmo/kg
Osmolality
225 mmol/kg
Osmolality
225 mmol/kg
Osmolality
225 mmol/kg
Osmolality
225 mmol/kg
FIGURE 4.9  ■ The major differences in brain cell volume in acute hyponatraemia and chronic hyponatraemia. In chronic ­hyponatraemia, 
cell osmotic content has been reduced.
BOX 4.9	
Causes of acute dilutional 
hyponatraemia
•	 Self-induced
•	 Psychogenic
•	 Freshwater drowning
•	 Iatrogenic
•	 Inappropriate i.v. fluid regimen
•	 Absorption of irrigant (transurethral prostatectomy, 
transcervical endometriectomy, transcutaneous ure-
terolithotomy, vesical ultrasonic lithotripsy)
•	 Syntocinon induction of labour with isotonic dextrose 
infusion
48	
Clinical biochemistry
Although this classification of AVP responses in 
chronic dilutional hyponatraemia assists pathophysi-
ological understanding, no reliable relationship has been 
found between the aetiology of the condition and any one 
pattern of response, save for the gain of function muta-
tions in the AVPR2 gene. The measurement of AVP in 
chronic dilutional hyponatraemia, therefore, for the vast 
majority of patients has no current diagnostic or prog-
nostic function.
The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hor-
mone secretion. The term ‘syndrome of inappropri-
ate antidiuretic hormone secretion’ (SIADH) was first 
coined by Bartter and Schwartz in 1957, to describe pa-
tients with severe hyponatraemia who were without evi-
dence of renal failure, adrenal failure or saline depletion, 
but who had indirect evidence of persistent AVP secre-
tion. The criteria for diagnosing the syndrome are shown 
in Box 4.11. Before this description, such patients were 
often misclassified as suffering from renal salt wasting 
because of the associated hyponatraemia and natriuresis. 
The original description thus provided a useful explana-
tion of the biochemical findings and led to more rational 
therapeutic regimens.
Unfortunately, the term SIADH tends to be used uni-
versally to describe any acute or chronic dilutional hy-
ponatraemia. Apart from certain causes of acute water 
intoxication and rare forms of chronic hyponatraemia, 
plasma AVP is detectable in the vast majority of patients 
with hyponatraemia of whatever cause. In addition, the 
criteria for diagnosis may produce anomalies, for exam-
ple chronic dilutional hyponatraemia with reset osmostat 
(Fig. 4.10B) could fit the criteria when plasma osmolality 
is above the new threshold for AVP release, but fail to 
comply when plasma osmolality falls below this thresh-
old, when maximally dilute urine is excreted. The term 
BOX 4.10	
Conditions associated with chronic dilutional hyponatraemia
Tumours
Thoracic
•	 Bronchogenic
•	 Carcinoma
•	 Bronchial carcinoid
•	 Mesothelioma
•	 Thymoma
Non-thoracic
•	 Pancreatic carcinoma
•	 Duodenal carcinoma
•	 Ureteral, bladder and prostatic carcinoma
•	 Lymphoma
•	 Myeloproliferative diseases
•	 Olfactory neuroblastoma
Pulmonary disease
Infections
•	 Tuberculosis
•	 Empyema
•	 Lung abscess
•	 Pneumonias (bacterial, viral and mycoplasmal)
•	 Aspergillosis
Ventilatory
•	 Asthma
•	 Bronchiolitis
•	 Pneumothorax
•	 Emphysema
•	 Cystic fibrosis
•	 Positive-pressure ventilation
CNS disorders
Space-occupying lesions
•	 Tumour (any type)
•	 Abscess
•	 Subdural haematoma
Degenerative
•	 Guillain–Barré
•	 Multiple sclerosis
•	 Cerebral atrophy
Infections
•	 Meningitis
•	 Encephalitis
Inflammatory conditions
•	 Systemic lupus erythematosus
Miscellaneous
•	 Head trauma
•	 Hydrocephalus
•	 Subarachnoid haemorrhage
•	 Cavernous sinus thrombosis
Drugs
AVP analogues
•	 dDAVP
•	 Oxytocin/syntocinon
AVP potentiation
•	 Prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors, e.g. aspirin, 
­indometacin
•	 Chlorpropamide
Stimulation of AVP release
•	 Nicotine
•	 Phenothiazines
•	 Vincristine
•	 Tricyclic antidepressants
Mixed or unknown action
•	 Colchicine
•	 Carbamazepine
•	 Clofibrate
•	 Cyclophosphamide
•	 Clozapine
Miscellaneous
•	 Idiopathic
•	 Gain of function mutation AVPR2
•	 Acute porphyrias
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Low osmotic load
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
49
SIADH implies physiological understanding when often 
very little exists, and is a diagnosis that does not indicate 
immediate management or prognosis. Syndrome of inap-
propriate antidiuretic hormone secretion is a term that 
should now be replaced with more descriptive terminol-
ogy, for example chronic dilutional hyponatraemia sec-
ondary to small cell carcinoma of the lung.
Sick cell syndrome. The association of sick cells and 
hyponatraemia was first explored by Flear and Singh in 
1973, and it was an attempt to explore critically the as-
sumption of common pathophysiology of the vast num-
ber of conditions grouped under SIADH, as well as to 
explain the hyponatraemia of seriously ill patients with 
conditions such as congestive cardiac failure (CCF), 
­cirrhosis or serious pulmonary or CNS infections. One 
hypothesis was that sick cells leak normally non-diffus-
ible solutes, but gain sodium, leading to extracellular hy-
ponatraemia, but maintenance of serum osmolality. This 
combination of events may be observed in extremely ill 
patients after major surgery or burns, but has not been 
detected in the vast majority of patients with chronic hy-
ponatraemia. However, a type of sick cell syndrome that 
is relevant to the development of chronic hyponatrae-
mia is that resulting from a primary overall reduction in 
­cellular osmotic content, through either increased loss 
or reduced production. Osmoreceptor cells so affected 
would result in control of AVP around a lower osmotic 
setting – a reset osmostat (SIADH type B). In practice, 
however, it is difficult to distinguish between a primary 
loss of cellular ­osmotic content (sick cells) or a second-
ary adaptive loss in response to a primary chronic dilu-
tional hyponatraemia. Like SIADH, the term ‘sick cell 
syndrome’ should now be replaced by descriptive termi-
nology, for example ‘chronic dilutional hyponatraemia 
secondary to chest infection’.
Low osmotic load hyponatraemia
One unusual cause of hyponatraemia requiring special 
mention is that associated with a low osmotic load for 
renal excretion. Beer potomania is an example of such a 
condition. It is caused by the consumption of a large vol-
ume of beer containing only very low quantities of elec-
trolytes, coupled with a diet poor in protein and other 
minerals. Unlike starvation, in which osmoles such as ke-
tones and urea are generated and excreted in the urine, the 
daily osmolal load for excretion in individuals at risk for 
beer potomania can be extremely low (<250 mmol/24 h). 
Thus, if the minimum achievable urine osmolality is nor-
mal at about 50 mmol/kg, then, allowing for insensible 
fluid loss, a consumption of more than 6 L of such beer 
over the 24 h period will result in water retention inde-
pendent of AVP secretion or responsiveness. Binges can 
result in acute hyponatraemia, although the more usual 
presentation is of a severe chronic hyponatraemia, oc-
casionally complicated by plasma electrolyte changes 
secondary to alcoholic liver disease. The condition is un-
usual in the UK, probably because of the higher mineral 
content of traditional beers compared with continental 
beers, together with the tradition of serving bar snacks 
rich in sodium chloride. An association with excess cider 
consumption (cider potomania) has also been described, 
although this condition can only occur in an individual 
with normal urine diluting capacity if factory-type cider 
is consumed, rather than traditional craft cider. The for-
mer may have only the equivalent of 25% apple juice con-
tent, whereas the latter has 100% with a corresponding 
mineral content providing non-metabolizable osmoles in 
excess of 70 mmol/kg.
FIGURE  4.10  ■ The four patterns of plasma arginine vasopres-
sin (AVP) responses to changes in plasma osmolality induced 
by hypertonic saline infusion in patients with chronic dilutional 
hyponatraemia. (A) Random variation. (B) Resetting of osmo-
stat. (C) Constant low-level release. (D) Hypovasopressinaemic 
antidiuresis. Shaded areas represent the inter-subject variation 
limits of normal response. The dotted line represents the limit of 
detection of current AVP assays. Data from Zerbe R L, Stropes L, 
Robertson G L. Vasopressin function in the syndrome of inappropri-
ate antidiuresis. Annual Review of Medicine 1980; 31:315–327.
BOX 4.11	
Criteria for diagnosing the 
syndrome of inappropriate 
antidiuretic hormone secretion 
(SIADH)
1.	 Hyponatraemia with corresponding hypoosmolality 
of the serum and ECF
2.	 Continued renal excretion of sodium
3.	 Absence of clinical evidence of fluid volume deple-
tion or overload, that is, normal skin turgor and blood 
pressure, or absence of oedema
4.	 Osmolality of the urine greater than that appropriate 
for the concomitant tonicity (effective osmolality) of 
the plasma, that is, urine not maximally dilute
5.	 Normal renal function
6.	 Normal adrenal function
7.	 Normal thyroid function
50	
Clinical biochemistry
The concept of beer potomania as a cause of dilu-
tional hyponatraemia is that of a mismatch between fluid 
intake and the capacity for excretion, independently of 
AVP secretion or responsiveness. This concept may have 
other parallels, for example in elderly patients treated 
with thiazide diuretics and with diets of low mineral con-
tent, adequate calories and relatively high fluid loads – 
the so-called ‘tea and toast’ diet. Thiazide diuretics act 
by blocking the reabsorption of sodium and chloride in 
the cortical diluting segment of the nephron. Thus, the 
capacity to generate maximally dilute urine is impaired 
and a concomitant ‘tea and toast’ diet can result in the 
development of severe dilutional hyponatraemia.
Cerebral salt wasting
The association of cerebral pathology, hyponatraemia 
and failure to retain urine sodium is termed cerebral salt 
wasting (CSW). This term was coined before the de-
scription and understanding of SIADH, in which there 
is also hyponatraemia and, during access to free water 
or following infusion of saline, a continued renal loss of 
sodium. Recent reports have attempted to re-implicate a 
primary renal sodium loss in some patients with cerebral 
pathology. Natriuretic peptide excess has been suggested 
as a mechanism. Caution is required, however, as many 
of such case reports invariably describe a euvolaemic, 
as opposed to hypovolaemic, hyponatraemia indistin-
guishable from hyponatraemia associated with SIADH. 
Differentiation of CSW from SIADH will become in-
creasingly important as selective AVPR2 antagonists 
(vaptans) become more widely available and affordable 
(see p. 51). Vaptans are contraindicated in hypovolaemic 
hyponatraemia.
Laboratory investigation of hyponatraemia
Hyponatraemia is, by definition, a laboratory diagnosis, 
but the differentiation of hypovolaemic and hypervolae-
mic hyponatraemia is largely clinical, as is the differentia-
tion between acute and chronic dilutional hyponatraemia.
Acute dilutional hyponatraemia may constitute a med-
ical emergency, yet its laboratory investigation is often 
cursory and incomplete. The diagnosis is by clinical his-
tory of acute water loading without evidence of corre-
sponding diuresis, and rapid deterioration in mental state, 
possibly coupled with signs of cerebral oedema. It is most 
important to confirm the serum sodium measurement, 
preferably with a fresh sample, ensuring that contamina-
tion of the specimen is avoided. The most important ad-
ditional laboratory investigation is the measurement of 
serum osmolality, which will validate the serum sodium 
measurement or indicate the extent of any osmolal gap. 
Measurement of urine osmolality is superfluous, even if a 
sample is available.
The laboratory investigation of chronic dilutional 
hyponatraemia is predominantly to confirm the water-
retaining state that has produced the condition and to 
exclude correctable metabolic causes. The serum elec-
trolyte pattern in chronic dilutional hyponatraemia will 
usually show normokalaemia, but a hypochloraemia of 
corresponding degree to the hyponatraemia. The serum 
urea concentration is often low and is reduced not only 
by dilution, but also because of reduced tubular reabsorp-
tion. Serum urate concentration may also be low because 
of changes in tubular function, but this is not invariable 
and renal handling of urate may be directly affected by 
the cause of the hyponatraemia, for example a thiazide 
diuretic.
Urine measurements may be of confirmatory help in 
chronic dilutional hyponatraemia, but can be mislead-
ing. The urine is inappropriately concentrated, that is, it 
is anything other than maximally dilute. There is wide-
spread belief that urine osmolality must exceed serum os-
molality for the diagnosis of a water retaining state, but 
this is not the case. The concentration of urine is depen-
dent on both water and osmolal content. An anorexic pa-
tient may have a total osmolal load of only 400 mmol/24 h 
to excrete, but if fluid intake is sufficient to produce 2 L 
of urine, then the overall urine concentration at balance 
is 200 mmol/kg. A urine concentration of 220 mmol/kg 
would produce a positive water balance, even though the 
urine is hypoosmolal to plasma.
One of the remarkable features of chronic dilutional 
hyponatraemia, especially when it is clearly demonstrated 
that plasma AVP concentrations are grossly elevated, is 
that patients do not form maximally concentrated urine. 
Patients with chronic dilutional hyponatraemia reach 
new steady states and then remain in sodium and water 
balance. Thirst thresholds appear to be downregulated to 
match the reduced plasma osmolality. Sudden increases 
or decreases in fluid intake may upset the steady state 
until a new one is reached. The mechanism of renal ad-
aptation is probably related to downregulation of the ex-
pression of AQP 2 in the renal collecting ducts coupled 
to a reduction in the concentration gradient within the 
renal medulla.
The urine sodium concentration may also be of diag-
nostic value to differentiate hypovolaemic hyponatrae-
mia if clinical signs are absent or misleading, but only 
if the sodium deficit is not renal in origin. Again, some 
care is needed, as chronic dilutional hyponatraemia is 
classically associated with a natriuresis, which can be de-
fined essentially as anything other than maximal sodium 
retention. Often, when the patient is on free fluids, the 
natriuresis is very marked, with a urine sodium concen-
tration >100 mmol/L. But as a new steady state is ap-
proached, urine sodium excretion falls, and when fluid 
and sodium intake are restricted, urine sodium may fall 
to very low concentrations (<10 mmol/L); this then in-
dicates the total body sodium deficit that has developed 
secondarily to the natriuresis induced by initial positive 
water balance.
Other laboratory investigations recommended when 
the cause of the water-retaining state is not clear include 
thyroid function tests and a short tetracosactide stimu-
lation test. There is a recognized, but variable, associa-
tion of chronic hyponatraemia with hypothyroidism, and 
occasionally patients with primary or secondary adrenal 
failure present with nothing more specific than chronic 
dilutional hyponatraemia.
As previously stated, measurements of plasma AVP 
concentration are not normally of any assistance in the 
diagnosis of chronic dilutional hyponatraemia, but may 
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
51
be of value to determine if normal osmoregulation has 
been restored following a period of treatment. An in-
direct assessment of water handling using a water load 
test can also occasionally be used for this purpose (see 
Appendix 4.2c).
Management of hyponatraemia
The management of hypovolaemic hyponatraemia is 
primarily to restore blood volume and ECF volume to 
normal and to correct the underlying disorder. The man-
agement of hypervolaemic hyponatraemia is primarily to 
treat the underlying disorder and to use diuretic therapy 
when appropriate. Management of both these conditions 
is covered within the sections on sodium deficiency and 
excess.
The management of euvolaemic or dilutional hypo-
natraemia has created considerable controversy in recent 
years. This has its origins in the morbidity and mortality 
of uncorrected severe dilutional hyponatraemia (serum 
sodium ≤115 mmol/L), whether it is acute or chronic in 
nature. In the USA, a regimen of partial correction of 
hyponatraemia was adopted in the past, which resulted in 
patients’ serum sodium concentrations being increased 
rapidly to ~125 mmol/L. The rate of increase in sodium 
was usually in excess of 0.5 mmol/L per hour and often 
several-fold greater. Unfortunately, this regimen has 
become increasingly associated with the development 
of the neurological disorder known variously as central 
pontine myelinolysis (CPM), pontine and extrapontine 
myelinolysis or osmotic demyelination syndrome. The 
usual course of events in such cases is that the patient 
presents clinically with hyponatraemic symptoms, which 
can be either mild, such as weakness and confusion or 
severe, such as convulsions or coma. During the rapid 
correction of the plasma sodium concentration, these 
symptoms improve, but in the following few days the 
patient’s neurological condition deteriorates and further 
symptoms develop, including behavioural disturbances 
and convulsions and these, in turn, may lead on to the 
full-blown condition of CPM, including pseudobulbar 
palsy and quadriparesis. Further confusion as to the 
origin of the condition has been a continued, but un-
substantiated, association in the literature of CPM with 
uncorrected hyponatraemia.
Recommended 
management 
of 
symptomatic 
acute dilutional hyponatraemia. The biggest dan-
ger in this condition is failure to treat promptly. 
Water restriction has a supportive role, but must not 
be used alone. Cerebral oedema is the major compli-
cation, and acute elevation of plasma sodium using 
5% sodium chloride infusion to produce a maximum  
increase of 12 mmol/L per 24 h or a serum sodium con-
centration of approximately 125 mmol/L (whichever is 
the lesser), is recommended. If an osmolal gap exists, 
then the infusion should increase serum osmolality to 
no greater than 255 mmol/kg. A formula to calculate 
the amount of sodium required is given in Appendix 
4.1g. Short-term rates of infusion resulting in an in-
crease of serum sodium up to 5 mmol/L per hour, have, 
in acutely symptomatic patients, been used successfully 
with dramatic clinical improvement and with no long-
term sequelae. A simple general rule for patients falling 
within the definition of acute hyponatraemia and who 
are symptomatic is to match the rate of correction with 
the presumed rate of onset. Diuretics such as furose-
mide and mannitol may be of benefit, but lack the pre-
cision of control afforded by hypertonic saline infusion, 
and when used in combination with hypertonic saline 
infusion may make controlling the rate of correction 
more difficult.
Recommended management of chronic dilutional 
hyponatraemia. The cornerstones of management in 
chronic dilutional hyponatraemia are to prevent further 
falls in plasma sodium concentration, to treat any under-
lying condition, to alleviate any symptoms attributable 
to hyponatraemia and to avoid any therapeutic complica-
tions. Many patients who are in a steady state with mild 
hyponatraemia require no specific treatment. For those 
at risk of further falls in plasma sodium, water should be 
restricted to a degree sufficient to induce negative water 
balance (usually 500–800 mL of water per 24 h). Water 
restriction will increase plasma sodium concentration in 
anyone, but the rate of increase may be very slow, and 
if any degree of sodium depletion exists, an increase in 
plasma sodium will only be achieved at the expense of 
a contraction in ECF volume and a potential deteriora-
tion in renal function. Certain patients cannot tolerate 
fluid restriction, and for these, until recently, treat-
ment with the tetracycline antibiotic demeclocycline 
(DMC) may have been considered. Arginine vasopres-
sin receptor antagonists (collectively termed ‘vaptans’) 
are now commercially available. Tolvaptan is a selective 
­vasopressin V2-receptor antagonist with an affinity for 
the V2-receptor greater than that of native arginine va-
sopressin. Treatment of chronic dilutional hyponatrae-
mia commences with a single 15 mg oral dose and can 
be titrated up to a single daily dose of 60 mg, depending 
on response. Regular monitoring of serum electrolytes 
and renal function is strongly recommended. Tolvaptan 
should not be used in the treatment of acute dilutional 
hyponatraemia, which requires hypertonic saline infu-
sion. The introduction of selective AVPR2 antagonists 
has rendered previous treatment options of DMC or 
lithium, obsolete.
In the very rare instances in which severe chronic hy-
ponatraemia produces neurological symptoms, it may be 
considered prudent to raise the plasma sodium concentra-
tion acutely with hypertonic saline. If this is considered, 
the rate of infusion should be most carefully controlled 
with frequent monitoring of serum sodium. As in the 
management of acute hyponatraemia, it is recommended 
that serum sodium is raised to a concentration no greater 
than 125 mmol/L by this method. In this instance, how-
ever, the rate of infusion should produce a change in 
serum sodium of no greater than 0.5 mmol/L per hour 
to minimize the risk of the development of CPM: this 
is in contrast to the treatment of acute symptomatic hy-
ponatraemia, in which the recommended 24 h rate and 
maximum concentration are the same, but the maximum 
rate for short periods may be much more rapid – up to 
5 mmol/L per hour.
52	
Clinical biochemistry
DISORDERS OF POTASSIUM METABOLISM
Potassium is predominantly an intracellular cation, but 
disorders of potassium metabolism are generally iden-
tified by measurements of extracellular potassium. 
Dramatic changes in plasma potassium concentration 
may occur as a result of transcellular shifts without nec-
essarily any alteration of total body potassium. Clinical 
disorders are therefore classified on the basis of serum 
potassium concentration, rather than of potassium deple-
tion or excess.
Hypokalaemia
The definition of hypokalaemia is not strict, but per-
sistent serum potassium concentrations <3.4 mmol/L 
(plasma 3.1 mmol/L) require investigation. The immedi-
ate clinical effects of hypokalaemia are on neuronal and 
muscular function: they result from an increase in the 
ratio of the intracellular to extracellular potassium con-
centrations. In addition, hypokalaemia, when associated 
with severe potassium depletion, affects the function of a 
wide variety of organ systems. Box 4.12 lists the possible 
clinical effects of hypokalaemia.
Causes of hypokalaemia
Hypokalaemia can be caused by redistribution of potas-
sium (in vitro or in vivo), inadequate intake or excessive 
loss (renal or extrarenal).
Redistribution hypokalaemia in  vitro. This form 
of hypokalaemia, sometimes known as spurious hypoka-
laemia, has been described in association with two clini-
cal situations (Box 4.13). First, it may occur in patients 
with leukaemia and very high white blood cell (WBC) 
counts; if the blood is taken and allowed to stand at room 
temperature without separation, the WBCs take up ex-
tracellular potassium. The second situation in which 
this phenomenon may occur is if blood is taken from a 
diabetic patient who received intravenous insulin a few 
minutes prior to venesection; erythrocytes take up ex-
tracellular potassium, and if blood is subsequently left 
to stand at room temperature unseparated for 2 h or so 
prior to analysis, serum potassium concentration will 
decrease.
Redistribution hypokalaemia in vivo. The major causes 
of transcellular shift of potassium occurring in vivo are 
also shown in Box  4.13. Both alkalosis and increased 
plasma bicarbonate concentration without alkalosis will 
induce increased cellular uptake of potassium, as does 
endogenous or exogenous insulin. Catecholamines and 
β-adrenergic agonists such as adrenaline (epinephrine), 
salbutamol and fenoterol can all promote cellular up-
take of potassium, and many patients admitted as acute 
medical emergencies may have significant, but transient, 
hypokalaemia, probably secondary to endogenous cat-
echolamine release. Toxic chemicals such as toluene (in-
volved in some forms of glue sniffing) and the ingestion 
of soluble barium salts (such as barium carbonate, which 
is used in certain pottery glazes, but has occasionally 
been mistaken for flour in cooking) have been implicated 
in redistribution hypokalaemia. It should be noted that 
barium salts used as contrast material for radiological in-
vestigations are not water soluble and do not pose a risk 
of toxicity.
Hypokalaemic periodic paralysis. This type of periodic 
paralysis occurs in two forms.
BOX 4.12	
The clinical effects of  
hypokalaemia
Cardiovascular
•	 Electrocardiographic changes – depressed ST ­segment, 
inverted T waves, prominent U waves
•	 Arrhythmias
•	 Potentiation of digitalis intoxication
•	 Hypotension
•	 Myocardial necrosis
Neuromuscular
•	 Weakness, flaccid paralysis
•	 Pain, tenderness, cramps
•	 Tetany
•	 Rhabdomyolysis
Neuropsychiatric
•	 Lethargy, apathy, depression
•	 Acute memory loss, disorientation, confusion
Renal
•	 Polyuria
•	 Sodium retention
•	 Increased renal ammoniagenesis
•	 Metabolic alkalosis
Gastrointestinal
•	 Decreased motility (constipation, paralytic ileus)
•	 Decreased gastric acid secretion
Endocrine
•	 Increased renin secretion
•	 Decreased aldosterone secretion
•	 Decreased insulin secretion
BOX 4.13	
Causes of redistribution 
hypokalaemia
In vitro redistribution
•	 Uptake by white blood cells (e.g. in leukaemia)
•	 Uptake by erythrocytes following in vivo insulin 
adminis­tration
In vivo redistribution
•	 Alkalosis
•	 Increased plasma bicarbonate
•	 Insulin administration
•	 β-adrenergic agonists
•	 Toxic chemicals (toluene, soluble barium salts)
•	 Hypokalaemic periodic paralysis
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
53
Familial hypokalaemic periodic paralysis (FHPP) is 
a rare autosomal dominant condition found most com-
monly in male Caucasians (male to female ratio 3:1 be-
cause of reduced penetrance and expression in females). 
The condition is characterized by attacks of flaccid 
paralysis affecting the limbs and trunk but rarely the 
facial and respiratory muscles; attacks commonly com-
mence at night and patients present with weakness or 
paralysis on awakening. Attacks can last for up to 24 h 
and other acute manifestations of hypokalaemia such as 
cardiac arrhythmias may also be present. Spontaneous 
remission occurs with the re-establishment of normo-
kalaemia. The attacks can begin in childhood, but often 
the onset may be delayed until the second decade of 
life. Periodicity of attacks is extremely variable between 
patients, with daily to yearly intervals (median four to 
six weeks). The attacks may be provoked by exercise 
followed by rest, a high carbohydrate intake, a glucose 
and insulin ­infusion, high sodium intake, adrenaline, 
glucagon administration and hypothermia. The total 
body potassium is ­unchanged during the attack, but 
potassium moves rapidly from the extracellular space 
into muscle. Mutations in three separate genes have 
now been implicated. The commonest mutations found 
are in the gene encoding the skeletal muscle voltage-
gated calcium channel α-subunit (CACNA1S), which 
accounts for the majority of cases. Also described are 
mutations in the gene coding for the skeletal muscle 
voltage-gated sodium channel α-subunit (SCN4A) and 
the skeletal muscle voltage-gated potassium channel 
(KCNE3).
The management of FHPP is similar to that of any 
other hypokalaemia (see later), with either oral potas-
sium supplements (up to 120 mmol/day) or, if necessary, 
intravenous administration, though particular care must 
be taken to avoid infusion of solutions containing glu-
cose. Monitoring of serum potassium is important fol-
lowing the attack to ensure rebound hyperkalaemia does 
not occur. Prophylaxis against attacks includes a low 
carbohydrate diet, together with oral potassium supple-
ments and the daily administration of spironolactone 
(100–200 mg), but probably most effective is the daily ad-
ministration of acetazolamide (250–750 mg), although in 
patients with SCN4A mutations, acetazolamide may be 
contraindicated.
Hypokalaemic periodic paralysis with thyrotoxicosis 
(THPP) is a condition which primarily occurs in indi-
viduals of Chinese or Japanese extraction, but has been 
described in other races, including Caucasians and 
black people. The male preponderance is even more 
marked than in familial hypokalaemic periodic paraly-
sis (FHPP) (20:1), and the age of onset is later (gener-
ally in the third decade). Links with mutations in the 
KCNE3 gene are described, but not in Chinese popu-
lations for whom links with mutations in CACNA1S 
have been made.
The clinical presentation of THPP is indistinguish-
able from the familial form, but the condition completely 
remits when the patient becomes euthyroid.
Extrarenal causes of potassium depletion. Box  4.14 
lists the causes of extrarenal potassium depletion.
A low dietary intake of potassium as the sole cause 
of hypokalaemia is rare. Renal conservation can reduce 
urine potassium in normal subjects to <5 mmol/L, so that 
without severe polyuria, a considerable lead-in period is 
necessary before clinically apparent hypokalaemia devel-
ops. Anorexia nervosa may, because of associated vom-
iting, speed the onset of clinically significant deficiency 
(see p. 55). One interesting cause of hypokalaemia is 
seen occasionally when patients with severe anaemia are 
treated with haematinics, resulting in a considerable and 
rapid increase in reticulocyte count; it has been specu-
lated that, in certain patients, the degree of hypokalaemia 
that develops may induce cardiovascular death.
Excessive sweating is a potential cause of hypokalae-
mia. Sweat has relatively low potassium concentration 
(normally <10 mmol/L), but subjects who undergo severe 
physical exertion in hot climates, or who exercise vigor-
ously in saunas, can lose considerable volumes of sweat 
(up to 12 L in a day). Subjects undergoing such ordeals 
may be aware of the potential for severe sodium deple-
tion without necessarily compensating for the associated 
potassium depletion.
The commonest causes of extrarenal potassium deple-
tion are those involving loss of gastrointestinal fluid rich 
in potassium, in particular diarrhoea. Stool water is rich in 
potassium with concentrations of up to 90 mmol/L, 
­although the normal daily volume of water lost by this 
route results in stool potassium losses of <10 mmol/24 h. 
Diarrhoea of whatever cause results in an increase in stool 
weight and fluid content, so that severe diarrhoea may lead 
to stool volumes up to 2 L/24 h. Although potassium con-
centration in stool water tends to decrease as the volume 
increases, there is a limited colonic capacity for sodium/
potassium exchange, and the daily losses of potassium in 
severe diarrhoea may exceed 100 mmol. As the stool water 
contains significant concentrations of bicarbonate, diar-
rhoea is often accompanied by a metabolic acidosis with 
hyperchloraemia. Thus, common causes of diarrhoea, 
such as bacterial causes, inflammatory bowel disease and 
diarrhoea associated with malabsorption ­syndromes, as 
well as less common causes, such as the watery diarrhoea–
hypokalaemia achlorhydria (WDHA) syndrome – due to 
a pancreatic adenoma secreting vasoactive intestinal pep-
tide (VIPoma) – are typically associated with a metabolic 
acidosis. Certain causes of diarrhoea, however, such as 
BOX 4.14	
Causes of hypokalaemia due to 
­extrarenal potassium depletion
Inadequate intake
•	 Fasting
•	 Anorexia
•	 During rapid cell synthesis
Increased loss
•	 Excessive sweating
•	 Gastrointestinal
•	 Fistula
•	 Diarrhoea
•	 Cation exchange
•	 Geophagia
54	
Clinical biochemistry
chloride-losing diarrhoea, Zollinger–Ellison syndrome 
(gastrinoma) and laxative abuse, are associated with a 
metabolic alkalosis. Typically, these conditions are associ-
ated with hypokalaemia because of associated renal, rather 
than gastrointestinal, potassium loss. Villous adenoma of 
the rectum results in the loss of large volumes of mucus, 
often rich in sodium, potassium and chloride. The acid–
base association can, therefore, be variable depending on 
predominant losses and replacement.
Potassium may be lost from the gastrointestinal tract 
as a result of the use of cation exchange resins such as 
sodium polystyrene sulphonate (Resonium A). This 
material is used primarily to treat clinically important 
hyperkalaemia. Geophagia (soil-eating) can, under cer-
tain circumstances, result in the development of hypo-
kalaemia, as clay in the soil may bind potassium in the 
gut, which then passes into the stool and is lost from 
the body.
Renal causes of potassium depletion. The classifica-
tion of renal potassium depletion adopted here is based 
on the associated acid–base disorder.
Renal hypokalaemic acidosis. The causes of renal hy-
pokalaemic acidosis with normotension are summarized 
in Box 4.15. Acidosis, with renal potassium loss, hypoka-
laemia and hyperchloraemia, is found in both distal (type 1) 
and proximal (type 2) renal tubular acidosis (RTA), as well 
as in RTA induced by the carbonic anhydrase inhibitor 
acetazolamide.
The need for urinary diversion from the bladder, as 
may occur following severely impaired capacity due to 
fibrosis or following cystectomy for carcinoma, presents 
the urological surgeon with four options.
1.	 Bringing the ureters to the skin surface (cuta-
neous ureterostomy) is rarely performed, ex-
cept temporarily in children: the operation will 
usually result in two stomata – if both kidneys 
are functioning – which are incontinent and re-
quire an external reservoir for collection. In ad-
dition, obstruction due to stricture is a frequent 
complication.
2.	 Transplantation of the ureters into the intact sig-
moid colon (ureterosigmoidostomy) was the 
original diversion operation involving the gastro-
intestinal tract, and is occasionally still performed 
when medical or religious objections preclude the 
fashioning of an alternative exit: the urine is passed 
with faeces via the rectum and anus. Potentially, 
ureterosigmoidoscopy is associated with significant 
metabolic complications (see below).
3.	 The commonest diversions now performed are 
those utilizing an isolated segment of bowel to form 
a conduit leading to the skin surface, which require 
a stoma bag or a constructed bladder fashioned to 
contain a valve to maintain continence.
4.	 Finally, if enough of the bladder is salvageable, then 
the wall may be augmented with opened segments 
of bowel (augmentation cystoplasty).
To understand the potential metabolic complications 
of potassium and other electrolytes that might arise from 
such procedures, it is necessary to know in some detail 
how the bowel normally handles the absorption of fluid 
and electrolytes. The jejunum normally rapidly absorbs 
fluid and electrolytes, but the electrolyte components, 
including potassium, will be absorbed only if there is 
a favourable concentration gradient; if the gradient is 
reversed then secretion of electrolytes into the lumen 
can occur. In the normal ileum, active sodium absorp-
tion occurs by sodium and chloride co-transport, which 
is coupled to bicarbonate excretion; potassium trans-
port is passive. In the normal colon, there is a mixture 
of electrogenic sodium absorption with passive chlo-
ride absorption, together with sodium and chloride co-
transport coupled to bicarbonate excretion, as occurs in 
BOX 4.15	
Causes of renal hypokalaemia, 
classified by associated acid–base 
disorder
Renal hypokalaemic acidosis
•	 Renal tubular acidosis
•	 Distal (type 1)
•	 Proximal (type 2)
•	 Carbonic anhydrase inhibitor
•	 Urinary tract diversion
•	 Ureterosigmoidostomy
•	 Colonic conduit
•	 Colonic continent diversion
•	 Diabetic ketoacidosis
Renal hypokalaemic alkalosis with  
normotension
•	 Gastric fluid loss (chloride depleting)
•	 Diuretics (chloride depleting)
•	 Congenital chloride-losing diarrhoea
•	 Cystic fibrosis
•	 Bartter syndrome
•	 Gitelman syndrome
Renal hypokalaemic alkalosis  
with hypertension
•	 Primary hyperaldosteronism
•	 Secondary hyperaldosteronism
•	 Familial hyperaldosteronism types FH-1,  
FH-2, FH-3
•	 Glucocorticoid excess
•	 Exogenous mineralocorticoid activity
•	 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
–	 11β-hydroxylase deficiency
–	 17α-hydroxylase deficiency
•	 Pseudohyperaldosteronism
–	 Liddle syndrome
–	 Apparent mineralocorticoid excess
Renal hypokalaemia without specific  
acid–base disorder
•	 Drug-related
•	 Penicillin
•	 Cisplatin
•	 Aminoglycosides
•	 Leukaemia
•	 Myelomonocytic leukaemia with lysozymuria
•	 Post relief of urinary tract obstruction
•	 Diuretic phase of acute kidney injury
•	 Magnesium depletion
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
55
the ileum. However, potassium is actively secreted into 
the lumen until the concentration rises to approximately 
20–30 mmol/L.
As may be predicted, if bowel wall is exposed to 
urine, the prevalence of metabolic complications due to 
electrolyte redistribution will be based on the exposed 
surface area of bowel, the duration of contact and the 
type of bowel wall exposed. The diet and fluid intake 
will alter the urinary constituents and their concentra-
tions, which can influence passive transport and con-
centration-limited active secretion. Any associated renal 
disease may have a direct metabolic effect. Thus, pre-
dictions in individual patients may be difficult but, in 
general, ureterosigmoidostomies give the greatest com-
plication rate overall with lower rates for the other tech-
niques. Diversions involving the sigmoid colon result in 
loss of bicarbonate and may result in loss of potassium, 
depending on the urine concentration of potassium en-
tering the colon. Thus there is the potential for the de-
velopment of significant hyperchloraemic acidosis with 
hypokalaemia.
Diversions involving ileal segments usually have low 
complication rates and, although hyperchloraemic aci-
dosis may occur, hypokalaemia is rare. Diversions using 
jejunal segments are mentioned here for completeness, 
but the potential effect on potassium is quite different. 
Complications include sodium, chloride and bicarbonate 
depletion, with hyperkalaemia. For that reason, jejunal 
segments are rarely used for urinary diversion.
Diabetic ketoacidosis is associated with severe po-
tassium depletion, but patients are usually hyperkalae-
mic or normokalaemic at presentation; if hypokalaemia 
is present, this is associated with extreme potassium 
depletion.
Renal hypokalaemic alkalosis. Potassium depletion 
with hypokalaemia and metabolic alkalosis can be further 
classified into normotensive and hypertensive conditions.
The causes of renal hypokalaemic alkalosis with nor-
motension are summarized in Box 4.15. Loss of gastric 
fluid through prolonged vomiting, or drainage of fluid via 
nasogastric aspiration, results in hypochloraemic alkalosis 
with renal excretion of bicarbonate and potassium. The 
associated chloride depletion results in enhanced potas-
sium secretion by the distal tubule (see Non-respiratory 
alkalosis, Chapter 5, p. 82).
Diuretics that act primarily on the thick ascending 
limb of the loops of Henle (furosemide, ethacrynic acid) 
or on the distal collecting ducts (thiazides, chlorthali-
done) can result in chloride depletion, which can further 
enhance the direct diuretic induced urinary potassium 
loss. Laxative abuse is often associated with metabolic 
alkalosis and renal chloride wasting; it may also be associ-
ated with simultaneous, but unrecognized, diuretic abuse 
or with self-induced vomiting.
Congenital chloride-losing diarrhoea is a rare con-
dition in which ileal chloride absorption is defective. 
Patients present within the first decade of life with watery 
diarrhoea and metabolic alkalosis. The diagnosis is made 
from the association of hypochloraemia (serum chloride 
usually <90 mmol/L), alkalosis, low urine chloride con-
centration (<20 mmol/L), but a high stool water chloride 
concentration (130–147 mmol/L). A similar clinical pic-
ture is seen in some patients with Zollinger–Ellison syn-
drome and in the rare condition of systemic mastocytosis 
secondary to basophil leukaemia; in the latter condition 
there is hypersecretion of gastric fluid due to histamine 
release, with diarrhoea, intestinal loss of chloride and sec-
ondary renal loss of potassium.
Rarely, cystic fibrosis (CF) may result in hypokalaemia 
in association with hypochloraemic alkalosis because of 
the high sweat chloride concentration in CF.
Bartter syndrome, a recessive autosomal condition, 
presents with hypokalaemic alkalosis in association with 
hyperreninaemic hyperaldosteronism. There is renal 
wasting of potassium and chloride, but patients are re-
sistant to the pressor effects of angiotensin II and, thus, 
are normotensive or mildly hypotensive. Patients present 
in childhood with failure to thrive, unexplained hypoka-
laemia and, occasionally, renal impairment. Renal biopsy 
typically reveals hyperplasia of the juxtaglomerular ap-
paratus. Occasionally, presentation is delayed until adult-
hood, at which time the major differential diagnosis is of 
diuretic abuse.
Bartter syndrome is caused by a loss of function mu-
tation in one of the genes coding for three transport 
proteins located in the epithelial cells of the thick as-
cending limb of the loops of Henle – respectively the 
Na+-K+-2Cl− co-transporter (NKCC2), the potassium-
secreting channel (ROMK1), which are both located 
on the apical membrane and the basolateral chloride 
channel (CLC-K6). Variations in phenotypic expres-
sion of Bartter syndrome have been explained by as-
sociation with specific transport protein mutations, for 
example early presentation, associated hypercalciuria 
and impaired urine-concentrating ability are typically 
associated with apical transport proteins, whereas later 
presentation and normal urine calcium excretion are as-
sociated with CLC-K6 mutations.
Gitelman syndrome is an autosomal recessive condi-
tion presenting with hypokalaemic alkalosis, but, unlike 
Bartter syndrome, is associated with hypomagnesaemia 
and hypocalciuria. Gitelman syndrome is caused by 
loss of function mutations in the gene coding for the 
thiazide-sensitive Na+-Cl− co-transporter (NCCT), 
situated in the distal convoluted tubules. This disorder 
may be asymptomatic in childhood and then present 
in adult life with weakness, fatigue, paraesthesia and, 
rarely, tetany.
A detailed classification of conditions causing renal 
hypokalaemic alkalosis with hypertension is given earlier 
in this chapter (see Box 4.4, p. 37), but these are summa-
rized in Box 4.15.
The association of hypokalaemic alkalosis with hy-
pertension is due to functional mineralocorticoid excess, 
resulting in sodium retention and distal tubular potas-
sium wasting with net acid excretion. Excess produc-
tion of aldosterone may be primary (hyporeninaemic) 
due to adenoma, hyperplasia or, rarely, carcinoma of the 
zona glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex (see Chapter 18). 
Three forms of familial hyperaldosteronism are currently 
described. Familial hyperaldosteronism type I (FH-I), 
a rare autosomal dominant condition, is also known as 
glucocorticoid suppressible hyperaldosteronism. It is due 
56	
Clinical biochemistry
to genetic recombination, resulting in the adrenocorti-
cotrophic hormone (ACTH)-responsive region of 11-hy-
droxylase being incorporated into aldosterone synthase 
(hybrid CYP11B1/CYP11B2 gene mutation). FH-II is 
not glucocorticoid suppressible, appears to be up to five 
times more prevalent than FH-I and is clinically indis-
tinguishable from apparent sporadic primary hyperaldo-
steronism. Family studies reveal linkage at chromosome 
7p22. Candidate genes involved in cell cycle control are 
implicated as adrenal hyperplasia and adrenal adenomas 
are reported as common in FH-II patients. FH-III, also 
not glucocorticoid suppressible, has been described in 
a single affected family in which all three members had 
hypertension, hyperaldosteronism and high plasma con-
centrations of the hybrid steroids 18-hydroxycortisol and 
18-oxocortisol. Only bilateral adrenalectomy could nor-
malize blood pressure.
Secondary (hyper-reninaemic) hyperaldosteronism 
with hypertension is seen in patients with accelerated 
(malignant) hypertension and renal artery stenosis. Renin-
producing tumours, such as benign haemangiopericytoma 
of the juxtaglomerular apparatus, are rare causes of hyper-
reninaemic hyperaldosteronism.
Cortisol possesses only weak mineralocorticoid ac-
tivity, but when plasma concentrations are sufficiently 
elevated, a mineralocorticoid effect results. Cushing syn-
drome, ectopic ACTH syndrome or the administration 
of exogenous glucocorticoid with mineralocorticoid ac-
tivity can result in significant hypokalaemic alkalosis and 
hypertension.
Two forms of congenital adrenal hyperplasia result in 
excess production of deoxycorticosterone (DOC), which 
has mineralocorticoid action. These are 11β-hydroxylase 
deficiency and 17α-hydroxylase deficiency.
Pseudohyperaldosteronism can present in two forms. 
Liddle syndrome is a rare autosomal dominant condition 
that clinically resembles primary hyperaldosteronism, 
but in which aldosterone and renin are suppressed. The 
­onset of hypertension and hypokalaemia occurs typically 
in childhood, but, even within a single family, pen-
etrance can be extremely variable. The condition is 
caused by mutation within the gene coding for the col-
lecting duct amiloride-sensitive epithelial sodium chan-
nel (ENaC), resulting in an ‘open’ channel, unregulated 
by the mineralocorticoid receptor (compared with loss 
of function mutations causing pseudohypoaldosteron-
ism type 1, see p. 35).
Apparent mineralocorticoid excess has been described 
in children and, as in Liddle syndrome, there is hyporeni-
naemic hypoaldosteronism, but unlike Liddle syndrome, 
patients are responsive to spironolactone. This rare autoso-
mal recessive condition is caused by impaired activity of the 
enzyme 11β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11β-HSD) 
due to mutations within the HSD11B2 gene. This enzyme 
normally inactivates cortisol in the kidney by conversion to 
cortisone (see p. 29). The mineralocorticoid receptor has 
equal affinity for cortisol, and selectivity for aldosterone 
is normally maintained by 11β-HSD activity. An acquired 
form of this syndrome can be produced by excess ingestion 
of glycyrrhizic acid found in natural liquorice root, as well 
as glycyrrhetinic acid, the active component of the peptic 
ulcer drug carbenoxolone.
Renal hypokalaemia without specific acid–base 
disorder. There remains a miscellaneous group of condi-
tions that result in renal loss of potassium, but without a 
specific acid–base disorder: these conditions are summa-
rized in Box 4.15.
Several drugs can result in renal potassium loss. 
Penicillins, especially those administered in large mo-
lar quantities, e.g. carbenicillin, are excreted in anionic 
form in the urine and are associated with kaliuresis. 
Both cisplatin and the aminoglycoside group of anti-
biotics have been associated with hypokalaemia, prob-
ably because of associated magnesium depletion (see 
below).
Acute myelomonocytic leukaemia is associated with 
renal loss of potassium, especially in association with re-
nal excretion of lysozyme released from the leukaemic 
cells.
Both the diuretic phase of acute kidney injury and 
that following the relief of urinary tract obstruction can 
result in a negative potassium balance with associated 
hypokalaemia.
Finally, there is increasing evidence that magne-
sium depletion, of whatever aetiology, is associated 
with an increase in renal potassium loss. Intracellular 
magnesium deficiency affects potassium excretion by 
reducing Na+,K+-ATPase activity proximally within the 
nephron, thus increasing distal sodium delivery and 
hence potassium secretion. In addition, magnesium 
deficiency reduces magnesium dependent inhibition 
of ROMK channels within the collecting duct ­principal 
cells, which also increases potassium secretion. 
In patients who are both potassium and magnesium 
depleted, supplementation with potassium will not re-
sult in correction of hypokalaemia unless magnesium is 
also supplemented.
Laboratory investigation of hypokalaemia
In the majority of patients presenting with hypokalaemia, 
the cause is clear from the clinical history. The role of 
the laboratory is then to provide a monitoring service for 
serum potassium and no further specific investigation is 
required. However, on occasion, patients presenting with 
inexplicable, consistent, severe hypokalaemia provide a 
considerable diagnostic challenge.
The first stage in differentiating the cause of hypo-
kalaemia is to ensure that the serum potassium is a true 
reflection of in vivo concentration and not due to in vitro 
redistribution (see Box  4.13). A fresh sample of blood 
should be obtained for immediate separation and mea-
surement of sodium and potassium concentration, and 
at the same time, renal function should be assessed by 
the measurement of serum urea or creatinine concentra-
tions (or both), and magnesium should be measured to 
exclude concomitant magnesium depletion. If possible, 
blood should also be obtained for assessment of acid–
base status. The clinical history, including a detailed past 
and present drug history, is essential. The next step in 
laboratory investigation is to differentiate renal from ex-
trarenal causes of hypokalaemia by measuring urine po-
tassium. The definition of renal potassium conservation 
is not absolute, but, in the presence of hypokalaemia, 
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
57
a 24 h potassium excretion of <15 mmol and a random 
urine potassium/creatinine ratio of <1.5 mmol/mmol 
provide strong evidence of extrarenal loss. The trans-
tubular potassium gradient (TTKG) can also be used. 
TTKG is calculated by dividing the urine/serum potas-
sium concentration by the urine/serum osmolality ratio 
(see Appendix 4.1h). The TTKG in renal conservation 
of potassium is expected to be <2.
When potassium is not conserved by the kidneys, the 
presence of a metabolic acidosis would suggest one of the 
causes listed in Box 4.15 under renal hypokalaemic aci-
dosis, although the majority of such conditions, except-
ing certain RTAs, should be apparent from the clinical 
history.
Hypokalaemia with metabolic alkalosis can be fur-
ther differentiated by measurement of urine chloride. 
Again, no absolute criteria are available, but a random 
urine chloride <20 mmol/L (or, with polyuria, 2 mmol/
mmol creatinine) indicates renal chloride retention and 
implies chloride ­depletion. Those conditions listed in 
Box  4.15 as chloride-­depleting include certain condi-
tions that frequently ­provide a diagnostic challenge, 
such as diuretic abuse and surreptitious vomiting. If 
the urine chloride concentration exceeds 20 mmol/L, 
then Bartter syndrome, Gitelman syndrome and di-
uretic abuse (with recent diuretic ingestion) should 
be considered; in the presence of hypertension, those 
conditions associated with glucocorticoid or miner-
alocorticoid excess should be considered, although 
it should be remembered that hypertension is com-
mon, but ­mineralocorticoid-induced hypertension is 
not. (For  full investigation of states of glucocorticoid 
or mineralocorticoid excess, see Chapters  18 and 38). 
Particular care should be exercised when interpreting 
urine electrolyte concentrations in hypokalaemic states. 
As mentioned previously, the concentration of potas-
sium or chloride may be reduced if polyuria secondary 
to hypokalaemia is present. Therefore, it may be neces-
sary to express concentrations in terms of creatinine or 
some other measure of urine concentration. The excre-
tion or retention of electrolytes may be time-­dependent; 
for example, diuretics may induce a kaliuresis and chlo-
ruresis following ingestion, which reverts between doses 
to a kaliuresis with chloride retention. If stopping the 
diuretic, with subsequent chloride, but not potassium 
replacement, induces urine potassium conservation, the 
implication is that there is extrarenal loss of potassium. 
In addition, two or more conditions may coexist, for ex-
ample anorexia and vomiting, laxative abuse and diuretic 
abuse. Finally, severe potassium depletion may of itself 
induce renal chloride wasting, thus potentially, a severe 
extrarenal loss of potassium may result in renal potas-
sium wasting.
Management of hypokalaemia
The decision to treat hypokalaemia will depend on the 
severity of the condition, the presence of symptoms, par-
ticularly muscle weakness, electrocardiographic evidence 
of cardiovascular effects and concomitant therapies, for 
example with cardiac glycosides, which increase cardiac 
sensitivity to hypokalaemia.
The magnitude of any potassium deficit can only be 
estimated. For hypokalaemia associated with a deficit 
rather than redistribution, a rough guide is that a serum 
potassium of 3.0 mmol/L equates with a total body deficit 
of 300 mmol and a serum potassium of 2.0 mmol/L, with 
a total deficit of 700–800 mmol.
Unless hypokalaemia is severe and potentially life-
threatening (serum potassium <2.5 mmol/L), then in 
general, oral replacement is preferred. Although cer-
tain fruit juices contain relatively high concentrations 
of potassium, the volumes required to provide sufficient 
potassium for replacement may be impracticable (see 
Table  4.6). Potassium salts are available in various for-
mulations, including syrups, effervescent preparations 
and sustained-release tablets. Potassium chloride is usu-
ally the preferred salt, and potassium bicarbonate should 
only be used in hyperchloraemic states. Potassium citrate 
is usually prescribed to alkalinize the urine and reduce 
the discomfort of urinary tract infections, but can be sub-
stituted for potassium bicarbonate in the treatment of 
hypokalaemia. Currently, the preferred sustained-release 
formulation is a microencapsulated form, which spreads 
the release of the potassium salt within the gastrointesti-
nal tract and minimizes the risk of ulceration and stric-
ture formation. Oral replacement is usually prescribed in 
doses that equate with a normal adult dietary intake of 
between 40 and 120 mmol/day, although up to 200 mmol/
day may be required and tolerated.
In states of severe hypokalaemia, or when oral 
­replacement is not possible, potassium can be given in-
travenously into peripheral veins. The maximum rate of 
infusion should not usually exceed 20 mmol/h, ­although 
this limit can, with cardiac monitoring, be increased to 
40 mmol/h. The maximum concentration of potassium in 
the infusion should not usually exceed 40 mmol/L. If it 
is necessary to minimize fluid intake, or if hypokalaemia 
proves resistant to such replacement, concentrations up 
to 80 mmol/L may be infused into a central vein.
Hyperkalaemia
There is no strict definition of hyperkalaemia, but per-
sistent serum potassium concentrations >5.3 mmol/L 
(plasma >5.0 mmol/L) warrant further investigation. 
The most significant clinical effect of hyperkalaemia is 
on cardiac function, most importantly to cause cardiac 
TABLE 4.6  Potassium content of oral 
preparations
Preparation
Potassium content
Salt
(mmol/g)
Potassium chloride
13.4
Potassium bicarbonate
9.9
Potassium citrate
9.2
Fruit juice
(mmol/100 mL)
Tomato juice
8.2
Orange juice
3.0
Grapefruit juice
3.0
Apple juice (and craft cider)
3.2
58	
Clinical biochemistry
arrest. This risk does not become appreciable until se-
rum potassium is >6 mmol/L, but is considerable at 
concentrations >8 mmol/L, particularly if the increase is 
rapid. Electrocardiographic changes become apparent at 
lower concentrations of potassium and are more promi-
nent if the hyperkalaemia is associated with hypocal-
caemia, hyponatraemia, hypermagnesaemia or acidosis. 
Occasionally, patients present with a form of ascend-
ing muscular weakness resembling the Guillain–Barré 
syndrome. Box 4.16 shows the major clinical effects of 
hyperkalaemia.
Causes of hyperkalaemia
Hyperkalaemia may reflect an inappropriate retention of 
potassium within the body or an alteration in the distri-
bution of potassium intra- and extracellularly. This alter-
ation in distribution may occur in vivo, or in vitro, when 
there has been redistribution of potassium from blood 
cells to serum during the time between venesection and 
separation of serum.
Redistribution hyperkalaemia in  vitro. This form of 
hyperkalaemia is sometimes known as spurious or pseu-
dohyperkalaemia (Box  4.17). The most common form 
is due simply to in vitro loss of potassium from eryth-
rocytes, and may or may not be associated with ­visible 
haemolysis. This type of spurious increase in serum 
­potassium is also seen in certain patients with leukaemia 
with extremely high WBC counts (>100 × 109/L), and in 
patients with thrombocythaemia when platelet counts 
exceed 1000 × 109/L; in both situations the cells are 
fragile and lyse during blood clotting. To exclude these 
causes in patients with leukaemia or thrombocythaemia, 
blood should be collected into a heparinized container 
and the plasma separated quickly from the cells at room 
temperature.
Whole blood samples stored at 4°C will eventually 
release potassium from red cells into the plasma, with-
out necessarily any evidence of haemolysis. In certain 
families, this tendency is greatly accentuated, giving rise 
to the condition familial pseudohyperkalaemia, which 
is due to disordered cation transport in the erythrocyte 
membrane.
Redistribution hyperkalaemia in  vivo. The ma-
jor causes of transcellular shift of potassium occurring 
in vivo are also shown in Box 4.17. As previously dis-
cussed, ­acidosis, particularly that induced by mineral 
acid, will result in increased extracellular potassium con-
centration. Acidosis and hypertonicity due to hypergly-
caemia and insulin deficiency lead to the hyperkalaemia 
frequently seen in potassium-depleted diabetic patients 
with ketoacidosis.
Various drugs may promote or accentuate hyperka-
laemia. Succinylcholine, a depolarizing muscle relax-
ant, results in some increase in plasma potassium in all 
subjects, but this is particularly evident in patients with 
increased total body potassium. Thus succinylcholine 
should be avoided in all patients who are hyperkalae-
mic. β-Adrenergic blocking agents have been associated 
with minor increases in plasma potassium concentra-
tion, but this may be greatly accentuated during vigor-
ous exercise.
The release of potassium from cells during strenu-
ous exercise is well described, and a similar phenom-
enon may occur locally in an ischaemic limb, such as 
may happen during prolonged venous stasis prior to 
venesection. Hyperkalaemia has been described in pa-
tients undergoing chemotherapy for malignancy, which 
causes massive lysis of neoplastic cells. This phenome-
non has been described in the treatment of chronic lym-
phocytic leukaemia, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia and 
lymphosarcoma. Its occurrence emphasizes the need 
for maintenance of hydration and for careful electro-
lyte monitoring during aggressive chemotherapy. Acute 
BOX 4.16	
The clinical effects of  
hyperkalaemia
Cardiovascular
•	 Electrocardiographic changes
•	 Tall T waves
•	 Prolonged PR interval
•	 Flat P waves
•	 Widening QRS complex
•	 ‘M’ complex sine wave
•	 Ventricular fibrillation or asystole
Neuromuscular
•	 Paraesthesia
•	 Weakness, flaccid paralysis
Renal
•	 Natriuresis
•	 Decreased renal ammoniagenesis
•	 Decreased reabsorption of bicarbonate in the proximal 
tubule
Endocrine
•	 Decreased renin secretion
•	 Increased aldosterone secretion
•	 Increased insulin secretion
BOX 4.17	
Causes of redistribution 
hyperkalaemia
In vitro redistribution
•	 Haemolysis of erythrocytes
•	 Release from white blood cells (high leukaemic counts)
•	 Release from platelets (thrombocythaemia)
•	 Storage of whole blood at low temperature
•	 Familial pseudohyperkalaemia
In vivo redistribution
•	 Acidosis
•	 Insulin deficiency with hyperglycaemia
•	 Drugs
•	 Succinylcholine
•	 β-Adrenergic blockers
•	 Acute tissue damage
•	 Hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
59
haemolytic disorders can give rise to hyperkalaemia by a 
similar mechanism.
Hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis. Hyperkalaemic 
periodic paralysis (HYPP) is a rare autosomal domi-
nant condition that presents with attacks of muscular 
weakness, paralysis (usually sparing the respiratory 
muscles) and an associated acute rise in plasma potas-
sium (up to 8.0 mmol/L). The periodicity of attacks 
is variable, ranging from daily to only a few attacks a 
year. This type of periodic paralysis is provoked by a 
high potassium intake, glucocorticoids, hypothermia 
and during the recovery phase after vigorous exer-
cise. During attacks, electrocardiographic monitoring 
shows tall T waves but cardiac arrhythmias are rare. 
The disorder is due to gain of function mutations in 
the skeletal muscle voltage-gated sodium channel X 
subunit (SCN4A) gene. The management of HYPP is 
administration of the β2-agonist salbutamol, which can 
easily be taken by inhalation. Salbutamol has also been 
used prophylactically.
Potassium retention. The major causes of potassium 
retention are listed in Box 4.18. An increased potassium 
intake alone, without associated renal impairment, in prac-
tice only occurs as an iatrogenic complication of inappro-
priate intravenous loading. Excessively high oral loads of 
potassium are counteracted by a combination of reduced 
gastrointestinal absorption, vomiting and diarrhoea.
A reduction in glomerular filtration rate (GFR), of 
whatever cause, increases the risk of development of hy-
perkalaemia. However, on a normal diet containing ap-
proximately 100 mmol of potassium per day, GFR may 
fall to less than 10 mL/min before a significant risk of 
hyperkalaemia arises, and increased colonic secretion of 
potassium may further protect the patient when GFR is 
reduced further. It is important, however, that patients 
with significantly reduced GFR avoid high intakes of po-
tassium or any condition that results in endogenous shifts 
of potassium.
Decreased tubular secretion of potassium may oc-
cur in response to treatment with the potassium-­sparing 
diuretics: spironolactone, triamterene or amiloride. 
Hyperkalaemia is a particular risk when such a drug is 
used in a patient with impaired renal function or in a pa-
tient with a high potassium intake. Urinary diversions 
that involve jejunal segments (see p. 55) result in a sig-
nificant incidence of hyperkalaemia due to reabsorption 
of potassium from the urine while contained within the 
segment.
Syndromes of hypoaldosteronism. This broad group 
of conditions is summarized in Table 4.7. Primary hyper-­
reninaemic hypoaldosteronism is found in Addison 
disease (see Chapter 18) and the rare condition corticos-
terone methyl oxidase deficiency, in which aldosterone 
synthesis is impaired. Heparin given in continuous high 
doses can also inhibit aldosterone synthesis through inhi-
bition of 18-hydroxylase and possibly by inducing atro-
phy in the zona glomerulosa.
Two 
forms 
of 
congenital 
adrenal 
hyperplasia 
(CAH) result in impaired mineralocorticoid synthesis. 
21-Hydroxylase deficiency is the most common form of 
CAH. Virilization is characteristic, but not all patients 
exhibit features of hypoaldosteronism; up to two-thirds 
develop renal sodium wasting with hyperkalaemia. 3β-
Hydroxydehydrogenase deficiency is a rarer condition, in 
which the majority of patients have renal sodium wasting 
and hyperkalaemia.
Hypoaldosteronism may occur in patients receiving 
angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors such as 
captopril. Patients at particular risk of developing hyper-
kalaemia include those with associated renal impairment 
or with high renin concentrations, for example resulting 
from congestive heart failure or renal artery stenosis.
Hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism is an ­increasingly 
recognized syndrome in which patients present with 
­hyperkalaemia out of proportion to a reduction in GFR. 
The majority of such patients develop a hyperchloraemic 
metabolic acidosis and fall, ­therefore, into the classifi-
cation of type 4 renal tubular acidosis (see Chapter 5). 
The  syndrome is particularly prevalent in elderly pa-
tients with type 2 diabetes, but is also found in many 
other diseases in association with ­interstitial nephritis, 
including systemic lupus erythematosus, multiple my-
eloma, chronic obstructive uropathy, gout, sickle cell dis-
ease, lead nephropathy, following renal transplantation 
and in association with treatment with prostaglandin 
BOX 4.18	
Causes of hyperkalaemia due  
to potassium retention
Increased intake
•	 Increased post-tubular reabsorption following surgical 
urinary diversion involving jejunal segments
Decreased output
•	 Decreased glomerular filtration rate
•	 Decreased tubular secretion
•	 Potassium-sparing diuretics
•	 Syndromes of hypoaldosteronism
TABLE 4.7  Syndromes of hypoaldosteronism 
with relative plasma renin activities and  
aldosterone concentrations (↑, increased; ↓, 
decreased; N, normal)
Syndrome
Renin
Aldosterone
Primary hypoaldosteronism
 
 
Addison disease
↑
↓
Isolated aldosterone 
deficiency
↑
↓
Heparin treatment
↑
↓
Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia
N to ↑
N to ↓
Angiotensin-converting-
enzyme inhibition
N to ↑
N to ↓
Hyporeninaemic 
hypoaldosteronism
↓
↓
Secondary tubular disorders
N
N
Pseudohypoaldosteronism
 
 
type I
↑
↑
type II
↓
N to ↓
60	
Clinical biochemistry
­synthetase inhibitors and treatment with ciclosporin. 
Plasma renin activity is reduced, as is aldosterone con-
centration. Renin response to upright posture or to salt 
depletion is also reduced. The pathogenesis is not fully 
understood, but includes structural damage to the kid-
ney, including the juxtaglomerular apparatus, and there 
is evidence in diabetes of impaired conversion of renin 
precursor to active renin. One intriguing aspect of hypo-
reninaemic hypoaldosteronism is why hyperkalaemia oc-
curs, as aldosterone secretion is known to be stimulated 
by hyperkalaemia. However, it is likely that this direct 
stimulation of aldosterone can only occur in the pres-
ence of angiotensin II. An important aspect of this syn-
drome is that, because it occurs more frequently in the 
elderly, drugs that suppress both renin and aldosterone, 
such as β-blockers and calcium channel blockers as well 
as prostaglandin synthetase inhibitors, should generally 
be avoided in this age group.
Interstitial nephritis may give rise to hyperkalaemia 
in which aldosterone secretion is not suppressed. The 
pathogenesis in these conditions is presumed to be a di-
rect impairment of tubular secretion of potassium. Many 
of the diseases associated with tubular dysfunction are 
those that are also associated with the development of 
hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism and include obstruc-
tive uropathy, sickle cell disease and systemic lupus ery-
thematosus. The main clinical difference between direct 
tubular dysfunction and hyporeninaemic hypoaldoste-
ronism is the failure of the former condition to respond 
adequately to mineralocorticoid replacement, and alter-
native treatments such as thiazide diuretics must be used.
Pseudohypoaldosteronism (PHA) is a term applied to 
a heterogeneous group of rare disorders linked by asso-
ciation with hyperkalaemia, metabolic acidosis, normal 
glomerular function and apparent renal tubular unrespon-
siveness or resistance to mineralocorticoids. The condi-
tions are broadly segregated into PHA types I and II.
Pseudohypoaldosteronism type I can be inherited ei-
ther as an autosomal dominant or autosomal recessive 
trait. Pseudohypoaldosteronism type II, alternatively 
known as Gordon syndrome, is inherited as an autosomal 
dominant condition. The major characteristics of these 
syndromes are summarized in Table 4.8.
Laboratory investigation of hyperkalaemia
The first stage in any laboratory investigation of hyper-
kalaemia is to ensure that the serum potassium is a true 
reflection of in vivo concentration. The storage of whole 
blood specimens in a refrigerator at 4°C is widely practised 
by clinicians in the belief that this will aid the preservation 
of a specimen, but this practice can greatly increase serum 
potassium without any evidence of haemolysis. This effect 
is particularly noticeable in familial pseudohyperkalaemia, 
but can affect any blood sample if storage is prolonged for 
8–12 h. As previously mentioned, hyperkalaemia in pa-
tients with high WBC counts or platelet counts should be 
confirmed in freshly separated plasma, rather than serum.
Having confirmed true hyperkalaemia, the clinical his-
tory is required with particular emphasis on drug and di-
etary regimens, with information being sought regarding 
possible causes of in vivo redistribution.
Assessment of blood acid–base status and glucose con-
centration may be valuable. Serum potassium is usually 
measured with other electrolytes and markers of renal 
function, including urea and creatinine. When GFR is re-
duced to <10 mL/min, hyperkalaemia is likely to develop 
unless dietary potassium is restricted. The measurement 
of urine potassium output is of marginal value except pos-
sibly in steady-state conditions when a 24 h urine potas-
sium will provide evidence of excessive ingestion.
If GFR is not reduced sufficiently to explain the hy-
perkalaemia, a syndrome of hypoaldosteronism should 
be considered. The measurement of TTKG may provide 
TABLE 4.8  Characteristics of pseudohypoaldosteronism (PHA) types I and II
PHA type I
PHA type II
 
Specific name
Autosomal dominant PHA
Autosomal recessive PHA
Autosomal dominant Gordon 
syndrome
Age at presentation
Newborn/early infancy
Newborn/early infancy
Late childhood/adulthood
Mechanism
Loss of function 
mineralocorticoid receptor 
mutation
NR3C2 gene
Loss of function epithelial 
sodium channel (ENaC)
SCNN1A, SCNN1B, SCNN1G 
subunit genes
Enhanced distal tubular chloride 
reabsorption in preference to 
potassium excretion
WNK1, WNK4 genes
Organ affected
Kidneys
Kidneys, sweat glands, salivary 
glands, colon
Kidneys
Blood pressure
Hypotension
Hypotension
Usually hypertension
Renal sodium loss
Present
Present
Absent
Treatment
Sodium supplements
Restricted potassium intake
K+ -binding resins
Sodium supplements
Restricted potassium intake
K+ -binding resins
High-dose fludrocortisone or 
carbenoxolone
Dietary sodium restriction
Thiazide diuretics
Prognosis
Improvement with advancing age
Lifelong therapy required
Lifelong therapy required
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
61
useful information (see Appendix 4.1h). The expected 
physiological response in hyperkalaemia would result in 
a TTKG of >10. A value for TTKG of <7 is compatible 
with hypoaldosteronism. Normally, the clinical presen-
tation of Addison disease is sufficiently characteristic to 
require only studies of cortisol response to exogenous 
ACTH preparations, but other forms of hypoaldoste-
ronism require measurement of renin and aldosterone. 
Unfortunately, the various combinations of findings do 
not fit snugly with clinical classification of disorders. 
Hyper-reninaemic hypoaldosteronism is found in pri-
mary hypoaldosteronism, the exceedingly rare condi-
tion of corticosterone methyl oxidase deficiency, some 
forms of CAH, and with ACE inhibitor treatment. 
Hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism is found in the con-
ditions grouped under the syndrome of the same name 
and is also found in the rare PHA type II (Gordon syn-
drome). In contrast, high renin and high aldosterone are 
found in PHA type I. However, normal renin concentra-
tions and aldosterone activity may be found in those con-
ditions causing interstitial nephritis with direct tubular 
inhibition of potassium excretion. Renin and aldosterone 
values are not always easy to interpret, as high plasma 
potassium directly stimulates aldosterone and suppresses 
renin activity. In addition, aldosterone concentration 
increases as the GFR falls without a corresponding 
change in renin activity. In situations in which diagnos-
tic difficulty may exist, for example in hyporeninaemic 
hypoaldosteronism, it may be necessary to reassess aldo-
sterone concentrations when plasma potassium has been 
reduced to within the reference range; alternatively a 
trial of mineralocorticoid replacement will differentiate 
hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism from direct tubular 
dysfunction.
Management of hyperkalaemia
Hyperkalaemia, particularly when severe (>6.0 mmol/L), 
is a serious condition requiring immediate treatment be-
cause of the risk of sudden death. Emergency manage-
ment is intravenous 10% calcium gluconate – 10 mL 
injected over 60–120 s and repeated every 15 min or so un-
til the electrocardiographic changes improve (maximum 
dose 50 mL). This does not correct the hyperkalaemia, 
but is directly cardioprotective. In patients receiving di-
goxin, calcium gluconate should be infused more slowly – 
10 mL over 30 min – to avoid digoxin toxicity induced by 
hypercalcaemia.
Two therapeutic regimens are available to lower 
plasma potassium rapidly. Glucose (50 mL of 50% glu-
cose) can be infused over 15 min together with ten units 
of soluble insulin. This regimen may be repeated at 
hourly intervals and should be accompanied by serum 
potassium and plasma glucose monitoring. Alternatively, 
plasma potassium may be reduced by the infusion of 50–
100 mL of 4.2% sodium bicarbonate (500 mmol/L) over a 
15–30 min period (provided that the patient is not sodium 
overloaded).
For haemodialysis patients with hyperkalaemia, 
a regimen that has been shown to be of equal benefit 
to glucose and insulin in reducing plasma potassium is 
treatment with the β2-adrenergic agonist salbutamol. 
Inhalation of nebulized salbutamol (10–20 mg) will re-
duce plasma potassium by approximately 1 mmol/L 
within 30 min.
If hyperkalaemia is the result of increased body stores 
of potassium, then this excess must be removed. The 
relationship of plasma potassium to excess body potas-
sium is highly variable and is not reliably predictable. 
As an approximation, elevation of plasma potassium by 
1 mmol/L above normal without evidence of redistribu-
tion will roughly equate with a 200 mmol total excess. 
Polystyrene sulphonate resins (sodium or calcium salts) 
may be given by mouth (15 g, 3–4 times daily in wa-
ter) or as an enema (30 g in methylcellulose, retained for 
9 h). As an approximation, each gram of resin removes 
1 mmol of potassium, so that up to 60 mmol may be re-
moved in each 24 h period. For more dramatic reduc-
tions in body potassium, renal replacement treatment 
is required. Peritoneal dialysis is capable of removing 
10–15 mmol of potassium each hour, whereas the effi-
ciency of haemodialysis will allow up to 30 mmol to be 
removed each hour.
If a reversible cause of hyperkalaemia cannot be iden-
tified, then therapy for chronic hyperkalaemia should 
be designed to minimize the recurrence of severe hy-
perkalaemia. This should include a reduction in di-
etary potassium intake (<50 mmol/day) and avoidance 
of volume contraction and drugs that cause redistribu-
tion hyperkalaemia. Sodium bicarbonate and thiazide di-
uretics may be useful and, in some cases, treatment with 
mineralocorticoids.
CONCLUSION
The physiological control over sodium, water and potas-
sium within the human body is a complex interrelated se-
ries of systems of extreme precision and sensitivity. These 
systems regulate the extracellular fluid volume, the extra- 
and intracellular solute content, the intracellular volume 
and neuromuscular function, and, therefore, indirectly 
influence myriad functional and metabolic processes es-
sential for life. The pathological causes and consequences 
of recognized abnormalities in the control of sodium, 
water and potassium have been explored in this chapter, 
together with the details of diagnosis and treatment.
Further reading
Adrogué HJ, Madias NE. Hyponatremia. N Engl J Med 
2000;342:1581–9. 
Focusing on the quantitative approach to rational treatment of 
hyponatraemia.
Bartter FC, Schwartz WB. The syndrome of inappropriate secretion of 
antidiuretic hormone. Am J Med 1967;42:790–806. 
A medical classic by the authors who originally coined the term ‘syndrome 
of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion’ (SIADH). The diagnostic 
criteria for this syndrome are clearly defined.
Ball SG. Vasopressin and disorders of water balance: the physiology 
and 
pathophysiology 
of 
vasopressin. 
Ann 
Clin 
Biochem 
2007;44:417–31. 
A review of the disorders of water balance.
Greenberg A, Lehrich RW. Treatment of chronic hyponatremia: 
now we know how, but do we know when or if? J Am Soc Nephrol 
2010;21:552–5. 
62	
Clinical biochemistry
Editorial comment on the appropriate usage of vasopressin receptor 
antagonists (vaptans) in chronic hyponatraemia
Halperin ML, Kamel KS. Potassium. Lancet 1998;352:135–40. 
A general review of hyper- and hypokalaemia. Rational approaches to 
diagnosing the underlying causes are explored, and management algorithms 
presented.
King L, Yasui M, Agre P. Aquaporins in health and disease. Mol Med 
Today 2000;6:60–5. 
The history of the discovery of these water-channel proteins and their 
physiology and pathology.
Kumar S, Berl T. Sodium. Lancet 1998;352:220–8. 
A general review of hypo- and hypernatraemia with particular emphasis 
on the treatment of acute and chronic hyponatraemia.
Penney MD, Walters G. Are osmolality measurements clinically useful? 
Ann Clin Biochem 1987;24:566–71. 
A critical review of the clinical usefulness of body fluid osmolality 
measurements, including measurements applied to fluid balance disorders.
Robertson GL, Aycinena P, Zerbe RL. Neurogenic disorders of 
osmoregulation. Am J Med 1982;72:339–53. 
The osmoregulatory control of AVP in hypodipsic hypernatraemic 
conditions is discussed in detail.
Sayer JA, Pearce SHS. Diagnosis and clinical biochemistry of inherited 
tubulopathies. Ann Clin Biochem 2001;38:459–70. 
A review covering in detail disorders caused by inherited tubulopathies. 
Disorders affecting renal sodium and potassium handling are included.
Unwin RJ, Luft FC, Shirley DG. Pathophysiology and management 
of hypokalemia: a clinical perspective. Nat Rev Nephrol 
2011;7:75–84. 
A review covering in detail the pathophysiology of hypokalaemia and its 
treatment.
Waters P, Hack MA, Richards J, Penney MD. Quantitating nocturia: a 
study into the recording of solute and water excretion to determine 
causation. Ann Clin Biochem 2011;48:321–6. 
Outlining an approach to the investigation of nocturnal polyuria.
Zerbe RL, Stropes L, Robertson GL. Vasopressin function in 
the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis. Annu Rev Med 
1980;31:315–27. 
Patterns of plasma arginine vasopressin (AVP) responses to hypertonic 
saline infusion in patients with dilutional hyponatraemia are presented.
APPENDIX 4.1 FORMULAE
Formulae (a)–(e) provide approximations only and 
are supplied as illustrative guidelines. Any corrective 
procedure based upon any of these formulae should 
be accompanied by detailed clinical and laboratory 
monitoring.
[Concentrations]: serum (s), plasma (p) or urine (u) in 
mmol/L or mmol/kg (osmolality).
(a) Estimate of reduction in ECF volume from 
rise in haematocrit (HCT) when no blood loss 
has occurred
ECF volumereduction litres
body weight kg
normal hct
m
(
) =
×
(
)
×
−
0 2
1
.
easured hct










(b) Estimate of sodium deficit in patients with 
hypovolaemic hyponatraemia
sodiumdeficit mmol
body weight kg
Na
s
(
) =
×
(
)
×
−

(
)
+
0 6
140
.
(c) Estimate of water deficit in 
hypernatraemia
water deficit litres
body weight kg
Na
(
) =
×
(
)
×
−






+
0 6
1
140
.
[
]s
(d) Estimate of the expected sodium 
­depression in hyperglycaemia-induced 
hyponatraemia
excepted sodium
depres
glucose
mmol/L
p
sion(
)
=
[
] −
(
)
0 288
5 5
.
.
Reference
Adapted 
from 
Katz 
MA. 
Hyperglycemia-induced 
­hyponatremia – calculation of expected serum sodium 
depression. N Engl J Med 1973;289:843–4.
(e) Calculation of serum osmolality
calculatedosmolality
Na
K
urea
s
s
s
=

+


+
[
] +
+
+
1 89
1 38
1 03
.
.
.
1 08
7 45
.
.
glucose p
[
]
+
Reference
Adapted from Behagat CI, Garcia-Webb P, Fletcher E, 
Beilby JP. Calculated vs measured osmolalities revisited. 
Clin Chem 1984;30:1703–5.
(f) Calculation of osmolal gap
osmolalgap
measuredosmolality
calculatedosmolality
=
−
(g) Estimate of sodium required in acute 
­water intoxication
(To increase serum sodium to 125 mmol/L):
sodium required mmol
Na
body weight kg
s
(
) =
−

(
)
×
×
(
)
+
125
0 6.
(Hypertonic saline (5%) = 855 mmol/L)
(h) Calculation of the transtubular potassium 
gradient (TTKG)
TTKG =

×[
]

×[
]
+
+
K
Osm
K
Osm
u
s
s
u
	
4  Sodium, water and potassium	
63
Reference
Adapted from Ethier JH, Kamel KS, Magner PO, 
Lemann Jr J, Halperin ML. The transtubular potassium 
concentration in patients with hypokalemia and hyperka-
lemia. Am J Kidney Dis 1990;15:309–15.
APPENDIX 4.2 DYNAMIC FUNCTION TESTS
(a) Water deprivation test
This test is used to differentiate between cranial diabetes 
­insipidus, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus or primary polydipsia 
as causes of polyuria.
The patient is denied fluid and sloppy food from 
08.30 h onwards. All patients should be observed closely 
to prevent covert access to fluid. The following pro-
tocol should be followed. Urine should, if possible, be 
collected hourly, the volume recorded and an aliquot 
tested for osmolality. Blood should be obtained for se-
rum sodium and osmolality measurements. Accurate 
weight recordings are required to monitor loss and, in 
certain cases, detect surreptitious fluid consumption.
Notes
•	 If the patient develops symptoms of water loss, or 
loses more than 3% of initial body weight, samples 
for serum and urine osmolality should be collected 
immediately.
•	 If serum osmolality exceeds 295 mmol/kg and/
or serum sodium exceeds 145 mmol/L, the test 
should be discontinued and the vasopressin test 
performed.
•	 If the test runs to completion and the urine osmolal-
ity remains below 600 mmol/kg, the supplementary 
vasopressin test should be performed.
Vasopressin test
Give 2 μg of dDAVP i.v. The patient is allowed to drink, but 
total fluid intake should be restricted to 1000 mL until 09.00 h 
the next morning, unless the patient’s weight loss continues 
above 3%, when free fluids should be allowed. Further urine 
collections are made the same day at 19.00 and 22.00 h, and 
on the following day at 07.00 and 09.00 h.
Interpretation
A normal subject will concentrate urine to >600 mmol/
kg during the period of water deprivation, and the serum 
osmolality will remain within the physiological range (or, 
more strictly, the urine:serum osmolality ratio will be greater 
than 2:1). If urine osmolality fails to increase to >600 mmol/
kg, but increases following dDAVP by >20%, then cranial 
diabetes insipidus (CDI) is likely. The weight loss recorded 
should always equate with total urine volume passed.
Reference
This protocol is modified from the original description of 
the ‘short’ water deprivation test by Dashe AM, Cramm 
RE, Crist AC, Habener JF, Solomon DH. A water depri-
vation test for the differential diagnosis of polyuria. J Am 
Med Assoc 1963;185:699–703.
(b) Hypertonic saline infusion
This test is used to directly assess the osmoregulatory control of 
the release of plasma AVP and/or to assess the control of subjec-
tive thirst.
The patient is food-fasted overnight (12 h), but is al-
lowed free access to water. Smoking is not allowed during 
this 12 h period or during any part of the test. No fluid of 
any kind should be consumed during the test, including 
sips, mouthwashes or ice cubes: all of these oropharyn-
geal stimuli can suppress the release of arginine vasopres-
sin (AVP) from the posterior pituitary.
Pre-infusion preparation
Infusion protocol
For interpretation of results, see Figure 4.3 and text.
Notes
•	 If information is required on subjective thirst rating, 
then the patient should be shown, at each time blood 
is sampled, a unitless 100 mm scale with a maximum 
limit labelled ‘Extreme thirst’ and a minimum limit 
‘No thirst’. The patient is asked to indicate thirst 
levels on the scale. Two separate scales should be 
Time of urine 
collection (h)
Time of blood 
collection (h)
Time of  
weighing (h)
09.00–10.00
09.00
09.00
10.00–11.00
–
–
11.00–12.00
–
–
12.00–13.00
12.00
12.00
13.00–14.00
–
–
14.00–15.00
–
14.00
15.00–16.00
–
–
16.00–17.00
17.00
17.00
09.00 h
Weigh
 
 
Supine position
 
 
Indwelling cannulae 
with both 
antecubital veins 
kept patent with 
heparinized saline
One for eventual 
infusion of 
hypertonic 
saline, one for 
blood sampling
09.00–10.00 h
Rest hour
 
Time of blood collection (h)
Tests
10.00
AVP, osmolality, urea and 
electrolytes
10.30
"
11.00
"
11.30
"
12.00
"
Commence 5% saline (0.06 mL/kg/min) infusion into one 
cannula at 10.00 h, following the first blood sample.
64	
Clinical biochemistry
completed on each occasion to obtain a measure of 
precision.
•	 Information concerning the handling of blood 
samples for AVP should be obtained from the lab-
oratory. In general, samples should be collected 
into pre-chilled heparin tubes, transported on ice 
to the laboratory immediately, centrifuged rapidly 
at 4°C and the plasma stored at a maximum tem-
perature of −20°C (preferably −70°C). The time 
from collection to storage should not usually ex-
ceed 20 min.
•	 Patients with a history of congestive cardiac failure 
should be closely monitored and, if necessary, the test 
curtailed and furosemide (40 mg i.v.) administered.
Reference
Adapted from Robertson GL, Athar S. The interac-
tion of blood osmolality and blood volume in regulat-
ing plasma vasopressin in man. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1976;42:613–20.
(c) Water load test
This test is used to assess osmoregulation indirectly by deter-
mining the renal response to water loading.
The patient is allowed free access to fluid 12 h prior 
to the test to ensure adequate patient-determined hydra-
tion at commencement. No smoking is allowed during 
the test period or for the 12 h prior to this. Adequate 
glucocorticoid replacement is required for patients with 
hypoadrenalism.
At 09.00 h, the bladder is emptied and an aliquot of 
urine (10–15 mL) saved for osmolality measurement. 
Blood (for urea and electrolytes, and osmolality) is col-
lected and the patient weighed. An oral water load 
(20 mL/kg) is then consumed within 20 min. Further 
samples and weighings are obtained according to the fol-
lowing schedule. Urine volume output is measured ac-
curately each hour.
Interpretation
In a normally hydrated subject, over 80% of a standard wa-
ter load is excreted within 4 h of ingestion. Urine osmolality 
will typically fall to <100 mmol/kg. Weight changes should 
confirm the observed difference between the water volume 
ingested and the urine volume loss. Difficulties in micturi-
tion may make the test difficult or impossible to interpret.
Reference
Penney MD, Murphy D, Walters G. Resetting of the os-
moreceptor response as a cause of hyponatraemia in acute 
idiopathic polyneuritis. Br Med J 1979;2:1474–6.
Sample
Time of urine 
collection (h)
Time of 
blood 
collection (h)
Time of 
weighing (h)
1
09.00
09.00
09.00
2
09.00–10.00
–
–
3
10.00–11.00
–
–
4
11.00–12.00
–
–
5
12.00–13.00
13.00
13.00
65
C H A P T E R  5
Hydrogen ion homoeostasis 
and tissue oxygenation and their 
disorders
William J. Marshall
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  65
THE PHYSIOLOGICAL ROLE OF HYDROGEN IONS  65
Definitions  65
HYDROGEN ION HOMOEOSTASIS  66
Buffering  66
Hydrogen ion turnover  68
Hydrogen ion production  68
Hydrogen ion excretion  70
Summary  73
THE ASSESSMENT OF ACID–BASE STATUS  73
Clinical assessment  73
Laboratory assessment  73
DISORDERS OF HYDROGEN ION HOMOEOSTASIS  74
Introduction  74
Non-respiratory acidosis  74
Respiratory acidosis  80
Non-respiratory alkalosis  82
Respiratory alkalosis  84
The interpretation of acid–base data  85
Mixed disorders of hydrogen ion 
homoeostasis  86
TISSUE OXYGENATION  87
Introduction  87
Pulmonary function  87
The role of haemoglobin in oxygen transport  88
The effects of pulmonary disease on oxygen 
uptake into blood  89
Oxygen transport to tissues  89
Hypoxia  90
CONCLUSION  92
INTRODUCTION
Disorders of both hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxy­
genation will be discussed in this chapter. Abnormalities of 
hydrogen ion homoeostasis occur ­frequently in respiratory 
disorders, as a result of changes in the rate of excretion of 
carbon dioxide. Such disorders can also affect oxygenation, 
and impaired tissue oxygenation is an important potential 
cause of acidosis. Furthermore, hydrogen ion concentra­
tion, carbon dioxide and oxygen are measured using related 
technologies, usually with the same instrument.
The first part of this chapter deals with hydrogen 
ion homoeostasis and its disorders (colloquially often 
­referred to as ‘acid–base balance’ and ‘acid–base disor­
ders’, respectively), while the second part deals with the 
mechanism whereby oxygen is made available to the 
­tissues, disorders in which tissue oxygenation is impaired 
and how tissue oxygenation is measured.
THE PHYSIOLOGICAL ROLE OF HYDROGEN IONS
Hydrogen ions are ubiquitous in the body and mainte­
nance of appropriate concentrations is critical to normal 
function. The gradient of hydrogen ion concentration 
between the inner and outer mitochondrial membrane 
drives oxidative phosphorylation; changes in hydrogen 
ion concentration can affect the surface charge and physi­
cal conformation of proteins and thus their function, and 
hydrogen ion concentration determines the degree of ion­
ization of weak acids and bases and can thus affect the dis­
position of such substances, among which are many with 
important physiological and pharmacological functions.
The hydrogen ion concentration of the blood is nor­
mally controlled within narrow limits, in health rarely 
exceeding 46 nmol/L or falling below 35 nmol/L. This 
regulation is achieved in spite of the continuous produc­
tion of hydrogen ions as a result of the normal processes 
of metabolism. Intracellular hydrogen ion concentra­
tion is, in general, higher; in the cytosol being slightly 
so while in lysosomes it is several orders of magnitude 
higher. However, the interior of mitochondria is slightly 
alkaline.
Definitions
An increase in the hydrogen ion concentration of the 
blood is termed acidaemia and a decrease, alkalaemia. The 
term ‘acidosis’ strictly describes a pathological ­disturbance 
that can result in acidaemia, but may not necessarily do so 
66	
Clinical biochemistry
because of the simultaneous existence of another distur­
bance (possibly the result of a physiological compensatory 
process) that has an opposing effect. Similarly, alkalaemia 
is not always present in alkalosis. These distinctions, al­
though made much of by some authors, often only intro­
duce confusion and will not be ­pursued in this chapter.
Strictly speaking, it is the activity of hydrogen ions 
and not their concentration that is relevant, and devices 
for measuring hydrogen ions respond to their activity. 
Activity and concentration are only the same in ideal 
­solutions, which biological fluids are not, but the distinc­
tion can be ignored for practical purposes.
Hydrogen ion concentration can also be expressed 
in terms of pH. The pH of a solution is the logarithm 
(base 10) of the reciprocal of hydrogen ion concentra­
tion (or minus the logarithm of hydrogen ion concentra­
tion). Thus, a solution with hydrogen ion concentration 
of 100 nmol/L (100  ×  10
−9 mol/L) has a pH of 7.00 
(log10 1/100  ×  10
−9). pH does not have units; it varies in 
a ­reciprocal and nonlinear fashion with hydrogen ion 
concentration. The reference range for the pH of blood, 
­corresponding to the range for hydrogen ion concentra­
tion given above, is 7.36–7.42. It is necessary, in ­discussing 
hydrogen ion homoeostasis and its disorders, to consider 
the production and disposal of ­hydrogen ions; it is there­
fore logical to discuss the effects of changes in these pro­
cesses on hydrogen ion concentration rather than on a 
derived unit. Furthermore, as will be seen, the analysis 
of disorders of hydrogen ion homoeostasis is facilitated 
considerably if direct measurements are used.
In health, the rates of formation of hydrogen ions and 
of their consumption and excretion are in balance, but dis­
turbances of hydrogen ion homoeostasis occur ­frequently 
and in a wide variety of disease states. They are classified 
traditionally as respiratory or non-­respiratory in origin, 
according to whether the primary ­abnormality is the result 
of an excess or deficiency of carbon ­dioxide (respiratory) 
or of bicarbonate (non-respiratory). Non-respiratory 
­disturbances are often referred to as metabolic. As will be 
seen, however, a respiratory disorder that causes ­hypoxia 
may produce an acid–base abnormality whose character­
istics are non-respiratory, or even combine respiratory 
and non-respiratory features. Nevertheless, the distinc­
tion is a useful one and is of considerable value in analys­
ing disorders of hydrogen ion homoeostasis.
HYDROGEN ION HOMOEOSTASIS
Buffering
What follows is a brief, simplified account of the essential 
features of buffering, sufficient for an appreciation of the 
physiology of hydrogen ion homoeostasis.
In essence, buffer systems limit the extent to which the 
hydrogen ion concentration actually changes in the face of 
any tendency to change. A buffer system (or buffer pair) 
consists of a weak (that is, only partly dissociated) acid and 
its conjugate base (that is, the anion that combines with a 
hydrogen ion to form the acid). If the acid is HB and the 
conjugate base is B
−, the relevant reactions are:
(1)
and
(2)
Bicarbonate
An example of central importance to physiology is the 
carbonic acid–bicarbonate system. Carbonic acid is a 
weak acid, which partly dissociates to bicarbonate and 
hydrogen ion:
(3)
If an amount of hydrogen ions were to be added to a 
solution containing this buffer pair, some would combine 
with bicarbonate to form carbonic acid, thus limiting the 
increase in hydrogen ion concentration that otherwise 
would be expected to occur, but at the expense of consum­
ing bicarbonate. Removal of hydrogen ions (or addition 
of hydroxyl, which, by combining with hydrogen ions to 
form water, has an identical effect) would cause disso­
ciation of carbonic acid, producing hydrogen ions (and 
bicarbonate) and thus limiting the fall in hydrogen ion 
concentration that otherwise would be expected to occur.
It will be apparent that if a buffer is to function 
­effectively in the face of equal tendencies for hydrogen 
ion concentration to increase and decrease, the concentra­
tions of the acid and conjugate base should be equal, for 
example for the acid HB, [HB] = [B
−]. Since at equilibrium:
(4)
(where Ka is the equilibrium constant), it follows that a ­buffer 
will be most effective when the hydrogen ion con­
centration to be defended is numerically similar to the 
equilibrium constant. It should also be appreciated that 
hydrogen ion concentration, [H
+], depends not on the 
absolute values for the concentrations of acid and con­
jugate base, but on the ratio of their concentrations. On 
the other hand, the buffer capacity, that is, the extent to 
which the buffer can absorb hydrogen ions, clearly will 
depend upon the absolute values of these concentrations.
For bicarbonate, it follows from the general equation 
(Eqn. 4) that:
(5)
The concentration of carbonic acid cannot readily be 
determined, but it is directly proportional to the concen­
tration of carbon dioxide [CO2], since carbonic acid is 
formed by the hydration of carbon dioxide:
(6)
Thus, Equation 5 can be rewritten in the form:
(7)
where Ka′ is a constant numerically incorporating the 
equilibrium constants for the reactions represented by 
Equations 3 and 5. The value of Ka′ is approximately 
800 nmol/L and, at physiological extracellular hydrogen 
ion concentration (40 nmol/L), the numerical value of 
B
H
HB
−
+
+
↔
HB
OH
H O
B
2
+
↔
+
−
−
H CO
HCO
2
3
3
↔
+
+
−
H
[
]
[
] /[
]
H+
−
= Ka HB
B
[
]
[
] /[
]
H+
−
= Ka H CO
HCO
2
3
3
CO
H O
H CO
2
2
2
3
+
↔
[
]
[
] /[
]
H+
′
−
= Ka CO
HCO
2
3
	
5  Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxygenation and their disorders	
67
the molar ratio [
] /[
]
CO
HCO
2
3
− is approximately 0.05, 
suggesting that this system should be a poor buffer, par­
ticularly against a tendency for hydrogen ion concentra­
tion to fall. However, the body is a net producer of acid, 
that is, the tendency is for hydrogen ion concentration 
to rise. More importantly, carbon dioxide, generated by 
the buffering of hydrogen ion by bicarbonate and the 
subsequent dissociation of carbonic acid, can be removed 
by the lungs, keeping the carbon ­dioxide concentration 
constant. As a result, the effective buffering capacity of 
the carbonic acid–­bicarbonate system is greatly increased, 
and it is a vitally important physiological buffer, particu­
larly in the extracellular fluid.
In practice, carbon dioxide concentration cannot be 
readily determined, but it is related to the partial pres­
sure, PCO2, such that [CO2] = 0.225  ×  PCO2 when PCO2 
is measured in kilopascals (kPa).
Phosphate
The monohydrogen and dihydrogen phosphate ions 
( HPO4
2− and H PO
2
4
−) form a buffer pair with Ka being 
approximately 160 nmol/L. Although the Ka appears rela­
tively favourable for buffering at physiological hydrogen 
ion concentrations, the concentration of phosphate in the 
extracellular fluid is too low for it to be of significance in 
this respect. Phosphate is, however, an important buffer 
in the urine, where its concentration is much greater.
Haemoglobin
All proteins can buffer hydrogen ions to some extent 
by virtue of their content of polar amino acid residues. 
Haemoglobin (Hb) is an important buffer. The reaction 
can be represented as:
(8)
although each haemoglobin molecule is capable of buff­
ering a number of hydrogen ions. It is relevant to note 
that haemoglobin is a more effective buffer for hydrogen 
ions when it is in the deoxygenated rather than the oxy­
genated form, and that oxygen release is facilitated by the 
buffering (the Bohr effect).
The efficacy of haemoglobin as a buffer is enhanced 
by the presence in erythrocytes of the enzyme ­carbonate 
dehydratase, which catalyses the hydration of ­carbon 
­dioxide (Eqn. 6). Despite the fact that they are respon­
sible for the majority of oxygen transport in the blood, 
erythrocytes obtain their energy anaerobically, by gly­
colysis, and thus do not generate carbon dioxide. In 
the capillary beds of tissues, carbon dioxide produced 
by aerobic metabolism readily diffuses down the con­
centration gradient into erythrocytes, where it is hy­
drated to form carbonic acid, which dissociates to form 
bicarbonate and hydrogen ions (Fig. 5.1). The latter are 
buffered by haemoglobin while bicarbonate diffuses out 
of the cells in exchange for chloride, so that the prod­
ucts of the dissociation of ­carbonic acid are removed, 
allowing further dissociation to occur and thus, by 
a mass action effect, stimulating its formation. In the 
lungs, alveolar PCO2 is lower than ­venous PCO2 and 
the process reverses, carbon dioxide being generated 
and excreted, while the release of hydrogen ions from 
haemoglobin favours oxygen uptake.
Thus, in addition to transporting carbon diox­
ide, the conversion of carbon dioxide to bicarbonate 
serves to minimize the potential change in the value 
of the ­ratio [
] /[
]
CO
HCO
2
3
− (and hence in hydrogen 
ion concentration) between arterial and venous blood. 
However, although erythrocytes are a potential source 
of bicarbonate, they can only generate bicarbonate 
if the hydrogen ion produced simultaneously can be 
buffered. There is clearly a limit to the extent to which 
this can occur, imposed by the buffering capacity of 
haemoglobin, so that this mechanism can have only a 
limited role in the correction of an acidosis. The way 
in which such correction is achieved is considered in a 
later section.
Other proteins
Although plasma proteins buffer hydrogen ions, their 
molar concentrations are lower than that of haemoglobin 
and their buffering capacity is less. In contrast, intracel­
lular and tissue proteins make an important contribution 
to buffering. In chronic acidosis, they may contribute up 
to one-third of total buffer capacity. Buffering by bone is 
particularly important.
Ammonia
It is often stated that ammonia is an important buffer in 
the urine because it can combine with hydrogen ions to 
form ammonium ions. This cannot be true. Ammonium 
is a very weak acid, with an equilibrium constant approxi­
mately 100 times lower than physiological hydrogen ion 
concentration, so that when ammonia is produced in the 
body, it is immediately and almost completely converted 
to ammonium ions. The urinary excretion of ammonium 
is of relevance to hydrogen ion homoeostasis because it 
represents a route for the disposal of ammonium which, 
unlike urea synthesis, does not result in the generation of 
hydrogen ions (see p. 70).
Hb
HHb
−
+
+
↔
H
FIGURE 5.1  ■ Transport and buffering of carbon dioxide in eryth-
rocytes. Carbon dioxide is converted into carbonic acid in erythro-
cytes; this dissociates to form ­bicarbonate, which diffuses into 
the plasma in exchange for chloride and hydrogen ions, which 
are buffered by haemoglobin. In the alveoli, the reverse process 
­liberates carbon dioxide.
68	
Clinical biochemistry
Hydrogen ion turnover
The fact that, on a normal diet, the daily excretion of 
hydrogen ions by the kidneys (the only physiologically 
important route of excretion) is 40–80 mmol tends to 
distract from the fact that there is a massive endogenous 
turnover of hydrogen ions. In the resting adult, interme­
diary metabolism accounts for a hydrogen ion turnover of 
2500–3000 mmol/24 h (Table 5.1).
Normally, the rates of hydrogen ion formation and 
utilization during intermediary metabolism are in over­
all balance, although any discrepancy can have a major 
effect on hydrogen ion concentration. But even this 
turnover of hydrogen ions appears insignificant in com­
parison with that which is associated with the turnover 
of adenine nucleotides – the movement of hydrogen 
ions that takes place across the mitochondrial mem­
brane during oxidative phosphorylation and the syn­
thesis and hydrolysis of ATP. This has been estimated 
at 500 mol/24 h. The ­potential for a disturbance in 
these processes to cause an acidosis is clearly colossal, 
­although, in health, the rates of adenine nucleotide re­
duction and oxidation and of ATP formation and utiliza­
tion are equal, so that these processes have no net effect 
on hydrogen ion homoeostasis. This may not, however, 
be true in disease.
As a result of oxidative metabolism, carbon dioxide 
is produced and excreted by the lungs. The rates of 
formation and excretion are normally equal, but car­
bon dioxide can combine with water to form carbonic 
acid, and the daily production of carbon dioxide in a 
resting adult is a potential source of approximately 
15–20 mol of hydrogen ions. As has been alluded to, 
disorders affecting the excretion of carbon dioxide are 
an important cause of abnormalities of hydrogen ion 
homoeostasis.
Tendencies for hydrogen ion concentration to change 
can be limited to some extent by buffering, but this 
­process can only offer a temporary solution to an imbal­
ance between the rates of hydrogen ion production and 
disposal, because the body’s buffers have a limited capac­
ity. Physiological processes often bring about a partial 
reversal of a change in hydrogen ion concentration (see 
Compensation, below), but ultimate correction of any 
disturbance requires equalization of the rates of produc­
tion and disposal of hydrogen ion.
Hydrogen ion production
The processes involved in hydrogen ion production and 
utilization are summarized in Table 5.1. They comprise: 
processes involving carbon dioxide formation, reactions 
of intermediary metabolism and processes involving 
‘fixed’ acids. In addition, and responsible for the bulk of 
hydrogen ion turnover, are the reactions involved in the 
complete oxidation of energy substrates. These processes 
are interlinked, but it is instructive to consider them 
separately.
Carbon dioxide
The role of carbon dioxide in relation to the formation of 
hydrogen ions has been mentioned above. Carbon diox­
ide, produced by oxidative metabolism, can become hy­
drated to carbonic acid, a weak acid that partly dissociates 
to hydrogen ion and bicarbonate:
(9)
The equilibrium for this reaction strongly favours car­
bon dioxide and water, but in tissues containing carbonate 
dehydratase (e.g. tubular cells in the kidneys), the rate of 
formation of carbonic acid is increased and it can become 
an important source of bicarbonate and hydrogen ions.
Incomplete metabolism of glucose: glycolysis 
and lactate metabolism
The most familiar process of intermediary metabolism 
that results in the formation of hydrogen ions is anaero­
bic glycolysis, the metabolism of glucose to lactate. The 
overall equation for this reaction is:
(10)
This process, which takes place particularly in skel­
etal muscle and erythrocytes, results in the formation of 
~1.3 mol of hydrogen ions per 24 h in a 70 kg man at rest. 
The major route of disposal of lactate is glucose synthesis 
by gluconeogenesis in the liver and kidneys. The overall 
equation for this process is the reverse of that for gly­
colysis (most enzymes involved being common to both 
CO
H O
H CO
HCO
2
2
2
3
3
+
↔
↔
+
+
−
H
C H O
CH CHOHCOO
Glucose
Lactate
6
12
6
3
2
2
→
+
−
+
H
TABLE 5.1  Approximate daily production and elimination of acid in a resting adult
Type of acid
Production
mmol/24 h
Disposal
mmol/24 h
Carbon dioxide
Tissue respiration
~17  500
Excretion by lungs
~17  500
Lactate
Glycolysis
~1300
Gluconeogenesis, oxidation
~1300
Free fatty acids
Lipolysis
~650
Re-esterification, oxidation
~650
Ketoacids
Ketogenesis
~500
Oxidation
~500
H
+ generated during urea 
synthesis
Ureagenesis
~1100
Oxidation of amino acids
~1100
Sulphuric and phosphoric 
acids
Metabolism of sulphur- 
and phosphate-
containing amino acids
~40
Renal excretion (‘fixed’ or 
buffered acid)
~40
Note that all figures are approximate, being dependent on diet, body mass index, physical activity etc.
	
5  Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxygenation and their disorders	
69
pathways, although some are unique). Gluconeogenesis 
thus consumes hydrogen ions. In health, lactate produc­
tion and disposal are equal and so, too, are the production 
and disposal of hydrogen ions by these pathways. At rest, 
most of the lactate produced is converted back to glucose; 
during exercise, when lactate production is increased, 
50% or more is completely oxidized instead. This pro­
cess also consumes the hydrogen ions that are generated 
in its production and results in the formation of carbon 
dioxide and water:
(11)
Thus, when lactate production and utilization are in bal­
ance, there is no net production of hydrogen ions. However, 
in disease states, an imbalance between these processes can 
be responsible for the development of acidosis.
The hydrogen ions generated in lactate produc­
tion will be buffered principally by bicarbonate, so that 
Equation 10 could be written:
(12)
Clearly, the reverse reaction, gluconeogenesis, will re­
generate the bicarbonate, and Equation 11 can be rewrit­
ten to show that this also occurs with complete oxidation 
of lactate:
(13)
It is pertinent to point out that hyperlactataemia does 
not automatically indicate an acidosis. If it is a result of 
increased lactate production or decreased excretion, aci­
dosis will only be present if the hydrogen ions produced 
simultaneously are not removed by excretion or metabo­
lism. Intravenous fluids containing sodium lactate (e.g. 
Hartmann’s solution) are actually a source of alkali, because 
the lactate ions are metabolized to bicarbonate (Eqn. 13).
Incomplete metabolism of triglycerides: 
ketogenesis
The liberation of free fatty acids from triglyceride (triacyl­
glycerol) in adipose tissue results in the generation of hy­
drogen ions. The process is exemplified by the equation:
(14)
In the liver and adipose tissue, free fatty acids can be 
re-esterified to triacylglycerol, a process that consumes 
three hydrogen ions for each molecule of triacylglycerol 
synthesized. The further metabolism of free fatty acids to 
ketones in the liver (ketogenesis) also results in hydrogen 
ion production. An example of the reaction, starting from 
palmitate, is:
(15)
In health, this process may account for up to 0.4 mol 
hydrogen ion per 24 h, although in pathological states, its 
contribution may be much greater. However, ketoacids 
(strictly, oxoacids) are utilized as energy sources by skel­
etal muscle and other tissues. Their oxidation consumes 
hydrogen ions so that, in health, the overall rates of hy­
drogen ion production and disposal are equal:
(16)
(17)
In disease, notably in diabetic ketoacidosis, excessive 
ketogenesis is an important cause of acidosis. Ketonuria 
may exacerbate the acidosis: ketoacid anions are a po­
tential source of bicarbonate so that their loss in urine 
(in maximally acidic urine, about half the ketoacids are 
present in this form) effectively reduces the potential for 
bicarbonate generation.
Complete oxidation of glucose and triglycerides
Glucose can also be completely oxidized to carbon diox­
ide and water; indeed, this is the major route of glucose 
metabolism in the body.
(18)
This is a complex process: oxidation is indirect, involv­
ing the transfer of hydrogen ions to adenine nucleotides, 
which are mainly oxidized by the mitochondrial electron 
transport system. Electrons are transferred to oxygen and 
combination with hydrogen ions produces water, while the 
energy released is transferred to ATP. But as Equation 18 
indicates, the complete oxidation of glucose to carbon di­
oxide does not give rise to net formation of hydrogen ions: 
the products of its oxidation are carbon dioxide and water.
The same is true for the complete oxidation of 
triacylglycerols:
(19)
As with glucose oxidation, the process is far more com­
plicated than appears from Equation 19, again involving 
the reduction of nucleotides, transfer of electrons to mo­
lecular oxygen, formation of water and trapping of energy 
in ATP, but the net production of hydrogen ions is zero.
Amino acid metabolism
Amino acid metabolism both produces and consumes 
hydrogen ions, according to the type of amino acid 
­concerned. The metabolism of neutral amino acids 
CH CHOHCOO
O
CO
H O
Lactate
3
2
2
2
3
3
3
−
+
+
+
→
+
H
C H O
HCO
CH CHOHCOO
CO
H O
6
12
6
3
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
+
→
+
+
−
−
CH CHOHCOO
O
CO
HCO
H O
3
2
2
3
2
3
2
2
−
−
+
→
+
+
(
(
)
)
(
(
)
)
CH CH
COO R
H O
CH CH
COO
Triglyceride
Freefatt
3
2
3
2
3
2
3
3
n
n
+
→
−
yacidanion
R OH
Glycerol
+
+
+
(
)3
3H
CH CH
COO
O
CH COCH COO
Palmitate
Acetoacetate
CH
3
2 14
2
3
2
3
6
2
2
(
)
−
−
+
→
+
CHOHCH COO
H O
Hydroxybutyrate
2
2
2
3
2
−
+
+
+
−
H
CH COCH COO
O
H O
CO
Acetoacetate
3
2
2
2
2
4
3
4
−
+
+
+
→
+
H
2
2
9
8
8
2
3
2
2
2
2
CH CHOHCH COO
O
H O
CO
Hydroxybutyrate
−
+
+
+
→
+
−
H
C H O
O
CO
H O
6
12
6
2
2
2
6
6
6
+
→
+
(
(
)
)
CH CH
COO C H
O
CO
H O
Tripalmitoylglycero
3
2 14
3
3
5
12
2
2
2
72
51
49
+
→
+
l
70	
Clinical biochemistry
eventually results in the formation of urea and carbon 
dioxide, for example:
(20)
It is instructive, however, to look at this process 
in more detail. Most amino acids are metabolized by 
transamination in the liver to yield the correspond­
ing oxoacid, the amino group being transferred to 
2–oxoglutarate to form glutamate. Glutamate under­
goes oxidative deamination, the amino group being con­
verted to ammonium. The carbon skeletons of amino 
acids are in general glucogenic, although some are 
ketogenic. Ultimately, they will be completely metabo­
lized. Omitting the transamination step, the ­intermediate 
stages are:
(21)
(22)
(23)
Thus, although urea synthesis generates hydrogen 
ions, these are utilized during the metabolism of the car­
bon skeleton so that the metabolism of neutral amino 
acids does not result in net generation of hydrogen ions 
provided that the nitrogen is converted into urea. If this does 
not occur, the metabolism of these amino acids consumes 
hydrogen ions. The relevance of this is discussed in a later 
section of this chapter.
The complete oxidation of a dibasic amino acid results 
in the generation of hydrogen ions, for example for lysine:
(24)
The complete oxidation of a dicarboxylic acid con­
sumes hydrogen ions, for example for aspartate:
(25)
The complete oxidation of sulphur-containing amino 
acids (cysteine, methionine) generates hydrogen ions, for 
example for methionine:
(26)
In each of these last three examples, it has been as­
sumed that the end-product of the amino nitrogen is 
urea. If it is not, the effect on hydrogen ion metabolism 
may be different.
Overall, the amino acid composition of dietary protein 
and the manner of amino acid metabolism is such that, in 
health, there is a small net production of hydrogen ions. 
This is disposed of primarily by renal excretion.
Hydrogen ion excretion
Carbon dioxide
Carbon dioxide is excreted via the lungs. The respira­
tory control mechanisms are exquisitely sensitive to 
carbon dioxide so that, in health (and in the absence 
of any conscious effort to hypo- or hyperventilate), 
the rate of carbon dioxide elimination is made equal to the 
rate of production, and blood carbon dioxide concen­
tration remains constant.
Hydrogen ions
Excess hydrogen ions are excreted in the urine and because, 
overall, the body is a net producer of acid, the urine is usu­
ally acidic. But before the urine can be acidified, there must 
be complete reabsorption of filtered bicarbonate.
Bicarbonate reabsorption. The glomerular filtrate 
contains bicarbonate at the same concentration as the 
plasma. Normally, the urine is virtually bicarbonate-free 
and, were the filtered bicarbonate not to be reabsorbed, 
the body’s bicarbonate pool, and thus buffering capacity, 
would rapidly be depleted. Generation of bicarbonate 
from carbon dioxide and water necessarily also involves 
the production of hydrogen ions.
The luminal membranes of renal tubular cells are rela­
tively impermeable to bicarbonate, so that filtered bicar­
bonate cannot be reabsorbed directly. Instead, carbonic 
acid is generated from carbon dioxide and water in renal 
tubular cells (catalysed by carbonate dehydratase) and dis­
sociates into hydrogen and bicarbonate ions; the former 
cross the luminal cell membranes in exchange for actively 
reabsorbed sodium and react with filtered bicarbonate, 
generating carbon dioxide. This can diffuse into tubular 
cells and, together with the carbon dioxide produced by 
aerobic metabolism, provides the substrate for the contin­
ued formation of carbonic acid. Although the equilibrium 
for the reaction favours carbon dioxide and water, the 
continual removal of hydrogen ions drives the enzyme-
catalysed reaction in the direction of hydrogen and bicar­
bonate ions. The bicarbonate thus formed accompanies 
sodium as it is pumped across the basolateral membranes 
of tubular cells into the interstitial fluid. The net effect 
is the reabsorption of filtered bicarbonate ions, with an 
equivalent amount of sodium ions. In health, bicarbonate 
‘reabsorption’ takes place almost entirely in the proximal 
renal tubules. This process is summarized in Figure 5.2.
Acidification of the urine. When bicarbonate reab­
sorption is complete, continued production of hydrogen 
ions by renal tubular cells and their movement into the 
tubular fluid will constitute net hydrogen ion excretion. 
Acidification of the urine is achieved by active secretion of 
hydrogen ions and hydrogen ion/potassium ion ­exchange 
by the α-intercalated cells of the distal tubules and proxi­
mal parts of the collecting ducts. There is, however, a limit 
to the acidity of urine that can be achieved. This is a pH 
2
6
5
5
3
3
2
2 2
2
2
CH CHNH COO
O
CO NH
CO
H O
Alanine
Urea
+
−+
→
+
+
(
)
2CH CHNH COO
O
2CH COCOO
NH
Alanine
Pyruvate
3
3
2
3
4
2
+
−
−
+
+
→
+
2
2
6
4
3
2
2
CH COCOO
CO
H O
−
+
+
→
+
H
CO
NH
CO NH
H O
2
4
2 2
2
2
2
+
→
+
+
+
+
(
)
H
NH CH CH
CH NH
COO
O
Lysine
CO NH
CO
H O
3
2
2 3
3
2
2
2
2
2
7
5
5
+
+
−
+
+
→
+
+
+
(
)
(
)
(
)
H
2
6
2
7
5
3
2
2
2
2
2
2
COO CH NH
CH COO
O
Aspartate
CO NH
CO
H O
−
+
−
+
+
+
→
+
+
(
)
(
)
H
2
15
2
9
7
3
2
2
3
2
2
2
2
2
CH S CH
CH NH
COO
O
Methionine
CO NH
CO
H O
(
)
(
)
(
)
+
−+
→
+
+
+
+
+
−
4
2
4
2
H
SO
	
5  Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxygenation and their disorders	
71
of approximately 4.5, equivalent to a ­hydrogen ion con­
centration of 38 μmol/L. This represents a 1000-fold 
concentration gradient with respect to the extracellular 
fluid, but clearly, excretion of free hydrogen ions alone 
would be insufficient to remove the daily burden of acid 
produced by metabolic processes, which is measured in 
millimoles. Significant acid excretion is achieved by hy­
drogen ions being buffered by phosphate, titrating mono­
hydrogen phosphate (
)
HPO4
2− (the principal form in the 
plasma and thus the glomerular filtrate) to dihydrogen 
phosphate (
)
H PO
2
4
− ions. It should be noted that, since 
the formation of hydrogen ions in renal tubular cells is ac­
companied by stoichiometric generation of bicarbonate 
ions, the excretion of hydrogen ions ­additionally results in 
the regeneration of bicarbonate ions and thus restores buff­
ering capacity. This process is summarized in Figure 5.3.
The role of urinary ammonium excretion. Although 
the urine contains ammonium and, indeed, the amount 
excreted increases considerably in states of chronic aci­
dosis, this cannot, for the reasons indicated above, in 
­itself, constitute net hydrogen ion excretion. Ammonium 
is produced in renal tubular cells by the action of the 
­enzyme glutaminase on glutamine, the amide of glutamic 
acid (Eqn. 27), and the oxidative deamination of gluta­
mate by glutamate dehydrogenase (Eqn. 28).
(27)
(28)
Glutamate 
is 
formed 
by 
transamination 
of 
2–­oxoglutarate with other amino acids, a process that 
does not involve either the production or utilization of 
hydrogen ions, and the equation for glutamine synthesis 
is the reverse of Equation 27. Thus, glutamine synthe­
sis is a mechanism for the disposal of ammonium ions 
that does not (unlike urea synthesis) produce ­hydrogen 
ions. Although subsequent urinary ammonium excretion 
appears to be a means whereby hydrogen ions can be ex­
creted in a buffered form, it does not represent direct ex­
cretion of hydrogen ions: rather, it is a process through 
which nitrogen can be excreted without the concomitant 
generation of hydrogen ions. As ­indicated in Equations 
27 and 28, the production of ammonium from glutamine 
also yields 2–oxoglutarate: this is a substrate for gluco­
neogenesis, a process that consumes ­hydrogen ions.
In acidosis, hepatic glutamine synthesis is increased: 
in the kidneys, the formation of ammonium from gluta­
mine, urinary ammonium excretion and gluconeogenesis 
are all increased. The net result is a decrease in hydrogen 
ion formation and an increase in bicarbonate generation, 
both of which tend to correct the acidosis. Renal ammo­
nium excretion is illustrated in Figure 5.4.
The luminal membranes of renal tubular cells are ac­
tually impermeable to ammonium ions, but are perme­
able to ammonia. Continued diffusion of small amounts 
NH CO CH
CH NH
COO
H O
Glutamine
COO
CH
CH NH
COO
2
2 2
3
2
2 2
3
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
+
−
−
+
+
→
−
+
+ NH
Glutamate
4
COO
CH
CH NH
COO
NAD
H O
Glutamate
COO
CH
COCOO
−
+
−
+
−
−
+
+
→
+
(
)
(
)
(
)
2 2
3
2
2 2
NADH
NH
Oxoglutarate
+
+
−
+
+
4
2
H
FIGURE 5.2  ■  Reabsorption of filtered bicarbon-
ate. Bicarbonate ions cannot be directly reab-
sorbed. Instead, hydrogen ions and bicarbonate 
are generated from carbon dioxide in tubular 
cells; the hydrogen ions are secreted into the tu-
bular lumen in exchange for sodium and titrate 
the filtered bicarbonate. Some of the carbon 
dioxide thus formed diffuses into renal tubular 
cells. The bicarbonate formed in the cells accom-
panies sodium as it is pumped into the intersti-
tial fluid and thence reaches the plasma.
72	
Clinical biochemistry
of ammonia in equilibrium with ammonium within renal 
tubular cells into the tubular fluid, results in continued 
formation of ammonia from ammonium. In the lumens 
of nephrons, this ammonia is immediately converted 
back to ammonium ions. This process does not entail net 
excretion of hydrogen ions; indeed, the net result is the 
same as if ammonium ions were transported directly.
The role of the liver in hydrogen ion homoeosta-
sis. Traditionally, the kidneys have been considered (to­
gether with the lungs) as the major organs responsible 
for hydrogen ion homoeostasis, but the liver also plays 
a role, although its extent remains controversial. While 
the kidneys are the only organs capable of excreting hy­
drogen ions from the body, the liver both generates and 
consumes hydrogen ions. As indicated above, it has a 
central role in the production (e.g. ketogenesis, ureagenesis) 
and utilization of hydrogen ions (e.g. gluconeogenesis), yet 
an abnormal hydrogen ion concentration is an uncom­
mon finding in patients with liver failure unless this is 
severe or there is accompanying renal disease. But this 
should not be surprising, since it is well known that the 
liver has substantial reserve capacity, and functional im­
pairment may only occur with massive liver damage. 
There is certainly evidence that acid–base status has an 
influence on hepatic urea synthesis and glutamine syn­
thesis, and affects lactate and ketone metabolism. For 
example, acidosis tends to stimulate hepatic glutamine 
synthesis and lactate disposal, but inhibits ketogenesis.
FIGURE  5.3  ■  Renal hydrogen ion excretion. 
Carbonic acid is generated from carbon diox-
ide and water and dissociates into hydrogen 
ions and bicarbonate. The hydrogen ions are 
secreted into the tubular lumen in exchange 
for sodium, where they titrate monohydro-
gen phosphate to dihydrogen phosphate. 
Bicarbonate and sodium ions are pumped 
from the cells into the interstitial fluid and 
thence reach the plasma.
−
–
FIGURE  5.4  ■  Renal ammonium excretion. Ammonium is 
formed directly from glutamine and glutamate and is excreted 
in the urine. There is no net excretion of hydrogen ion. This pro-
cess is accompanied by the formation of oxoglutarate, which 
can undergo gluconeogenesis, and results in the consumption 
of hydrogen ions that are produced with bicarbonate from car-
bonic acid.
	
5  Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxygenation and their disorders	
73
Summary
Three organs are involved in hydrogen ion homoeostasis: 
the lungs, the kidneys and the liver. Extracellular hydrogen 
ion concentration depends on the ratio PCO2
3
/[
]
HCO −. 
The respiratory centre is exquisitely sensitive to arterial 
PCO2 and, given normal respiratory function, PCO2 is 
maintained within narrow limits by changes in the rate 
and depth of respiration. It has been calculated that cessa­
tion of carbon dioxide excretion would lead to potentially 
fatal acidosis within 30 min (although this is purely hypo­
thetical, since the accompanying failure in oxygen supply 
would be fatal before this time).
Nearly all the carbon dioxide produced each day is 
excreted through the lungs in the expired gas, although 
the liver is capable of disposing of a very small amount 
through the anaplerotic carboxylation of ­pyruvate to 
oxaloacetate. Although the liver can both generate and 
utilize hydrogen ions in metabolism, only the kidneys 
can excrete hydrogen ions from the body. In terms of the 
total turnover of hydrogen ions, the amount ­excreted 
this way is small. Nevertheless, it is vitally ­important, 
and a failure of renal hydrogen ion excretion frequently 
leads to acidosis, although even in acute kidney injury, 
if there are no additional causes of acidosis, it can take 
several days before the acidosis itself becomes severe.
Whilst any one of abnormal respiratory, hepatic or re­
nal function may lead to the development of acidosis or al­
kalosis, changes in the others may ameliorate the effect on 
arterial hydrogen ion concentration. The compensatory 
hyperventilation seen in patients with non-­respiratory aci­
dosis is an example of this. Such compensatory processes 
are of vital importance in disturbances of hydrogen ion 
homoeostasis, and are discussed in relation to the specific 
conditions in which they occur. However, it is important 
to appreciate that, although they may restore an abnormal 
hydrogen ion concentration to, or at least towards, nor­
mal, they do not correct the underlying disturbance.
THE ASSESSMENT OF ACID–BASE STATUS
Clinical assessment
None of the clinical features of acidosis and alkalosis is spe­
cific to these disturbances and they may only be present 
when the disturbances are severe. The conditions that give 
rise to acidosis and alkalosis may have specific features, 
but, while clinical assessment is important in patients with 
disturbances of hydrogen ion homoeostasis, laboratory in­
vestigations are vital for their diagnosis, the assessment of 
their severity and for monitoring their progress.
Laboratory assessment
Hydrogen ion concentration and PCO2
Measurements of arterial blood hydrogen ion concentra­
tion (strictly, activity) and PaCO2 (the ‘a’ indicates arterial, 
and ‘A’ alveolar; in this chapter, for the sake of simplicity, 
the ‘a’ is omitted except where doing so could lead to am­
biguity) are fundamental to the assessment of acid–base 
status. Analysers may express hydrogen ion concentration 
as pH, but the SI unit is concentration and the use of con­
centration greatly facilitates data interpretation.
Since the hydrogen ion concentration is determined 
by the ratio of PCO2 to bicarbonate concentration, bicar­
bonate concentration is not an independent variable and 
knowledge of it is not necessary for the characterization of 
acid–base disorders. Analysers calculate bicarbonate from 
PCO2, [H
+] and Ka′, using the formula given in Equation 7. 
However, although Ka′ is supposedly a constant, there is 
evidence that it can vary unpredictably, particularly in se­
verely ill patients.
True bicarbonate concentration is not readily measur­
able. Most laboratory measurements of ‘bicarbonate’ are 
in fact measurements of total carbon dioxide (TCO2), to 
which bicarbonate makes by far the greatest contribution, 
but which also measures dissolved carbon dioxide, car­
bonic acid and carbamino compounds (histidine residues 
in proteins that have combined with carbon dioxide). 
Together, all these other species contribute only about 
10% to the TCO2. It should be noted that the TCO2 
concentration of plasma and serum decreases in  vitro, 
as carbon dioxide is lost to the atmosphere. Caution 
should thus be exercised in interpreting its value if there 
has been any significant delay between the times of the 
blood sample being taken and the plasma or serum be­
ing analysed. Arterial blood for analysis must be suitably 
anticoagulated; any gas bubbles must be expelled and the 
specimen protected from the atmosphere and either ana­
lysed immediately using a point of care instrument, or 
transported rapidly to the laboratory, chilled by placing 
the syringe in which it is collected in iced water.
Derived variables
Analysers that measure hydrogen ion concentration and 
PCO2 are generically termed ‘blood gas analysers’; they 
also measure PO2 and may provide other information 
of value in determining arterial oxygen content. They 
also frequently generate various derived terms, includ­
ing ‘standard bicarbonate’, ‘base excess’ and ‘standard 
base excess’. These are calculated terms and add noth­
ing to the characterization of disorders of hydrogen ion 
­homoeostasis beyond what can be determined from con­
sideration of [H
+] and PCO2.
As will be seen, bicarbonate can be affected by both 
respiratory and non-respiratory disturbances. The stan­
dard bicarbonate is the bicarbonate concentration that 
would be expected in that blood sample were the PCO2 
to be normal. It supposedly eliminates any contribution 
by a respiratory disturbance, so that an abnormal stan­
dard bicarbonate concentration is taken as indicating 
the presence of a non-respiratory disturbance of hydro­
gen ion homoeostasis. The base excess is the calculated 
amount of acid in millimoles that would have to be added 
to 1 L of the patient’s blood in vitro to restore the hydro­
gen ion concentration to normal in an alkalosis (the base 
deficit is the corresponding figure for alkali in an acido­
sis). The standard base excess extends the base excess to 
include the whole extracellular compartment. The cal­
culation of these derived variables makes unwarranted 
assumptions, and the data themselves can confuse, rather 
74	
Clinical biochemistry
than facilitate, the analysis of clinical disorders. The only 
measurement required to derive these variables in addi­
tion to PCO2 and [H
+] is the haemoglobin concentration. 
Since, therefore, derived units do not incorporate any 
other independent measurements of acid–base status, it 
follows that they cannot provide any information that 
cannot be derived from the measured variables alone. 
Furthermore, although it is correct that abnormal val­
ues for standard bicarbonate and base excess indicate the 
presence of a non-respiratory component in an acid–base 
disorder, they do not distinguish between this being a primary 
disorder or a compensatory response to a primary respiratory 
disorder.
Base deficit is sometimes used to calculate the amount 
of bicarbonate that is required to correct an acidosis, 
but, in practice, if an acidosis is so severe that bicarbon­
ate treatment is warranted, this should be given in small 
amounts and the effect assessed by frequent measure­
ments of [H
+] and PCO2.
Anion gap
The anion gap is the sum of the concentrations (in mmol/L) 
of the two major cations in plasma minus those of the two 
major anions (i.e. ([
]
[
])
([
]
[
])
Na
K
Cl
HCO
+
+
−
−
+
−
+
3
). 
The total concentration of anionic charge in plasma 
must equal the concentration of cationic charge: the 
anion gap reflects mainly the anionic nature of most 
proteins in plasma at physiological hydrogen ion con­
centration, ­although phosphate and other anions make 
a small contribution. Its normal value is related to the 
concentrations of the species that determine it, and is 
~15 mmol/L.
Determination of the anion gap can be of help in 
deter­mining the cause of a non-respiratory acidosis. 
When acidosis is due to loss of bicarbonate (e.g. renal 
tubular acidoses, loss of bicarbonate from the gut), there 
is increased renal chloride retention; the lost bicarbonate 
is replaced by chloride and the anion gap is unaffected. 
On the other hand, when acidosis is due to ingestion or 
excess generation of acids, the associated anions (e.g. lac­
tate) ­replace bicarbonate as this is consumed by buffering, 
and the anion gap is increased. In practice, determination 
of the anion gap is only likely to be helpful if the cause of the 
acidosis is not already obvious. It certainly does not sub­
stitute for careful clinical assessment. For its ­calculation, 
plasma chloride concentration must be known, and in 
the UK, this often must be requested individually, rather 
than being available as part of a profile of tests. Also, the 
imprecision of the value of the anion gap, summating as 
it does the individual imprecisions of the measurements 
of the analytes that are required to calculate it, needs to 
be taken into account.
Other investigations
Other biochemical measurements may be of value in 
the assessment of disorders of hydrogen ion homoeo­
stasis under certain conditions, for example in patients 
with diabetes, in neonates and in poisoned patients. 
These measurements are discussed in the sections that 
follow.
DISORDERS OF HYDROGEN ION  
HOMOEOSTASIS
Introduction
Although they differ in their pathogenesis, an under­
standing of the disorders of hydrogen ion homoeostasis is 
facilitated by considering them in a similar way. The pro­
cesses involved are the generation of the disorder, buffer­
ing, physiological compensation and ultimate correction. 
In practice, there is often overlap between these.
Disorders of hydrogen ion homoeostasis may be 
simple, that is, involving only one type of disturbance, 
or mixed (two or more disturbances arising together). 
Unless rapidly corrected, simple disturbances typically 
generate secondary changes, which, in terms of bicarbon­
ate concentrations and PCO2, can take on the character­
istics of mixed disturbances.
Non-respiratory acidosis
This disorder can develop as a consequence of any, or a 
combination of, an increase in the rate of generation of 
hydrogen ions, a decrease in the rate of their utilization 
or excretion or a decrease in buffering capacity.
A list of some of the causes of non-respiratory acidosis is 
given in Box 5.1. Frequently, more than one cause may con­
tribute to an acidosis in an individual patient. For example, 
patients with diabetic ketoacidosis are usually hypovolaemic 
and their renal function is impaired. Many of these condi­
tions are discussed in detail in other chapters of this book; 
the reasons why they can cause acidosis should be evident 
from the first section of this chapter. Some conditions of 
particular interest are discussed later. Although many of the 
conditions causing acidosis have distinct clinical features, 
some of the features of acidosis, and of the body’s response 
to it, are common to them all. Non-respiratory acidosis can 
develop rapidly, particularly when it is due to increased pro­
duction of hydrogen ions or loss of bicarbonate.
Compensatory responses in non-respiratory 
acidosis
Buffering. A tendency for hydrogen ion concentration to 
increase will be resisted by buffering; bicarbonate will be 
consumed and its concentration in the plasma will tend 
to fall. In the early stages of a condition that can cause 
acidosis, buffering, together with increased renal hydro­
gen ion excretion and bicarbonate regeneration, may pre­
vent the development of a significant rise in hydrogen ion 
concentration. In chronic acidosis, buffering of hydrogen 
ions by tissue proteins also plays an important part in lim­
iting the rise in hydrogen ion concentration.
Hyperventilation. Provided that respiratory function 
and its control are normal, acidosis stimulates ventilation 
through effects on aortic and carotid body chemorecep­
tors, and directly on the respiratory centre. Kussmaul 
breathing – deep, sighing respiration – is characteristic of 
non-respiratory acidosis. This not only allows excretion of 
carbon dioxide derived from the carbonic acid produced 
	
5  Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxygenation and their disorders	
75
by buffering, but actually reduces the PCO2, which in turn 
tends to lower the hydrogen ion concentration towards 
normal. The muscular effort of hyperventilation itself 
generates carbon dioxide, and there is a lower limit to the 
PCO2 that can be obtained as a result of hyperventilation 
(approximately 1.4 –1.6 kPa). Many causes of non-respira­
tory acidosis are progressive conditions, and the acidosis 
may be so severe that respiratory compensation cannot 
normalize the hydrogen ion concentration. However, 
when the acidosis is only mild, a new steady state may be 
achieved in which hyperventilation maintains a hydrogen 
ion concentration that is only slightly higher than normal.
The increased ventilation, and thus respiratory com­
pensation for non-respiratory acidosis, develops rapidly, 
so that the predicted changes of a ‘pure’, that is uncom­
pensated, non-respiratory acidosis (elevated blood hydro­
gen ion concentration, decreased bicarbonate and normal 
PCO2) do not occur. However, compensation may take 
several hours to become maximal. This is because carbon 
dioxide equilibrates more rapidly across the blood–brain 
barrier than bicarbonate. Initial hyperventilation low­
ers cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) PCO2, and thus hydrogen 
ion concentration, and tends to counter the stimulation 
of respiration by peripheral chemoreceptors. Only as 
CSF bicarbonate concentration falls will its hydrogen 
ion concentration rise and augment the respiratory drive. 
The reverse phenomenon may be seen if rapid correction 
of an acidosis is attempted.
In patients with respiratory impairment, the efficacy of 
the compensatory process may be greatly reduced.
Renal hydrogen ion excretion. Provided that renal 
dysfunction is not the cause of acidosis and renal func­
tion is not compromised, the urine hydrogen ion con­
centration rises to its maximum possible value. However, 
the capacity of the kidneys to excrete acid is limited: the 
fixed buffering capacity of the urine is approximately 2–3 
times the normal acid load. In this process, filtered mono­
hydrogen phosphate is titrated virtually completely to 
dihydrogen phosphate. In mild or transient acidosis, this 
may be sufficient to prevent a significant increase in blood 
hydrogen ion concentration occurring. If acidosis persists, 
however, there is an adaptive increase in the excretion of 
ammonium ions. Ammonium excretion may increase five-
fold or more. As has been discussed above, although it has 
been widely considered that this represents the excretion 
of buffered hydrogen ions, it is more accurate to consider 
renal ammonium excretion as representing an alternative 
pathway for ammonium disposal that, unlike urea syn­
thesis, does not involve the generation of hydrogen ions. 
Acidosis induces increased synthesis of glutaminase, the 
enzyme responsible for the formation of ammonium from 
glutamine. It is noteworthy in this respect that renal glu­
coneogenesis, which provides a pathway for the utilization 
of the 2–oxoglutarate derived from the carbon skeleton of 
glutamine, is also increased in acidosis.
Biochemical characteristics of non-respiratory 
acidosis
The cardinal features of a non-respiratory acidosis are an 
elevated blood hydrogen ion concentration and a decrease 
in bicarbonate. Hyperventilation results in a decrease in 
PCO2. The extent of the change in PCO2 predicted 
for a given decrease in bicarbonate is discussed later. 
Comparison of the observed change with the predicted 
change can indicate whether there is an additional com­
ponent to the acid–base disturbance.
In addition to these changes, other consequences of 
­acidosis, especially hyperkalaemia, may be present, to­
gether with any specific features of the cause of the acidosis.
Systemic effects of acidosis
Many of the systemic effects of acidosis are common to 
acidosis of whatever cause. The effects on the cardiovas­
cular system, oxygen delivery to tissues, the nervous sys­
tem, potassium homoeostasis and bone are of particular 
significance. Acidosis also has important effects on inter­
mediary metabolism.
The cardiovascular system. Acidosis has a negative ino­
tropic effect, although this is probably only of ­significance 
in severe acidosis. Acidosis causes arteriolar vasodilatation 
and constriction of peripheral veins, but in many forms of 
acidosis these responses are obscured by other influences 
on vasomotor tone.
BOX 5.1	
Some causes of non-respiratory 
acidosis
Predominant increased acid formation
•	 Ketoacidosis
a
•	 Diabetic
•	 Alcoholic
•	 Starvation
•	 Lactic acidosis
a
•	 Hypoxic (type A)
•	 Other causes (type B, see Box 5.2)
•	 Poisoning
a
•	 Salicylate
•	 Alcohols
•	 Inherited organic acidoses
a
Predominant decreased acid excretion
•	 Uraemic acidosis
a
•	 Renal tubular acidoses types 1 and 4 (see Table 5.3)
Predominant gain of acid or substances 
causing acidosis
•	 Ingestion of strong acid
•	 Ingestion/infusion of ammonium chloride
•	 Intravenous feeding with excess cationic amino acids
•	 Dilutional acidosis
Predominant loss of base
•	 Gastrointestinal loss
•	 Diarrhoea
•	 Pancreatic fistula
•	 Renal loss
•	 Renal tubular acidosis type 2
•	 Acetazolamide treatment
•	 Ureteroenterostomy
aAcidoses associated with a high anion gap. Note: In many instances, 
more than one mechanism may contribute to the acidosis.
76	
Clinical biochemistry
Oxygen delivery to tissues. Acidosis causes a right shift 
in the oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve (the Bohr effect, 
see p. 90) and this facilitates oxygen delivery to tissues. An 
increase in hydrogen ion concentration decreases eryth­
rocyte 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) concentra­
tions through effects on both synthesis and breakdown; 
this causes a left shift in the curve, but, whereas the Bohr 
effect is immediate, the fall in 2,3-DPG takes place over a 
matter of hours. The reverse is also true; so, if hydrogen 
ion concentration is restored to normal rapidly, oxygen 
delivery will be compromised until 2,3-DPG concentra­
tions are restored to normal. This is a potential hazard if 
an attempt is made to correct an acidosis rapidly by the 
intravenous infusion of bicarbonate.
The nervous system. Patients with acidosis can dem­
onstrate impaired consciousness of varying degrees of se­
verity, but there is little correlation between this and the 
severity of the acidosis. In many patients with acidosis, 
other factors are operating that may affect CNS function, 
and changes in blood flow and oxygen delivery secondary 
to the acidosis may also be relevant.
Potassium homoeostasis. There is a well-known as­
sociation between acidosis and hyperkalaemia. This is 
multifactorial: movement of potassium ions from the in­
tracellular to the extracellular compartment used to be 
thought to be related to intracellular buffering of hydro­
gen ions, but is probably to a greater extent the result of 
a loss of intracellular potassium to the plasma for other 
reasons, including a decrease in ATPase activity. It is of 
practical importance to note that total body potassium 
stores are frequently depleted, despite the high plasma 
concentration, and treatment of the acidosis may cause 
hypokalaemia if potassium is not replaced.
Bone. In chronic non-respiratory acidosis, there is signifi­
cant buffering of hydrogen ions by bone, accompanied by 
decalcification, leading to a negative calcium balance. This 
is one factor contributing to renal osteodystrophy, the bone 
disease of chronic kidney disease. In addition, acidosis tends 
to increase ionized calcium concentration and so the filtered 
load presented to the renal tubules; renal calcium reabsorp­
tion may be decreased and calcitriol synthesis decreased.
Other effects. Acute acidosis can cause a leukocytosis; 
chronic acidosis can have a detrimental effect on nitrogen 
balance and insulin resistance can be a feature of both 
acute and chronic acidosis.
Management of non-respiratory acidosis
The logical management of a non-respiratory acidosis is 
to treat the underlying cause(s) of the disturbance appro­
priately. However, this may not always be possible and 
then, if the acidosis itself is having a significantly adverse 
effect on the patient, it may be necessary to attempt to 
lower the blood hydrogen ion concentration by giving 
alkali. The potential advantages are the reversal of the 
effects discussed above, including the hyperventilation, 
which may be particularly distressing for a conscious pa­
tient. There are, however, significant disadvantages. As 
indicated above, rapid correction of an acidosis may have 
an adverse effect on oxygen delivery to tissues. When 
acidosis is associated with the presence of organic an­
ions (e.g. lactate, acetoacetate), continued metabolism of 
these after correction of the acidosis (rather than pari 
passu with the correction, as would happen if the un­
derlying cause were reversed) may, by consuming hydro­
gen ions, cause the blood hydrogen ion concentration to 
fall. This is a rebound phenomenon and not just a direct 
consequence of excessive alkali administration.
The alkali used most frequently when it is considered 
necessary to correct an acidosis is sodium bicarbonate. 
Buffering of hydrogen ions will result in the formation of 
carbon dioxide and blood PCO2 may rise. Since carbon diox­
ide equilibrates across the blood–brain barrier more quickly 
than bicarbonate, the resulting increase in CSF carbon diox­
ide may cause a paradoxical rise in CSF hydrogen ion con­
centration. This may perpetuate the hyperventilation, even 
though the peripheral stimulus has been reduced by restora­
tion of blood hydrogen ion concentration to normal.
There is general agreement that, in otherwise uncom­
plicated cases of non-respiratory acidosis that have a re­
versible cause (e.g. ketoacidosis and some forms of lactic 
acidosis), bicarbonate administration should not be con­
sidered unless the arterial hydrogen ion concentration 
is unusually severe (e.g. >100 nmol/L). In acute kidney 
injury, however, bicarbonate administration may have a 
rapid and beneficial effect on dangerous hyperkalaemia, 
while renal replacement treatment is being put in place. If 
intravenous bicarbonate is to be given, it should be given 
as a series of small quantities (e.g. 50 mmol) in isotonic 
solution (unless there is a danger of fluid overload, when 
a hypertonic solution may be used); after each infusion, 
the patient should be reassessed clinically and arterial 
[H
+] and PCO2 measured.
The use of bicarbonate in the treatment of renal tubu­
lar acidosis (RTA) is discussed on p. 79.
Specific causes of non-respiratory acidosis
Ketoacidosis. Diabetic ketoacidosis is discussed in detail 
in Chapter 16. The primary abnormality is increased li­
polysis and ketogenesis (production of acetoacetic and 
2-hydroxybutyric (β-hydroxybutyric) acids), coupled with 
decreased utilization of these acids. In addition, dehydra­
tion may decrease the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) 
and impair renal hydrogen ion excretion. Some patients 
also have a lactic acidosis (see below). It is noteworthy that 
resolution of the acidosis and clinical improvement of con­
scious level can lag behind the correction of the hypergly­
caemia and ketosis in this condition. As normovolaemia is 
restored by the administration of 0.9% saline, renal excre­
tion of sodium together with ketoacid anions results in loss 
of a source of bicarbonate and there is a tendency to hyper­
chloraemic acidosis, which may not be so rapidly reversed.
Ketoacidosis can also occur in association with alco­
hol ingestion (see Chapter  40), typically in alcoholics 
one or more days after a drinking bout, so that ethanol 
may not be detectable in the blood at the time that aci­
dosis becomes apparent. Ketoacidosis develops as a re­
sult of a combination of factors, which are summarized in 
Table 5.2. The term ketoacidosis is a relative misnomer 
	
5  Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxygenation and their disorders	
77
when applied to this condition; the oxidation of etha­
nol to acetaldehyde and acetate increases the [NADH]/
[NAD
+] ratio and hence the ratio [2–hydroxybutyrate]/
[acetoacetate], so that dipstick tests for urinary ketones 
(which do not detect 2–hydroxybutyrate) may be negative 
or only weakly positive.
In both types of ketoacidosis, significant excretion 
of the organic acids can occur in urine; at the lowest at­
tainable urinary hydrogen ion concentration, some 50% 
of 2–hydroxybutyrate, but only 10% of acetoacetate, is 
in the form of the undissociated acid. Although this is 
­advantageous in that it represents a route of buffered 
hydrogen ion excretion, the fact that the bulk of ace­
toacetate and 50% of 2–hydroxybutyrate are excreted 
as organic cations has adverse consequences. It entails 
obligatory excretion of sodium and potassium as the ac­
companying anions, thus contributing to their deficits, 
and also removes substrate for the later regeneration of 
bicarbonate by oxidation of these anions. It is of interest 
that, in patients with ketoacidosis with poor renal func­
tion (in whom less ­excretion of organic anions will occur), 
the ­extent of the fall in plasma bicarbonate concentration 
at the time of admission tends to match the increase in 
the anion gap and in the plasma concentrations of organic 
acid anions; in contrast, in patients with good renal func­
tion, the anion gap is less and plasma chloride concentra­
tion is increased. A third, but rare, cause of ketoacidosis 
is severe starvation.
The non-enzymatic decarboxylation of acetoacetate to 
acetone consumes hydrogen ions, but adds to the burden 
of carbon dioxide to be excreted.
Other 
acid–base 
disturbances 
associated 
with 
alcohol. A range of other acid–base disturbances can occur 
in association with alcohol ingestion. In normal subjects, 
the severe hypoglycaemia that can occur when ethanol is 
taken after a period without food, can be ­accompanied 
by a mild lactic acidosis. In chronic alcoholics, severe 
­vomiting may cause a non-respiratory alkalosis, and con­
tinued ethanol ingestion can cause a lactic acidosis.
In patients with cirrhosis, alcohol can precipitate he­
patic encephalopathy, which is often associated with 
respiratory alkalosis, as a result of stimulation of the respi­
ratory centre by ammonia and other nitrogenous toxins.
Lactic acidosis. Lactate is formed from pyruvate as the 
end-product of glycolysis. Normal venous plasma lactate 
concentration is 0.6–1.2 mmol/L, tending to the lower 
end of this range during fasting and to the higher end af­
ter meals. Concentrations of up to 10 mmol/L can occur 
during severe physical exercise, but they fall rapidly once 
exercise ceases. Lactate is generated by glycolysis, princi­
pally in skeletal muscle, brain, erythrocytes, the skin and 
the gut, and is disposed of by gluconeogenesis in the liver 
and kidneys, thereby providing an important source of 
glucose, and by complete oxidation.
Lactic acid is a strong acid and is virtually completely 
dissociated at normal physiological hydrogen ion con­
centrations. Thus, the generation of lactate is always ac­
companied by equimolar generation of hydrogen ions. 
Buffering or other compensatory processes may prevent 
a significant rise in hydrogen ion concentration so that 
hyper­lactataemia is not always associated with acidosis, but 
if the lactate concentration is greater than about 5 mmol/L, 
the hydrogen ion concentration is usually elevated.
Lactic acidosis can occur as a result of either excessive 
lactate formation or decreased lactate disposal or a com­
bination of both. It is conventionally divided into type 
A (hypoxic) lactic acidosis, and type B, in which hypoxia 
is not the primary event. Causes of type B lactic acidosis 
include exposure to drugs, toxins and other chemicals, 
severe liver disease and certain inherited metabolic dis­
eases. Some of the more important causes of lactic acido­
sis are indicated in Box 5.2. This list is not meant to be 
exhaustive; many rare conditions that have been reported 
to cause lactic acidosis and some conditions that only 
­occasionally cause it, have not been included.
BOX 5.2	
Some causes of lactic acidosis
Type A
•	 Shock (haemorrhagic, cardiogenic etc.)
•	 Severe hypoxia
•	 Severe exercise
Type B
•	 Associated with the ingestion of drugs etc.
•	 Biguanides (especially phenformin)
•	 Ethanol
•	 Fructose administration (also sorbitol)
•	 Associated with inherited metabolic diseases
•	 Fructose 1,6-diphosphatase deficiency
•	 Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
•	 Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency
•	 Glucose 6-phosphatase deficiency (glycogen  
storage disease type I)
•	 Other causes
•	 Liver failure
•	 Thiamin deficiency
•	 Metabolic myopathies etc.
TABLE 5.2  Factors involved in the pathogenesis 
of alcoholic ketoacidosis
Factor
Mechanism(s)
Fasting
Decreased insulin and increased 
counter-regulatory hormones,
a 
leading to:
  increased lipolysis
  increased ketogenesis
  decreased ketone utilization
Hypoglycaemia
Effects of fasting exacerbated
Dehydration
Increased counter-regulatory hormones
Impaired renal ketone excretion
Impaired insulin secretion
b
Ethanol
Metabolism inhibits lipolysis but 
lipolysis is stimulated as ethanol is 
cleared from the blood
aCounter-regulatory hormones include glucagon, adrenaline  
(epinephrine) and cortisol.
b Via stimulation of α-adrenergic receptors by adrenaline 
(epinephrine).
78	
Clinical biochemistry
Type A lactic acidosis is the commoner variety. It is 
due primarily to an increase in lactate formation, as a con­
sequence of tissue hypoxia, resulting, for example, from 
cardiogenic or haemorrhagic shock. Approximately half 
the lactate is produced by the gut. Decreased disposal of 
lactate is also important. Hepatic uptake and metabolism 
of lactate may be decreased in acidosis and when perfu­
sion is decreased. The effects of acidosis on the cardiovas­
cular system (negative inotropism and vasoconstriction) 
may further impair tissue perfusion (so that in the gut, 
a vicious spiral may develop, whereby splanchnic vaso­
constriction induced by acidosis itself contributes to the 
acidosis). Although an acidosis-induced right shift in the 
oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve may promote oxygen 
delivery to tissues, type A lactic acidosis can become self-
perpetuating unless vigorous measures are undertaken to 
reverse the disturbance and treat the underlying cause. 
The prognosis is poor and appears to be related directly to 
the blood lactate concentration, mortality exceeding 80% 
with a concentration >9 mmol/L. The specific treatment 
of the acidosis, for example by the judicious administra­
tion of bicarbonate, has been described above. Measures 
to correct the underlying cause are more important.
The mechanisms of lactate accumulation in type B lac­
tic acidosis vary. The classic descriptions of this condition 
relate to phenformin-induced lactic acidosis; phenformin 
is a biguanide formerly used for treating type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. It causes lactic acidosis primarily as a result of 
decreased utilization of lactate for gluconeogenesis, but 
increased production may also contribute. Lactic acidosis 
frequently leads to shock, and increased production may 
then become the predominant mechanism. Metformin, 
also a biguanide, has low risk of causing lactic acidosis ex­
cept in patients with renal impairment, in whom it should 
not be used.
The inherited metabolic diseases shown in Box 5.2 are 
a useful paradigm to illustrate the mechanisms that can 
lead to the accumulation of lactate (Fig. 5.5). Two reac­
tions in the glycolytic pathway are not simply ­reversible 
for gluconeogenesis. Deficiency of both fructose 
1,6-­diphosphatase and pyruvate carboxylase, the enzymes 
that catalyse these steps in gluconeogenesis, are associated 
with lactate accumulation, particularly when production 
is increased as, for example, during exercise. In glucose 
6-phosphatase deficiency, glucose 6-phosphate released 
from glycogen cannot be converted to glucose and so is 
metabolized through the glycolytic pathway to lactate, 
particularly when glycogenolysis is stimulated, for exam­
ple during fasting. Pyruvate dehydrogenase is responsible 
for converting pyruvate to acetyl coenzyme A, which sub­
sequently enters the tricarboxylic acid cycle: its deficiency 
decreases pyruvate, and hence lactate, oxidation.
The association between alcohol and lactic acid, men­
tioned above, is not confined to ethanol. Methanol and 
ethylene glycol are metabolized by alcohol dehydroge­
nase and the reactions consume NAD
+, which is then 
not available for the lactate dehydrogenase reaction. 
Particularly with ethylene glycol poisoning, other acids 
(e.g. glycolic and glyoxylic acids) also contribute to the 
acidosis (it should, however, be noted that glycolate may 
cause an apparent elevation of lactate concentration in 
lactate assays employing lactate oxidase).
Hyperlactataemia is common in patients with severe 
acute hepatic failure, but in many such patients the pre­
dominant acid–base disturbance is not acidosis, but alka­
losis, either respiratory (as a result of direct stimulation 
of the respiratory centre by toxins) or non-respiratory, 
thought to be caused by a decrease in ureagenesis such 
that the consumption of hydrogen ions during the oxida­
tion of the carbon skeletons of amino acids is not bal­
anced by hydrogen ion formation.
The naturally occurring isomer of lactic acid in man is 
the l-isomer. Lactic acidosis due to accumulation of the 
d-isomer has been reported in patients with blind intesti­
nal loops and short bowel syndrome, resulting from over­
production by the altered gut flora. The diagnosis may 
be missed, since d-lactate is not measured by the usual 
assays based on lactate dehydrogenase.
Dilutional (expansion) acidosis. Excessive infusion 
of isotonic saline solution can cause a mild acidosis. 
Expansion of the extracellular fluid (ECF) volume leads 
to a dilutional decrease in bicarbonate concentration, 
but, more importantly, volume expansion decreases re­
nal bicarbonate reabsorption. This form of acidosis is 
self-correcting when ECF volume is allowed to return 
to normal.
Acidosis in renal disease. Acidosis is common in pa­
tients with renal disease. In acute kidney injury, acidosis 
is frequently multifactorial. Patients are often shocked 
and may have increased acid production, while the failure 
FIGURE  5.5  ■  Key reactions in glycolysis/gluconeogenesis. 
Inherited metabolic diseases affecting the enzymes indicated 
can cause lactic acidosis, by blocking gluconeogenesis (fruc-
tose 1,6-diphosphatase and pyruvate decarboxylase deficien-
cies), pyruvate oxidation (pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency) 
or by increasing glycolysis (glucose 6-phosphatase deficiency). 
Intermediate reactions have been omitted for clarity.
	
5  Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxygenation and their disorders	
79
of urine production prevents renal acid ­excretion. In 
chronic kidney disease, the urine can usually be maxi­
mally acidified – that is, the hydrogen ion concentra­
tion can be raised (the pH lowered) to the same extent 
as can occur in normal individuals (exceptions include 
renal disease particularly affecting the medulla, for 
example chronic pyelonephritis, in which acidifica­
tion may be impaired). In the early stages, the devel­
opment of hyperphosphataemia results in an increase 
in the amount of phosphate filtered in each nephron, 
and phosphate reabsorption is decreased secondarily 
to increased secretion of parathyroid hormone. This 
may allow the excretion of a normal load of hydrogen 
ion buffered by phosphate. However, although individ­
ual nephrons may secrete a normal or even increased 
amount of ammonium, overall ammonium excretion 
decreases early in chronic renal disease and, as a con­
sequence, systemic acidosis develops. Nevertheless, se­
vere acidosis is unusual in chronic kidney disease, with 
plasma bicarbonate concentration rarely falling below 
10–12 mmol/L. This is a result of extensive buffering 
of hydrogen ions by bone, a factor of importance in 
the pathogenesis of renal osteodystrophy. Uraemic 
acidosis is an example of a type of acidosis in which 
alkali treatment is beneficial, though usually with oral 
calcium carbonate rather than sodium bicarbonate in 
order to reduce the risk of sodium overload and also 
bind phosphate.
Impairment of renal tubular function is an important 
cause of acidosis. Three distinct syndromes of renal tu­
bular acidosis (RTA) have been described: type 1 or dis­
tal RTA (sometimes referred to as ‘classic’ RTA); type 
2 or proximal RTA, and type 4 or hyperkalaemic RTA. 
Both type 1 and type 4 owe their pathogenesis to defec­
tive mechanisms in the distal tubules: they are sometimes 
called hypokalaemic and hyperkalaemic distal RTA, re­
spectively. Their principal characteristics are summarized 
in Table 5.3.
Normal urinary acidification requires the generation 
of nearly a 1000-fold gradient in hydrogen ion concen­
tration between the blood and the lumen of the nephron, 
and type 1 RTA can be due to a failure to maintain this 
gradient because secreted hydrogen ions diffuse back into 
the tubular cells or due to defective hydrogen ion secre­
tion. It can be inherited as an isolated defect (autosomal 
dominant) or be acquired. Unusually, for a systemic aci­
dosis, there is associated potassium wasting, leading to 
hypokalaemia, partly because more potassium is excreted 
to maintain electrochemical neutrality and partly be­
cause the impairment of hydrogen ion excretion impairs 
TABLE 5.3  Some causes and features of renal tubular acidosis
Type
Pathogenesis
Causes
Features
1 (distal)
Impaired ability to  
generate [H
+] 
gradient between 
blood and tubular 
lumen
Inherited idiopathic
Minimum urine pH >5.5
Hypokalaemia
Hypocitraturia
Hypercalciuria
Nephrocalcinosis
Renal calculi
Rickets
Osteomalacia
Autoimmune disease:
  Systemic lupus erythematosus:
  Primary biliary cirrhosis
Sjögren syndrome
Multiple myeloma
Drugs:
  Amphotericin
  Lithium
  Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory  
drugs (NSAIDs)
Renal disease:
  Analgesic nephropathy
  Sickle cell nephropathy
  Nephrocalcinosis
2 (proximal)
Impaired 
reabsorption 
of filtered 
bicarbonate
Inherited idiopathic
Minimum urine pH 4.5 if plasma
 
[HCO ]
3
− low
Hypokalaemia
Glycosuria
Uricosuria
Amino aciduria
Hyperphosphaturia
Hypophosphataemia
Rickets
Osteomalacia
Polyuria
Thirst
Metabolic disease:
  Tyrosinosis
  Cystinosis
  Hereditary fructose intolerance
  Wilson disease
Drugs and toxins:
  Lead, mercury, acetazolamide
Miscellaneous:
  Multiple myeloma
  Amyloidosis
  Sjögren syndrome
4 (hyperkalaemic)
Hypoaldosteronism
Adrenal failure
Minimum urine pH >5.5
a
Hyperkalaemia
Low plasma [renin]
Low plasma [aldosterone]
Renal disease:
  Diabetic nephropathy
  Interstitial nephropathy
Drugs:
  Indometacin
  Spironolactone
a Lower urinary pH may be achieved in ‘rate’ defects, see text for details.
80	
Clinical biochemistry
sodium reabsorption and may lead to secondary aldo­
steronism. Buffering of acid in bone contributes to hy­
percalciuria and there is a risk of nephrocalcinosis. Type 
1 RTA is typically treated with modest amounts of oral 
sodium bicarbonate (typically 2–3 mmol/kg body weight/
day; cf. type 2 RTA, below); potassium supplements, cit­
rate and thiazide diuretics (which increase proximal tu­
bular sodium – and thus bicarbonate – reabsorption by 
inducing volume contraction) may also be helpful. The 
principal aim of treatment is to allow normal growth in 
children and to correct the bone disease and reduce the 
risk of renal damage in adults.
Type 2 RTA is less common than type 1. It is due 
to a failure of proximal tubular bicarbonate reabsorp­
tion, which leads to bicarbonaturia. The fall in plasma 
­bicarbonate concentration causes a systemic acidosis, but 
as the amount of filtered bicarbonate falls, the amount 
presented to the proximal tubules for reabsorption falls, 
and bicarbonate may be completely reabsorbed. Since 
the distal acidification mechanism is normal, excretion of 
an acidic urine is possible, albeit only at the expense of 
a systemic acidosis. Plasma bicarbonate concentration is 
typically 15–20 mmol/L. Type 2 RTA is usually associated 
with other abnormalities of proximal tubular function, 
for example glycosuria, amino aciduria, hypercitraturia 
and phosphaturia; it can be a feature of inherited diseases 
(classically, the Fanconi syndrome caused by cystinosis) 
or be acquired. Plasma potassium concentration is usually 
normal or only slightly decreased. Hypercalciuria is not a 
feature of type 2 RTA. However, metabolic bone ­disease 
(rickets in children, osteopenia in adults) occurs fre­
quently. It is, in part, a direct consequence of the acidosis; 
defective synthesis of calcitriol and hypophosphataemia 
may also be contributory factors. Correction of the aci­
dosis in type 2 RTA requires the ingestion of much larger 
quantities (typically 5–15 mmol/kg body weight/day) of 
bicarbonate than are required in RTA type 1. Appropriate 
treatment is particularly important in children, to opti­
mize growth (the condition is in any case rare in adults). 
Bicarbonate replacement leads to bicarbonaturia and po­
tassium wasting: potassium replacement is also required.
Renal tubular acidosis type 4 can be subdivided into 
two types. So-called ‘rate defects’ (which occur more fre­
quently) are associated with decreased secretion of aldo­
sterone, resulting from either primary adrenal disease or 
renal disease in which renin secretion is impaired (e.g. 
diabetic nephropathy, tubulointerstitial nephropathy). 
They can also be seen in syndromes of aldosterone resis­
tance, in patients being treated with spironolactone and 
in patients treated with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (in whom it is probably as a result of a decrease 
in renin secretion secondary to decreased renal prosta­
glandin synthesis). The acidosis is due, in part, to re­
duced hydrogen ion secretion secondary to decreased 
sodium reabsorption, and usually responds to treatment 
with small doses of a synthetic mineralocorticoid to­
gether with bicarbonate, diuretics or ion exchange res­
ins to correct the hyperkalaemia. However, there is also 
decreased ammonium excretion, and the fact that this, 
and the acidosis, may be corrected if the plasma potas­
sium concentration is lowered without giving aldosterone 
suggests that the hyperkalaemia itself contributes to the 
acidosis. The other subtype comprises ‘voltage defects’, 
in which the secretion of hydrogen and potassium ions 
in the cortical collecting ducts is reduced as a result of 
a decrease in the usual negative intratubular electrical 
potential. This can occur with structural damage to the 
nephrons (e.g. sickle cell nephropathy), drugs (lithium, 
triamterene and amiloride, among others) and a decrease 
in the supply of sodium to the distal nephron as a result of 
avid proximal absorption (e.g. in hepatic cirrhosis). The 
urine pH can be reduced below 5.5 in rate defects, but 
not in voltage defects. In contrast to type 2 RTA, where 
acidosis is often severe, the acidosis in both subtypes of 
4 RTA is often mild (plasma bicarbonate concentration 
typically 18–21 mmol/L), and the hyperkalaemia is often 
more remarkable.
If a diagnosis of renal tubular acidosis is not clear from 
the clinical findings and the simple laboratory measure­
ments outlined above, tests of urinary acidification (for 
distal RTA) or bicarbonate reabsorption (for proximal 
RTA) may be required (see Chapter  9). Investigations 
that may be of value in the diagnosis of type 4 RTA in­
clude assessment of adrenal function and demonstration 
of a failure of plasma renin and aldosterone concentra­
tions to respond to oral furosemide.
Respiratory acidosis
This is a consequence of carbon dioxide retention. In 
health, the rate and depth of respiration are adjusted pre­
cisely, so that the rate of excretion matches the rate of for­
mation. Carbon dioxide excretion is a complex process, 
involving the transport of carbon dioxide in the blood to 
the pulmonary capillaries, diffusion into the alveoli and 
ventilation. Ventilation is controlled by the medullary 
respiratory centre, which receives input from peripheral 
and central chemoreceptors. Carbon dioxide retention 
can occur as a consequence of malfunction of either the 
excretory mechanism or its control. Some of the causes of 
respiratory acidosis are indicated in Box 5.3.
Compensatory responses in respiratory acidosis
Buffering. The role of erythrocytes in converting car­
bon dioxide to bicarbonate and buffering the hydrogen 
ions produced has been discussed above. This process is 
extremely effective: in health, the arteriovenous differ­
ence in hydrogen ion concentration is only ~3 nmol/L. It 
is salutary to examine the efficacy of this process in more 
detail. In the absence of any buffering, were an increase 
in PCO2 sufficient to cause an increase in bicarbonate 
concentration of only 1 mmol/L to occur (acutely, an in­
crease of little more than 1 kPa is required to do this), 
it would be expected that hydrogen ion concentration 
would increase by the same amount, that is, 1 mmol/L. 
The fact that the increase is only a matter of a few 
­nanomoles is almost entirely due to buffering by haemo­
globin. Buffering of hydrogen ions by haemoglobin takes 
place rapidly, but the amount of haemoglobin available 
to buffer hydrogen ions is limited. The maximum in­
crease in plasma bicarbonate concentration that occurs 
in acute respiratory acidosis is of the order of 4 mmol/L. 
In chronic carbon dioxide retention, buffering by other 
	
5  Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxygenation and their disorders	
81
intracellular buffers occurs, and, as discussed below, 
increased renal ammonium excretion plays an impor­
tant (albeit indirect) part in controlling the hydrogen 
ion concentration. Buffering of hydrogen ions by bone 
­occurs to a lesser extent in chronic respiratory acidosis 
than in metabolic acidosis.
Hyperventilation. Although the increase in PCO2 will 
stimulate the respiratory centre, the underlying disease will 
mean that the respiratory apparatus is unable to respond 
adequately to this stimulus. Therapeutic measures to im­
prove respiratory function may lower PCO2, but in chronic 
carbon dioxide retention, this may have undesirable conse­
quences, as is discussed in the section on treatment, below.
Renal hydrogen ion excretion. In sustained carbon 
dioxide retention, renal bicarbonate reabsorption is 
maximal and phosphate is excreted almost entirely in 
the dihydrogen form. There is also a marked increase 
in urinary ammonium excretion. This has the effect of 
compensating for the increase in hydrogen ion formation 
from carbon dioxide, and may even restore blood hydro­
gen ion concentration to normal. It is accompanied by 
a further increase in plasma bicarbonate concentration 
(in addition to that generated directly by the erythrocyte 
mechanism). Although this is usually considered to be a 
consequence of increased renal hydrogen ion excretion 
(since bicarbonate is generated pari passu with hydrogen 
ions in renal tubular cells), it is probably also partly a re­
sult of diversion of ammonium from ureagenesis, requir­
ing decreased buffering by bicarbonate of hydrogen ions 
produced during this process. Practically, it is important 
to appreciate that this compensation evolves over several 
days of carbon dioxide retention. If an attempt is made 
to reduce PCO2 rapidly, for example by artificial ventila­
tion, temporary persistence of the compensatory process 
may result in the development of an alkalosis (Post-
hypercapnic alkalosis, see p. 83).
There is a limit to which changes in renal acid excre­
tion and in ammonium metabolism can compensate for 
an increase in PCO2; if this rises above 8 kPa, arterial hy­
drogen ion concentration will always be increased.
Biochemical characteristics of respiratory  
acidosis
The cardinal features of respiratory acidosis are an in­
creased blood PCO2 and a high, or high–normal, hy­
drogen ion concentration; bicarbonate concentration is 
increased. The hydrogen ion and bicarbonate concen­
trations for any PCO2 depend on the extent of the com­
pensatory increase in renal hydrogen ion and ammonium 
excretion (see above). In an acute disturbance, the in­
crease in bicarbonate is only of the order of 2–4 mmol/L, 
even with massive increases in PCO2, but in compensated 
disturbances the increase is much greater.
Systemic effects of respiratory acidosis
In patients with respiratory acidosis, the manifestations 
of the underlying disorder and of hypoxaemia, if pres­
ent, usually dominate the clinical findings, but effects 
due to acidosis and to hypercapnia may also be present. 
Hypoxaemia causes breathlessness, cyanosis and drowsi­
ness. The consequences of acidosis have been discussed 
above. The effects of hypercapnia are seen predominantly 
in the central nervous and cardiovascular systems.
The neurological effects of hypercapnia cover a spec­
trum from anxiety and confusion through to impaired 
consciousness and coma. Particularly in chronic carbon 
dioxide retention, headache, papilloedema, extensor plan­
tar responses and myoclonus may occur. Most of these ef­
fects are due to the increased cerebral blood flow that is a 
consequence of the vasodilatory action of carbon dioxide.
Systemic vasodilatation also occurs, but the cardiac out­
put is increased so that blood pressure is usually maintained. 
The skin is warm and arterial pulses are bounding. The 
acidosis may cause venous constriction and chronic hypox­
aemia may cause pulmonary hypertension and cor pulmo­
nale, rendering the patient very susceptible to pulmonary 
oedema should intravenous fluids be given injudiciously.
Management
The logical management of respiratory acidosis is to treat 
the underlying cause and thus restore PCO2 to normal. 
This may not be possible and, in chronic carbon diox­
ide retention, if compensatory processes have restored 
the blood hydrogen ion concentration to normal or near 
­normal, it may not be necessary. In practice, the man­
agement of respiratory disorders is usually dictated by 
the necessity to maintain an adequate arterial PO2. As 
mentioned above, rapid correction of an elevated PCO2 
in a patient with chronic carbon dioxide retention is 
BOX 5.3	
Some causes of respiratory acidosis
Defects in the control of respiration
•	 CNS depression
•	 Anaesthetics
•	 Narcotics
•	 Severe hypoxia
•	 CNS disease
•	 Trauma
•	 Stroke
•	 Neurological disease
•	 Spinal cord lesions
•	 Poliomyelitis
•	 Guillain–Barré syndrome
•	 Motor neuron disease
•	 Neurotoxins
Defects in respiratory function
•	 Mechanical
•	 Myasthenic syndromes
•	 Myopathies
•	 Thoracic trauma and deformities
•	 Pneumothorax, pleural effusion
•	 Pulmonary disease
•	 Restrictive defects (extensive fibrosis, pulmonary 
oedema, infiltrative tumours)
•	 Obstructive defects (chronic bronchitis, emphy­
sema, severe asthma)
•	 Impaired perfusion (massive pulmonary embolism)
82	
Clinical biochemistry
potentially dangerous. The compensatory changes can 
persist for several hours, or even a few days, and may 
cause the patient to become alkalotic.
This demonstrates the fact that the compensatory pro­
cess in a respiratory acidosis can be regarded as the physio-
logical generation of a non-respiratory alkalosis, although 
the patient’s hydrogen ion concentration does not fall be-
low normal, that is, the patient does not become frankly 
alkalotic, as long as the PCO2 remains elevated.
Non-respiratory alkalosis
This disorder can develop because of excessive loss of hy­
drogen ions, decreased generation of hydrogen ions or 
exogenous alkali administration. Some of the causes are 
indicated in Box 5.4 and some of the more important of 
these are discussed later.
Non-respiratory alkalosis is characterized by an in­
crease in plasma bicarbonate concentration. Since this 
bicarbonate is filtered at the glomerulus and, therefore, 
available for urinary excretion, the persistence of a non-
respiratory alkalosis implies that it is being perpetuated 
by inappropriate reabsorption of filtered bicarbonate. 
Indeed, in healthy subjects, it is very difficult to produce 
a sustained alkalosis by the administration of, for exam­
ple, sodium bicarbonate, whether orally or intravenously, 
because the excess is excreted in the urine. In consider­
ing the body’s responses to non-respiratory alkalosis, it 
is therefore necessary to take into account not only the 
underlying cause, but also the factors responsible for its 
perpetuation. Three such factors appear to be important:
•	 extracellular volume contraction
•	 potassium deficiency
•	 mineralocorticoid excess.
These are discussed further below.
Compensation for non-respiratory alkalosis
Buffering. A fall in blood hydrogen ion concentration 
results in the release of buffered hydrogen ions and, in 
consequence, the blood bicarbonate concentration in­
creases. The excess bicarbonate could be excreted by the 
kidneys but, as mentioned above, this process is impeded 
in sustained alkalosis.
Hypoventilation. In a systemic alkalosis, decreased stimu­
lation of chemoreceptors would be expected to decrease 
the respiratory drive, leading to compensatory retention 
of carbon dioxide. However, any increase in PCO2 will 
tend to stimulate respiration and lessen the extent of the 
acute compensatory response. With the passage of time, 
this response may increase, because the central respiratory 
centre appears to become less sensitive to an increase in 
PCO2. However, hypoventilation will tend to decrease ar­
terial PO2 and should the extent of this be so severe as to 
cause hypoxaemia, the stimulus of this will override any 
inhibitory effect of a low hydrogen ion concentration. 
Significant tissue hypoxia is, however, uncommon in the 
absence of respiratory disease: although alkalosis causes a 
left shift in the oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve, chroni­
cally this is offset by a decrease in red cell 2,3-DPG, which 
reduces the affinity of haemoglobin for oxygen (see p. 90).
Renal bicarbonate excretion. As indicated above, persis­
tence of a non-respiratory alkalosis implies continued and 
inappropriate renal bicarbonate reabsorption. This could 
be achieved by the combination of a fall in the glomerular 
filtration rate (GFR) with maintenance of normal rates of 
tubular bicarbonate reabsorption, or by enhanced tubular 
reabsorption with a normal GFR. In many patients with 
non-respiratory alkalosis, there is both a decrease in the 
GFR and increased bicarbonate reabsorption.
A decrease in ECF volume may lead to a decrease in 
the GFR. If this is associated with chloride deficiency, the 
requirement to maximize tubular sodium reabsorption may 
cause an obligatory increase in the reabsorption of filtered 
bicarbonate to maintain electrochemical neutrality, to the 
extent that the urine may become acidic. (Priority is given 
to the control of ECF volume over that of acid–base sta­
tus.) In the majority of patients with non-respiratory alka­
losis, correction of the alkalosis follows repletion of ECF 
volume by the infusion of an isotonic sodium chloride so­
lution (hence ‘saline-responsive’ non-respiratory alkalosis).
Non-respiratory alkalosis is frequently associated 
with potassium deficiency, but the fact that, in many 
instances, the alkalosis can usually be corrected by vol­
ume expansion without replacement of potassium casts 
doubt on the precise role of potassium. However, potas­
sium depletion can contribute to the maintenance of a 
non-respiratory alkalosis through an effect on bicarbon­
ate reabsorption. Severe potassium depletion enhances 
BOX 5.4	
Some causes of non-respiratory 
alkalosis
Saline responsive (chloride depletion)
•	 Gastrointestinal causes
•	 Vomiting
•	 Gastric drainage
•	 Congenital chloride-losing diarrhoea
•	 Exogenous alkali administration
•	 Sodium bicarbonate, lactate, acetate especially if 
GFR reduced
•	 Contraction alkalosis
•	 Renal causes
•	 Poorly reabsorbable anion therapy (e.g. carbenicillin)
•	 Diuretics (secondary to ECF volume contraction)
•	 Post-(chronic)hypercapnia, especially in congestive 
cardiac failure, nephrotic syndrome, cirrhosis, i.e. 
decreased ‘effective intravascular volume’
Saline unresponsive
•	 Associated with hypertension
•	 Primary aldosteronism
•	 Cushing syndrome
•	 Secondary aldosteronism
•	 Liquorice, carbenoxolone
•	 Not usually associated with hypertension
•	 Bartter, Gitelman syndromes
•	 Refeeding after starvation
•	 Potassium depletion
a (except in renal tubular acido­
sis, acetazolamide and pancreatic fistula)
•	 Magnesium depletion
a
a When diuretic induced, may respond to saline.
	
5  Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxygenation and their disorders	
83
proximal bicarbonate reabsorption. Distal tubular so­
dium reabsorption takes place in exchange for potassium 
and hydrogen ions; particularly when there is enhanced 
distal sodium reabsorption, potassium depletion may re­
sult in an increased secretion of hydrogen ions into the 
tubular fluid.
The third factor that can maintain a non-respiratory 
alkalosis is an increase in mineralocorticoid activity. This 
promotes distal tubular sodium reabsorption and results 
in increased excretion of both potassium and hydrogen 
ions. The effect is potentiated by potassium depletion, in­
creased distal sodium delivery (as with diuretic treatment) 
and by the presence of non-resorbable anions, which ac­
centuate the negativity of the luminal aspect of tubular 
cells. Increased mineralocorticoid secretion can occur 
secondarily to ECF volume contraction or be primary, 
as in Conn and Cushing syndromes. In these two condi­
tions, ECF volume is expanded and the alkalosis, unusu­
ally, is not corrected by saline infusion.
Biochemical characteristics of non-respiratory 
alkalosis
The blood hydrogen ion concentration is low and the 
bicarbonate concentration increased; respiratory com­
pensation may increase PCO2, but not to more than 
about 8 kPa. Hypokalaemia is almost always present. 
Paradoxically, for the reasons explained above, the urine 
may be acidic and urinary potassium excretion increased.
Systemic effects of alkalosis
In general, the effects of alkalosis are the opposite of 
those of acidosis. The effects on the cardiovascular sys­
tem are, however, less in alkalosis and infrequently of 
clinical consequence. Alkalosis is rarely sustained over a 
long period and there is no evidence of any adverse ef­
fects on bone.
Chronic non-respiratory alkalosis is frequently associ­
ated with potassium depletion and hypokalaemia. In ad­
dition to any contribution from the causative condition 
(e.g. gastric secretions contain approximately 10 mmol/L 
potassium), this is related to increased distal tubular se­
cretion of potassium as a consequence of decreased hy­
drogen ion secretion. Thus, alkalosis can cause potassium 
depletion and potassium depletion sustain alkalosis. If 
sodium depletion is also present, the stimulation of maxi­
mal distal tubular sodium reabsorption will also contrib­
ute to potassium depletion.
Neuromuscular hyperexcitability is present frequently 
in patients with acute respiratory alkalosis, manifest as 
paraesthesia, muscle cramps and tetany. It is unusual in 
non-respiratory alkalosis, except when the hydrogen ion 
concentration falls rapidly, as has been reported in pa­
tients with chronic respiratory acidosis treated with me­
chanical ventilation. Grand mal convulsions have been 
reported in such patients, and alkalosis can precipitate 
a fit in patients with epilepsy. This is, at least in part, a 
result of buffering of hydrogen ion by plasma proteins, 
particularly albumin, which decreases in alkalosis, leading 
to increased binding of calcium to protein, thus lowering 
the plasma ionized calcium concentration.
Management of non-respiratory alkalosis
Management should be directed towards treatment of 
the underlying cause of the alkalosis, when possible. As 
mentioned above, treatment can also be directed towards 
the correction of any factors tending to sustain the al­
kalosis. Most patients will respond to expansion of the 
ECF volume with isotonic saline. The demonstration 
of a low urinary chloride concentration reliably predicts 
those patients who will respond to this treatment. This 
is frequently combined with potassium replacement, 
­although, in many instances, the alkalosis can be cor­
rected by the administration of saline alone, even if there 
is potassium depletion (which may require correction in 
its own right).
Administration of saline is inappropriate (and poten­
tially dangerous) in patients with saline-unresponsive 
causes of non-respiratory alkalosis. Management must 
be directed towards the underlying cause, for example 
removing the source of excessive mineralocorticoid se­
cretion (or blockade of mineralocorticoid action) or re­
placement of potassium or magnesium, as appropriate.
Specific causes of non-respiratory alkalosis
Loss of gastric acid. The most severe non-respiratory 
alkalosis is seen in patients losing unbuffered acid from 
the stomach because of either gastric drainage or pro­
longed vomiting, particularly in association with pyloric 
stenosis, which prevents the concomitant loss of alkaline 
secretions from the proximal small intestine. The acid is 
hydrochloric acid so that patients become chloride de­
pleted. The hydrogen ions are derived from carbonic 
acid, pari passu with bicarbonate. Initially, renal excretion 
of the excess bicarbonate may prevent the development of 
alkalosis, but with ECF volume contraction, the require­
ment to maximize renal sodium reabsorption in the face 
of hypochloraemia necessitates increased reabsorption of 
sodium with bicarbonate. Indeed, in severe cases, renal 
bicarbonate reabsorption may be complete in spite of 
the high plasma concentration, resulting in the excretion 
of an acidic urine. Potassium is lost in gastric fluid, but 
increased aldosterone secretion may result in significant 
loss of potassium in the urine as well, exacerbating the 
potassium depletion and the alkalosis. Thus all three of 
the factors mentioned above can be involved in the main­
tenance of the alkalosis. The alkalosis usually responds 
to re-expansion of the ECF volume with isotonic saline; 
isovolaemic infusion of saline prevents the development 
of alkalosis in patients whose gastric fluid is being drained 
(e.g. because of postoperative ileus).
Post-hypercapnic alkalosis. It has been pointed out 
that the rapid lowering of a chronically elevated PCO2 
can result in the compensatory processes causing a frank 
non-respiratory alkalosis. If PCO2 falls to normal over a 
few days, bicarbonate is excreted and an alkalosis does not 
develop, but if this occurs in patients with contraction of 
the ECF volume, for example as a result of diuretic treat­
ment, alkalosis may become apparent and persist. It can 
be treated by administration of isotonic saline, though 
with caution because these patients frequently have sec­
ondary cardiac disease.
84	
Clinical biochemistry
Mineralocorticoid excess. Syndromes of actual or ap­
parent mineralocorticoid excess are almost invariably 
associated with non-respiratory alkalosis, for reasons 
that have been outlined above. Extracellular fluid vol­
ume is increased and patients are usually hypertensive. 
Expansion of the ECF should oppose the effect of po­
tassium depletion on proximal bicarbonate reabsorption, 
and it is likely that the alkalosis is maintained largely by 
increased distal reabsorption.
Miscellaneous. Several other conditions can cause non-
respiratory alkalosis as a result of increased renal excretion 
of hydrogen ions, but are not associated with hyperten­
sion. They include Bartter and Gitelman syndromes, 
and magnesium and potassium depletion. Refeeding af­
ter starvation is also sometimes associated with transient 
non-respiratory alkalosis, the cause of which is unclear, 
but which may be perpetuated by concomitant hypovo­
laemia and avid renal sodium reabsorption.
Respiratory alkalosis
Respiratory alkalosis is a consequence of the rate of excre­
tion of carbon dioxide exceeding the rate of ­production, 
leading to a decrease in PCO2. This is usually due to 
stimulation of the respiratory centre: the stimulus may 
be toxic, reflex, psychogenic or related to the presence of 
an intracranial lesion. The exception is mechanical venti­
lation, when normal respiratory control is overridden. It 
is a common abnormality in the critically ill. Some of the 
causes of respiratory alkalosis are indicated in Box 5.5.
Compensatory responses in respiratory alkalosis
Buffering. In acute respiratory alkalosis, the fall in PCO2 
causes a decrease in hydrogen ion concentration and a 
slight fall in bicarbonate. Other buffers release hydrogen 
ions, so tending to counter the effect of the fall in PCO2; 
some of these hydrogen ions will combine with bicarbon­
ate, causing its concentration in the blood to fall further. 
A new steady state can be attained rapidly and can persist for 
approximately six hours, after which the effect of changes 
in renal hydrogen ion metabolism become detectable.
Hypoventilation. Correction of a respiratory alkalosis is 
only possible if the rate of excretion of carbon dioxide can 
be restored to normal. The fact that an alkalosis develops 
(other than with mechanical ventilation) indicates that 
the inhibitory effect of the decrease in PCO2 on respira­
tion is being overwhelmed by whatever stimulus is caus­
ing the hyperventilation.
Renal hydrogen ion excretion. If a low PCO2 persists 
for more than a few hours, decreased renal generation 
of bicarbonate (for which carbon dioxide is a substrate) 
will decrease urinary acidification and effect further com­
pensation for the alkalosis, further lowering the plasma 
bicarbonate concentration.
Biochemical features of respiratory alkalosis
The cardinal feature of an acute respiratory alkalosis is 
a decrease in arterial PCO2, a decrease in hydrogen ion 
concentration and a small decrease in bicarbonate con­
centration, though not to less than about 18 mmol/L. In 
a chronic respiratory alkalosis, renal compensation may 
result in arterial hydrogen ion concentration being only 
marginally decreased, while the bicarbonate concentra­
tion falls further, but not to less than about 12 mmol/L. 
The finding of bicarbonate concentrations less than 
these values suggests the additional presence of a non-
respiratory acidosis.
If the stimulus to hyperventilation is hypoxaemia, ar­
terial hydrogen ion concentration may be affected pre­
dominantly by a resulting non-respiratory acidosis. The 
interpretation of measured acid–base parameters in mixed 
disorders of hydrogen ion homoeostasis is discussed in a 
later section.
Systemic effects of respiratory alkalosis
The manifestations of the underlying disorder often pre­
dominate in patients with respiratory alkalosis. In acute 
hypocapnia, cerebral vasoconstriction reduces cerebral 
blood flow, and light-headedness, confusion, impaired 
intellectual function, syncope and seizures may occur. In 
patients with sickle cell disease, hypocapnia has been re­
corded as causing strokes, presumably as a result of cere­
bral hypoxaemia engendered by the vasoconstriction. 
Perioral and peripheral paraesthesiae are common, in part 
at least, because of a fall in ionized calcium concentration. 
These features usually remit if the hypocapnia persists.
In contrast, cardiovascular changes can occur with 
both acute and chronic hypocapnia. They include an in­
crease in heart rate, non-specific chest pain or even frank 
angina.
Mild hypokalaemia can occur with respiratory alkalo­
sis; plasma phosphate concentration is often significantly 
reduced.
Management
Where possible, treatment should be directed at the un­
derlying cause. In a psychogenically induced acute respi­
ratory alkalosis, rapid symptomatic relief may be obtained 
by getting the patient to rebreathe from a paper bag. 
BOX 5.5	
Some causes of respiratory 
alkalosis
•	 Voluntary hyperventilation
•	 Mechanical ventilation
•	 Reflex hyperventilation
•	 Decreased pulmonary compliance
•	 Disease affecting chest wall
•	 Irritative lesions of the air passages
•	 Other stimuli to respiratory centre
•	 Cortical influences (pain, fever, anxiety etc.)
•	 Local disease (trauma, tumours)
•	 Drugs and toxins (salicylate poisoning, hepatic 
failure)
•	 Hypoxaemia (ascent to altitude, right-to-left shunts, 
pulmonary disease, carbon monoxide poisoning etc.)
•	 Non-respiratory acidosis (during recovery)
	
5  Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxygenation and their disorders	
85
FIGURE 5.6  ■ The relationship between arterial hydrogen ion con-
centration ([H
+]) and partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PCO2). 
The ranges of values typical of the major disturbances of hydro-
gen ion homoeostasis are shown. Note that, in acute respiratory 
disturbances, the variation of [H
+] with PCO2 is rectilinear.
If the alkalosis is severe, and the nervous or cardiovascular 
features are giving cause for concern, it may occasionally 
be necessary to sedate the patient or prevent the hyper­
ventilation by resorting to mechanical ventilation, always 
being sure that adequate oxygenation is maintained.
The interpretation of acid–base data
Many approaches to the diagnosis of disorders of hy­
drogen ion homoeostasis have been promulgated. These 
may involve the mathematical manipulation of data, or 
the plotting of data on a diagram that shows the ranges 
of the variables in the various disorders. Three points are 
worth emphasizing in this context. First, although the 
use of diagrams may facilitate the rapid diagnosis of an 
acid–base disturbance, it cannot add to the information 
that is available from an analysis of the data on which the 
diagrams are based. Second, diagnosis should be based 
on measured variables and not on secondarily derived 
data. Third, acid–base variables must always be assessed 
in their clinical context: this is particularly important in 
mixed disorders, in which results may be indistinguish­
able from those that can occur during the physiological 
compensation of single disorders.
The most logical acid–base diagram is thus a graph of 
hydrogen ion concentration against partial pressure of 
carbon dioxide, as shown in Figure 5.6. This shows the 
zones in which combinations of PCO2 and [H
+] occur in 
the various disorders that have been described. If a pair 
of data for a patient falls outside one of these areas, it 
suggests that there is a mixed acid–base disorder. Such 
diagrams may be useful not only to help in defining the 
acid–base disorder in an individual patient, but also, when 
serial plots are made, to follow the response to treatment.
It will be apparent that diagnosis of the type of acid–
base disorder requires only knowledge of PCO2 and [H
+]; 
this must follow from the fact that, as shown by Equation 
7, bicarbonate concentration depends on PCO2 and [H
+] 
and cannot vary independently of them.
In Figure 5.6, the plot of [H
+] against PCO2 is recti­
linear in acute respiratory disorders. This fact makes it 
possible to diagnose acid–base disorders without recourse 
to diagrams. The slope of the plot is such that, in an acute 
respiratory disturbance (that is, before there has been 
time for significant compensation to occur), for every 
1 kPa change in PCO2, [H
+] would be expected to change 
by 5.5 nmol/L, an increase in PCO2 increasing [H
+] and a 
decrease in PCO2 decreasing [H
+] by this amount.
Thus, in a patient whose PCO2 is abnormal, it is pos­
sible to calculate whether the observed [H
+] is what it 
would be expected to be if the respiratory disturbance 
were acute, that is, in the absence of any compensation. 
Suppose, for example, a patient has a PCO2 of 7.5 kPa and 
[H
+] of 52 nmol/L – plotting these figures on Figure 5.6 
suggests that the patient has an acute respiratory acidosis. 
But this can also be appreciated by calculation: assum­
ing a normal PCO2 of 5.3 kPa and [H
+] of 40 nmol/L, an 
acute increase in PCO2 to 7.5 kPa would be expected to 
increase [H
+] to [40  +  (5.5  ×  2.2)] = 52 nmol/L, as is ob­
served. Were the observed [H
+] to be higher, it would 
indicate that the acidosis had a non-respiratory as well 
as a respiratory component. Were the observed [H
+] to 
be lower than expected from the PCO2, it would indicate 
the presence of a non-respiratory alkalosis in addition to the 
respiratory acidosis.
In this latter instance, however, an alternative explana­
tion could be that the respiratory acidosis had been partly 
compensated. As has been indicated, the compensatory 
processes in disturbances of hydrogen ion homoeostasis 
can be regarded as the generation of opposing distur­
bances. Indeed, in respiratory disturbances, in which the 
development of compensation lags behind the develop­
ment of the primary disorder, the presence and nature 
of the compensation is made explicit if the primary ab­
normality is corrected rapidly, leaving the persisting com­
pensatory process as the sole acid–base abnormality (see 
Post-hypercapnic alkalosis, above).
As previously mentioned, it is important to appreciate 
that examination of PCO2 and [H
+], or of data derived 
from them, in isolation from clinical information and 
other, independent, laboratory data, may not permit dif­
ferentiation between a compensated disorder of hydro­
gen ion homoeostasis or the simultaneous existence of 
two primary disorders having opposing effects on hydro­
gen ion concentration. In the descriptions of the major 
acid–base disorders, the maximum extent to which com­
pensation can occur was indicated, and if data lie outside 
these limits then a mixed disturbance must be present; 
however, such a disturbance can be present even if the 
data lie within the limits of normal compensation.
The approach to the interpretation of acid–base data 
described above is essentially physiological; it does not 
require the use of derived data which, as explained in an 
earlier section, do not provide additional, independent, 
information.
An alternative approach, which is essentially physico­
chemical in nature, is provided by the strong ion theory, 
originally developed by Stewart (1978). This was based 
86	
Clinical biochemistry
on in vitro studies of the dissociation of water (and hence 
hydrogen ion concentration) in the presence of various 
solutes and carbon dioxide, and led to the conclusion that 
[H
+] is determined by three independent variables. These 
are the ‘strong ion difference’ (SID, the sum of the con­
centrations of sodium, potassium, magnesium and calcium 
ions less than that of the sum of the concentrations of 
chloride, sulphate and organic acid anions); the total con­
centration of weak acids, i.e. phosphate and proteins (A T) 
and the partial pressure of carbon dioxide.
Strong ion difference is further differentiated into ‘ap­
parent’ SID (SIDa) and ‘effective’ SID (SIDe). The for­
mer is provided by ([Na
+]  +  [K
+])  −  [Cl
−]); the latter is 
the sum of [
]
HCO3
− and non-bicarbonate buffers, that 
is, the anionic equivalences of albumin and phosphate. 
The difference between the two is the ‘strong ion gap’ 
(SIG). The normal value of SIG is zero. The various 
quantities are either measured or read from nomograms 
based on the solutions of a series of complex equations.
This approach defines additional primary acid–base 
disorders in addition to the four described above. There 
are two respiratory disorders (as with the physiological 
approach), but in non-respiratory acidosis, although SIDe 
is always low, this can occur with a high SIG (as in lactic 
acidosis) or a normal SIG (as with bicarbonate loss); in 
non-respiratory alkalosis, SIDe is high and SIG normal, 
but both acidosis and alkalosis can also be due to abnormal 
value of AT (hyperalbuminaemic acidosis and hypoalbu­
minaemic alkalosis, respectively). The contribution of 
differences in plasma protein concentration is not consid­
ered to be of significance in the physiological approach 
(and indeed, changes in plasma albumin concentration 
in vivo do not affect [H
+]).
Although the strong ion theory has its proponents, 
it has not been widely adopted. It is considerably more 
complex than the physiological approach; it is derived 
entirely from observations made in vitro; it does not pro­
vide any quantitative data concerning the compensatory 
responses to primary disorders and, although there are 
some data suggesting that it better predicts outcome in 
critically ill patients than traditional approaches, most 
studies have failed to do this. (The interested reader will 
find further information and discussion of this topic in 
the Further reading section, below.)
Mixed disorders of hydrogen ion 
homoeostasis
Mixed acid–base disorders, that is, disorders with both 
respiratory and non-respiratory components, occur fre­
quently. Some examples are shown in Box 5.6. They can 
be classified according to whether the component distur­
bances are additive or opposing in their effects on hydro­
gen ion concentration.
The presence of a mixed disorder can be inferred from 
any change in hydrogen ion concentration not being as 
predicted from the PCO2. In a mixed respiratory and 
non-respiratory acidosis, PCO2 will be elevated, 
but [H
+] will be higher than would be predicted from 
the PCO2. In a mixed respiratory and non-respiratory 
alkalosis, PCO2 will be decreased, but [H
+] will be lower 
than predicted. In each case, the plot of [H
+] and PCO2 
on the acid–base diagram (Fig. 5.6) will fall in the regions 
between those shown for the appropriate non-respiratory 
and acute respiratory disorders.
The diagnosis of mixed disorders in which the com­
ponent disturbances have opposite effects on hydrogen 
ion concentration is less straightforward. As discussed 
above, the problem is that the changes in [H
+] and 
PCO2 may be exactly the same as may be found as a 
result of physiological compensation. This stems from 
the fact that the compensatory process itself disturbs 
acid–base homoeostasis, albeit advantageously, tending 
as it does to restore [H
+] towards normal. Usually, care­
ful consideration of the clinical findings and other data 
that may be available will allow the correct diagnosis to 
be made. It should also be appreciated that the efficacy 
of compensatory processes is limited, particularly in 
non-respiratory disorders. Compensation restores the 
hydrogen ion concentration towards normal, but resto­
ration to normal is only seen with mild chronic respi­
ratory acidosis and chronic respiratory alkalosis. With 
more severe disturbances, compensation is incomplete. 
Overcompensation does not occur so that, for exam­
ple, a patient with a slightly elevated [H
+] and a low 
PCO2, must have a partially compensated non-respira­
tory acidosis and cannot have compensated respiratory 
alkalosis.
Since the causes of respiratory acidosis and alkalo­
sis are retention and excessive excretion of carbon di­
oxide, respectively, these two disorders cannot coexist. 
However, several mechanisms can be responsible for 
the development of non-respiratory disorders, and the 
BOX 5.6	
Some causes of mixed acid–base 
disorders
Additive disorders
•	 Non-respiratory acidosis  +  respiratory acidosis
•	 Respiratory failure
•	 Cardiac arrest
•	 Poisoning, e.g. with ethanol, methanol
•	 Non-respiratory alkalosis  +  respiratory alkalosis
•	 Vomiting and congestive cardiac failure
•	 Vomiting or diuretic therapy and, for example, he­
patic failure or pneumonia
Counterbalancing disorders
•	 Non-respiratory acidosis  +  respiratory alkalosis
•	 Salicylate poisoning
•	 Septicaemia ± renal failure
•	 Acute hepatic failure, hepatorenal syndrome
•	 Ketoacidosis and pneumonia
•	 Non-respiratory alkalosis  +  respiratory acidosis
•	 Diuretic therapy or vomiting and chronic obstruc­
tive airways disease
•	 Severe potassium depletion
•	 Non-respiratory acidosis  +  non-respiratory alkalosis
•	 Vomiting and renal failure
•	 Diuretic therapy and ketoacidosis
•	 Severe vomiting in ketoacidosis
Triple disorders
•	 See text
	
5  Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxygenation and their disorders	
87
existence of a process producing an acidosis need not 
exclude the presence of one producing an alkalosis. 
Thus, a patient could have renal failure (a cause of aci­
dosis) and be vomiting excessively (a cause of alkalosis). 
Whether the patient is actually acidotic or alkalotic will 
depend on which process predominates, but examina­
tion of [H
+] and PCO2 alone will not reveal this type of 
mixed disturbance. It may only be inferred from clini­
cal observations coupled with other biochemical data – 
particularly, for example, the anion gap – or become 
apparent when the predominant disorder is treated ap­
propriately and apparent ‘over-swing’ occurs, for ex­
ample the patient, having had a mild non-respiratory 
acidosis, becomes severely alkalotic.
Exceptionally, triple acid–base disorders can ­occur. 
Patients have been described with a severe ­non-­respiratory 
alkalosis (usually due to prolonged vomiting), accompa­
nied by a respiratory acidosis or alkalosis, in whom a high 
anion gap suggests a component of non-respiratory acido­
sis (e.g. a lactic acidosis). The [H
+] (low) and PCO2 (also 
low) in such patients may suggest a partially compensated 
acute respiratory disturbance, but the clinical features will 
be inconsistent with this as the sole diagnosis.
In practice, because mixed acid–base disorders fre­
quently develop in patients who are severely ill, the man­
agement of the acid–base disorder per se will usually be 
less important than that of the underlying illness. Indeed, 
the management of any acid–base disorder should include 
measures to correct the cause where possible, though, as 
has been indicated above, specific measures relating to 
the acidosis or alkalosis may also be necessary.
TISSUE OXYGENATION
Introduction
The process whereby atmospheric oxygen is made avail­
able to mitochondria, where the oxidation of carbon and 
hydrogen releases energy, is a complex one, depending 
on adequate alveolar ventilation and function, pulmonary 
and tissue blood flows, and the ability of the blood itself 
to take up oxygen in the alveoli and release it to tissues. 
Tissue oxygenation can be compromised by disease af­
fecting any of these functions. Until relatively recently, 
the only readily available index of tissue oxygen supply 
was the arterial partial pressure of oxygen, PaO2. This 
measurement is still regarded as essential, but it has a 
number of limitations. It requires access to arterial blood, 
either by direct puncture or through an indwelling cath­
eter; blood samples must be collected with considerable 
care and analysis performed without delay, but, perhaps 
most importantly, measurement of PaO2 provides incom­
plete information on oxygen transport. It is a measure of 
partial pressure, not of the oxygen content of blood nor 
the delivery of oxygen to tissues. However, although tis­
sue oxygenation depends upon factors other than PaO2, 
maintenance of an adequate PaO2 is a prerequisite for 
normal tissue oxygenation. This is illustrated in the fol­
lowing sections, which discuss the transport of oxygen 
from the inspired gas to the tissues, where it is used for 
oxidative metabolism.
Pulmonary function
The lungs have two principal functions: to transfer oxy­
gen from inspired gas to the blood, and to remove carbon 
dioxide from the blood to the expired gas. As discussed 
above, the latter is critical to hydrogen ion homoeostasis, 
and is compromised by hypoventilation. Hypoventilation 
invariably leads to decreased oxygen uptake into the 
blood, but, as will be seen, impaired oxygenation can oc­
cur in the absence of hypoventilation.
Alveolar ventilation
The partial pressure of oxygen in arterial blood, PaO2, 
depends on the alveolar oxygen tension (PaO2), which 
is in turn dependent on the fraction of the inspired gas 
comprising oxygen (FiO2), the arterial carbon dioxide 
tension (PaCO2), the respiratory quotient (RQ), atmo­
spheric barometric pressure (PB) and the partial pressure 
of water vapour (PH2O) such that:
(29)
This is the alveolar gas equation. The respiratory quo­
tient depends on the relative proportions of free fatty 
acids, carbohydrate and protein being used as energy sub­
strates by the tissues, but it varies through only a small 
range, even in disease. Alveolar air is always saturated with 
water so that PH2O is constant. It follows that PaO2 can 
increase significantly as a result of either an increase in PB 
(requiring a hyperbaric chamber) or FiO2 (requiring the ad­
ministration of oxygen) or a decrease in PaCO2 (requiring 
an increase in ventilation). Only the last two are readily 
available to treat patients with a low PaO2. Inspection of 
Equation 29 will indicate that the effect of a change in 
PaCO2 on PaO2 will be greater if FiO2 is normal than 
if it is raised; an increase in PaCO2 (usually accepted as 
being equal to PaCO2) can significantly decrease PaO2 at 
normal values of FiO2, but it will have a lesser effect if the 
FiO2 is increased.
Oxygen uptake into blood
The continuous delivery of mixed venous blood of 
low oxygen content to the alveolar capillaries, and 
diffusion of oxygen down the concentration gradi­
ent from the alveolar space to the blood, result in a 
constant tendency for PaO2 to fall that is prevented 
by the delivery of oxygen to the alveoli by ventilation. 
In healthy young individuals, oxygen diffuses readily 
from alveoli into the plasma and PaO2 is usually only 
about 1 kPa less than PaO2, that is (breathing room 
air at sea level) about 13.3 kPa. The gradient increases 
with age and the approximate normal value is given by 
(PaO2  −  PaO2) = (0.06  ×  age in years) kPa so that it may 
reach nearly 4 kPa in healthy 60-year-olds. Pulmonary 
disease that impairs diffusion is a potential cause of 
an increase in (PaO2  −  PaO2) and hence a decrease in 
PaO2, but the nature of the alveoli is such that any im­
pairment of diffusion must be considerable before it 
affects PaO2 at rest.
The maintenance of a normal PaO2 also requires a 
normal relationship between the perfusion of alveoli and 
P
P
P
aO
FiO
P
H O
aCO
RQ
B
2
2
2
2
=
×
−
−
(
)
/
88	
Clinical biochemistry
their ventilation: the effects of a disturbance in this re­
lationship (ventilation–perfusion imbalance) are further 
considered below.
In health, a small proportion of the blood reaching the 
lungs from the tissues bypasses the alveoli and does not 
take part in gas exchange (a right-to-left shunt). This is 
because the bronchial veins drain directly into the pulmo­
nary veins, while some blood that perfuses the myocar­
dium drains directly into the cavity of the left ventricle. 
Any increase in shunting due to a pathological process 
will tend to decrease PaO2.
The final factor that can affect PaO2 is the oxygen 
tension in the blood reaching the lungs, that is, mixed 
(‘mixed’ because this blood is derived from all the veins 
draining into the right side of the heart) venous PO2 or 
PvO2. If this is low, increased alveolar oxygen transport 
will be necessary to allow maximal PaO2. In health, in­
creased tissue oxygen requirements (as, e.g. during ex­
ercise) result in a fall in PvO2 and the increased oxygen 
requirement is met by hyperventilation. Tissue oxygen 
requirements are often increased in disease, for example 
as a result of sepsis or the metabolic response to trauma, 
but, at the same time, the physiological responses leading 
to hyperventilation may be attenuated. Other factors that 
can contribute to a low PvO2 include decreased oxygen 
saturation, anaemia and a decrease in cardiac output, all 
of which, as will be discussed below, can decrease the de­
livery of oxygen to tissues.
In summary, a low PaO2, that is, hypoxaemia, can be 
caused by any of the following:
•	 a decrease in PaO2 (whether due to a decrease in the 
proportion of oxygen in the inspired gas, an increase 
in PaCO2 or a decreased barometric pressure)
•	 hypoventilation
•	 decreased diffusion
•	 imbalance of ventilation and perfusion
•	 an increase in shunting
•	 a decrease in PvO2.
Hypoxaemia caused by hypoventilation or a decrease 
in PaO2 or PvO2 can be distinguished from the other 
causes by calculating the alveolar–arterial oxygen gradi­
ent (PaO2  −  PaO2). PaO2 can be calculated from arterial 
blood gas measurements using the alveolar gas equation. 
The gradient is increased when hypoxaemia is a result of 
impaired diffusion, shunting or imbalance between venti­
lation and perfusion. In these conditions, PaCO2 is often 
normal. However, when, as in hypoxaemia caused by alve­
olar hypoventilation, PaCO2 is increased, (PaO2  −  PaO2) 
is typically normal.
Hypoxaemia becomes recognizable clinically when it 
is sufficiently severe to cause central cyanosis. This re­
quires a deoxygenated haemoglobin concentration of 
more than 50 g/L (saturation <75% at normal haemoglo­
bin concentrations). In patients with severe anaemia, the 
low haemoglobin may result in significant hypoxaemia 
being present without there being discernible cyanosis; 
conversely, patients with polycythaemia may have central 
cyanosis, despite a relatively normal oxygen saturation.
Peripheral cyanosis will always be present if there is 
central cyanosis, but peripheral cyanosis can occur in the 
absence of central cyanosis as a consequence of reduced 
peripheral circulation.
The role of haemoglobin in oxygen transport
Although the amount of oxygen present in physical solu­
tion in the blood is directly related to PaO2 (0.225 mL/L 
per kPa), only a small amount of oxygen is carried in this 
way (at normal PaO2, approximately 3 mL per litre of 
plasma). Oxygen is principally transported in the blood 
bound to haemoglobin. One gram of haemoglobin can 
bind 1.34 mL of oxygen when fully saturated. The normal 
PaO2 of arterial blood is approximately 13.3 kPa, at which 
haemoglobin is approximately 97% saturated. Total ar­
terial oxygen content (CaO2) is given by the sum of the 
dissolved and haemoglobin-bound fractions:
(30)
where [Hb] is the haemoglobin concentration (g/L) and 
SaO2 is the percentage saturation of haemoglobin with 
oxygen. At sea level, CaO2 is normally about 200 mL/L. 
SaO2 can be measured using a co-oximeter; these instru­
ments also measure haemoglobin concentration and thus 
allow calculation of arterial oxygen content, which pro­
vides far more information than PaO2 alone. Modern 
blood gas analysers often incorporate a co-oximeter, and 
such instruments are widely used in intensive therapy 
units. Arterial oxygen content can also be measured non-
invasively (transcutaneously) using a pulse oximeter. It 
is beyond the scope of this book to discuss in detail the 
analytical principles utilized in these instruments, but a 
summary is provided in a later section (see p. 91).
The familiar sigmoid relationship between Hb satura­
tion and oxygen tension (Fig. 5.7) has a number of impor­
tant clinical consequences. First, a considerable reduction 
in PaO2 below normal has little effect on the amount of 
oxygen carried in the blood. Saturation only falls below 
90% when PaO2 falls below 8 kPa. If PaO2 falls further, 
however, oxygen saturation (and thus the amount of oxy­
gen carried) decreases sharply. A further consequence is 
that, because haemoglobin is saturable, increasing PaO2 
C
S
P
aO
Hb
aO
aO
2
2
2
100
1 34
0 23
=
×
×
+
×
(
)
[
]
/
.
( .
)
FIGURE 5.7  ■ The oxygen–haemoglobin dissociation curve. At a 
normal arterial PO2 (point ‘a’), haemoglobin is about 97% satu-
rated (SaO2 = 97%). Point ‘y’ represents the normal venous PO2, 
at which haemoglobin is 75% saturated (SVO2 = 75%). A decrease 
in arterial PO2 to 8 kPa (point ‘x’) is associated with a decrease in 
SaO2 to only 90%, but a further decrease will have a proportion-
ately greater effect on SaO2 and thus on arterial oxygen content.
	
5  Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxygenation and their disorders	
89
above that necessary to provide complete saturation has 
relatively little effect on arterial oxygen content, since 
only the small fraction present in solution is significantly 
increased.
The effects of pulmonary disease on  
oxygen uptake into blood
The effects of alveolar hypoventilation and impaired dif­
fusion on pulmonary function have been described above. 
Two other functional defects, shunting and ventilation–
perfusion imbalance, can also have profound effects on 
the oxygenation of blood.
Shunting
Haemoglobin is only about 97% saturated in normal 
arterial blood. This is, in part, because of physiological 
shunting. In some conditions (e.g. lobar pneumonia, pul­
monary oedema, adult respiratory distress syndrome), 
some alveoli become filled with fluid and do not take 
part in gas exchange, although they are still perfused with 
blood. Shunting is thereby increased and this leads to ar­
terial hypoxaemia. Atelectasis (collapse of a lung or part 
of a lung so that it is not aerated) has the same effect. 
Under such circumstances, increasing PaO2 by increas­
ing FiO2 has little effect on overall PaO2. This is because 
no gas exchange will be taking place in the alveoli that 
are acting as shunts, while haemoglobin in blood leaving 
normally functioning alveoli will already be fully satu­
rated with oxygen. Increasing FiO2 will increase only the 
small proportion of oxygen held in physical solution in 
this blood, and this will have little effect on total arterial 
oxygen content.
Ventilation–perfusion imbalance
The fact that haemoglobin is not fully saturated in nor­
mal arterial blood is also related to an imbalance between 
alveolar ventilation and perfusion. At rest, ventilation 
is about 4.2 L/min and pulmonary blood flow is about 
5.5 L/min, so that the overall ventilation–perfusion ratio 
(
 ratio) is approximately 0.8. However, this ratio is 
not uniform throughout the lungs, ranging between the 
approximate limits 0.5 and 3.0. Some alveoli are better 
ventilated than they are perfused (
 >1), so that a 
proportion of ventilation is ‘wasted’ and the effect is an 
increase in ‘dead space’; in others, 
 and Q are in bal­
ance. In both cases, effective oxygenation of the blood 
takes place. However, in those alveoli in which perfusion 
exceeds ventilation (
 <1), complete oxygenation of 
the blood is impossible. Because haemoglobin is satu­
rable, oxygen transport in the well-ventilated and nor­
mally ventilated alveoli cannot compensate for decreased 
oxygenation of blood in poorly ventilated alveoli. Many 
pulmonary diseases, notably chronic obstructive pulmo­
nary disease and interstitial pulmonary disease, give rise 
to an increase over the normal imbalance of ventilation 
and perfusion. However, in contrast to disease in which 
significant shunting occurs, increasing the FiO2 in such 
conditions, because it will increase oxygen transport in 
poorly ventilated alveoli, can increase overall PaO2.
Differential effects of pulmonary disease  
on PaCO2 and PaO2
It will be instructive at this point to compare the effects of 
respiratory disease on PaCO2 and PaO2. Carbon dioxide 
is transported in blood effectively in physical solution (al­
beit mostly in the form of bicarbonate). In contrast to the 
oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve, the curve relating 
the carbon dioxide content of blood to partial pressure 
is almost linear over the physiological range. As a result, 
a significant change in PaCO2 will always cause a signifi­
cant change in the carbon dioxide content of blood. In 
contrast, as has been seen, considerable changes in PaO2 
can occur with little effect on the blood’s oxygen content.
PaCO2 is determined by alveolar ventilation: in health, 
any increase in carbon dioxide formation (e.g. during exer­
cise) can be matched by an increase in excretion and PaO2 is 
not affected. In contrast, in pulmonary disease, if PaCO2 is 
increased, then PaO2 will always be decreased. Thus, if hy­
poventilation causes hypercapnia, it will also cause hypoxae­
mia. However, hypercapnia is not always present in patients 
who are hypoxaemic. Carbon dioxide can diffuse between 
the blood and the alveolar air more readily than oxygen; 
defects in diffusion rarely cause hypercapnia, although they 
can cause hypoxaemia. Shunting causes a decrease in PaO2, 
but this will stimulate ventilation, increasing the excretion 
of carbon dioxide from ventilated alveoli and preventing a 
rise in PaCO2 or even causing hypocapnia. Only with ex­
tensive shunting will the PaCO2 be increased.
In pulmonary disease causing an increase in 
 im­
balance, there is a tendency for PaO2 to fall, for the rea­
sons discussed above; this will stimulate respiration but, 
while the increased ventilation of well-perfused alveoli 
cannot compensate for the impaired oxygenation, it can 
increase carbon dioxide excretion and PaCO2 fall. With 
more severe disease, however, hypoxaemia will be accom­
panied by hypercapnia.
Respiratory failure, defined by PaO2 being <8 kPa or 
PaCO2 being >7 kPa, is thus divided into two types: type 
I, in which PaO2 is low and PaCO2 is normal or low (typi­
cally seen in condition such as pneumonia, pulmonary 
oedema and acute lung injury, where lung tissue is dam­
aged) and type II, in which PaO2 is low but PaCO2 is high 
(typically seen in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 
and conditions causing hypoventilation).
Oxygen transport to tissues
Oxygen delivery
The transport of oxygen to tissues depends not only on 
adequate transfer of oxygen from the inspired gas to the 
alveolar capillaries, but also on an adequate cardiac out­
put. The total amount of oxygen delivered by the car­
diopulmonary apparatus (DO2) is given by the product of 
oxygen content (CaO2) and cardiac output (CO):
(31)
However, the amount of oxygen available to tissues 
will depend upon local perfusion and the affinity of hae­
moglobin for oxygen, which determines how readily oxy­
gen can be released.
D
C
O
aO
CO
2
2
=
×
90	
Clinical biochemistry
Oxygen uptake
Oxygen is taken up into tissues because their PO2 is 
lower than that of the blood, and oxygen diffuses down 
its concentration gradient. However, examination of the 
­oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve indicates that the 
amount of oxygen taken up will depend on the haemoglo­
bin saturation (SO2) at a given PO2. Mixed venous oxygen 
saturation (SvO2) at rest is approximately 75%, corre­
sponding to a PvO2 of 5.3 kPa and permitting the uptake 
of 46 mL of oxygen from each litre of blood. Resting 
cardiac output is approximately 5 L/min, and total tissue 
uptake of oxygen is about 250 mL/min at rest. However, 
if the oxyhaemoglobin curve were to shift to the left, less 
oxygen would be released from haemoglobin for the same 
fall in pO2, whereas a right shift would increase the avail­
ability of oxygen.
Such shifts occur physiologically. An increase in PCO2 
or [H
+] (both of which occur as blood traverses the cap­
illary beds) causes a right shift, as does an increase in 
temperature. The position of the curve is also deter­
mined by the concentration of 2,3-DPG in erythrocytes. 
An increase in 2,3-DPG concentration (normally about 
4 mmol/L of red cells) causes a right shift. This occurs 
in chronic hypoxia and thus facilitates oxygen uptake by 
tissues. These effects are illustrated in Figure 5.8. The 
position of the oxyhaemoglobin saturation curve can be 
defined by P50, the partial pressure of oxygen at which 
haemoglobin is 50% saturated. It is normally about 
3.7 kPa.
Hypoxia
Tissue hypoxia can be due to a disturbance occurring at 
any stage in the delivery of oxygen to the cells where it is 
utilized (Table 5.4), to increased demand or to deficient 
oxygen uptake. The rational treatment of hypoxia obvi­
ously depends on knowing the cause.
Measurement of oxygen delivery to tissues
This requires determination of arterial oxygen content, 
preferably from measurements of haemoglobin and SaO2, 
and of cardiac output. SaO2 can be calculated from PaO2, 
using an assumed value for P50, but direct measurement, 
by oximetry, is more reliable. It may be possible to infer 
the adequacy of cardiac output from clinical observation, 
but it can be measured directly by the thermodilution 
FIGURE 5.8  ■ The oxygen–haemoglobin dissociation curve. An increase in PCO2, [H
+] or red cell 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) 
causes a right shift in the curve, decreasing the affinity of haemoglobin for oxygen (P50 increased) and increasing the amount of oxy-
gen available to the tissues. A decrease in PCO2, [H
+] or red cell 2,3-DPG causes a left shift, which has the opposite effect.
TABLE 5.4  Factors affecting tissue oxygenation 
and causes of hypoxia
Factor
Cause of hypoxia
Type of 
hypoxia
Inspired oxygen 
content (FiO2)
Low inspired PO2
Low barometric pressure 
(PB)
Hypoxic
Alveolar oxygen 
tension (P aO2)
Hypoventilation
Increased oxygen 
consumption
Increased PaCO2
Hypoxic
Arterial oxygen 
tension (PaO2)
Venous-arterial shunting 
Q
V
 imbalance
Impaired diffusion 
capacity
Hypoxic
Oxygen-carrying 
capacity of 
blood
Low haemoglobin
Low P 50
Anaemic
Blood supply to 
tissues
Low cardiac output
Vasoconstriction
Stagnant
Impaired 
utilization of 
oxygen
Metabolic poisons
Histotoxic
	
5  Hydrogen ion homoeostasis and tissue oxygenation and their disorders	
91
method using a pulmonary artery (Swan–Ganz) catheter 
incorporating a thermistor.
Oximeters – instruments that measure the satura­
tion of haemoglobin with oxygen – are of two types. 
Co-oximeters measure the optical absorbance of blood ­ 
in vitro at multiple wavelengths; because oxyhaemoglo­
bin and deoxygenated haemoglobin (and, indeed, car­
boxyhaemoglobin and methaemoglobin) have different 
absorbance characteristics, these instruments can be cali­
brated to quantitate these species separately, and thus to 
measure SaO2. Pulse oximeters are non-invasive. They 
have sensors that are usually placed on a thin part of the 
patient’s anatomy (e.g. a finger tip or ear lobe) that direct 
light of two wavelengths (660 and 940 nm) through the 
tissue to a detector that measures the relative absorbance 
and hence haemoglobin and oxyhaemoglobin. The influ­
ence of absorption by tissues and venous and capillary 
blood is minimized by measuring the changing absorption 
(hence pulse oximetry) that is due to haemoglobin in ar­
terial blood alone. Reflectance pulse oximeters are also 
available, but are less widely used.
Pulse oximeters do not detect carboxyhaemoglobin 
and other haemoglobin variants and may thus give 
misleading results if these are present. For example, 
while the saturation may be normal (e.g. 97%), if 12% 
of the haemoglobin were to be in the form of carboxy­
haemoglobin, the true percentage of oxyhaemoglobin 
would only be 85% of the total. Pulse co-oximeters 
that combine the two techniques and allow more re­
liable non-invasive measurement of SaO2 have been 
developed.
Most blood gas analysers provide an estimate of SaO2 
based on measurements of [H
+], PaO2 and empirical 
equations. This approach relies on a number of assump­
tions that may not be valid in individual patients, with 
the result that these estimates can vary significantly from 
measured values, particularly if abnormal haemoglobins 
(e.g. carboxy-, methaemoglobin) are present. Direct 
measurements are to be preferred. Blood gas analys­
ers may also provide a value for arterial oxygen content, 
but as with saturation, these are only estimates, not true 
measurements.
Detection of tissue hypoxia
Although the accumulation of lactic acid is a conse­
quence of severe tissue hypoxia, the development of 
hyperlactataemia is a relatively late phenomenon, and 
by the time it is detectable, hypoxic tissue damage may 
already have occurred. Furthermore, it can occur for 
other reasons, for example impaired hepatic function, 
strenuous muscle contraction (not only in exercise but 
also due to rigors or convulsions) and as a result of im­
proved perfusion of previously poorly perfused tissue 
(‘washout’ phenomenon).
The measurement of mixed venous oxygen satura­
tion (SvO2) is now widely used in the assessment of the 
critically ill. SvO2 can be measured either in vitro in 
a blood sample taken through a pulmonary artery cath­
eter or in vivo using a catheter containing fibre-optic 
bundles, which transmit light of appropriate wave­
length to the blood and transmit reflected light back to 
a measuring device. It reflects the difference between 
arterial oxygen supply and tissue consumption. SvO2 
is normally of the order of 75%, but frequently falls 
to 50% or less when there is anaerobic metabolism, 
although such a fall can also be due to appropriately 
increased tissue uptake of oxygen or to a decrease in 
cardiac output. Because the measured SvO2 is effec­
tively a mean value of venous blood from all tissues, it 
can be affected by changes in the relative distribution of 
blood between different tissues. Measurements of SvO2 
can be misleading; in severe sepsis, reduced tissue oxy­
genation is sometimes associated with a high SvO2, as a 
result of impaired oxygen extraction and local arterio­
venous shunting.
Oxygen delivery to tissues (approximately 16 mL/kg 
body weight/min at rest) normally exceeds demand, so 
that if delivery falls demand may still be met and con­
sumption be independent of supply. However, if sup­
ply falls below a critical level (approximately 8 mL/
kg per min), oxygen consumption becomes supply de­
pendent (Fig. 5.9). If this occurs, it may be possible to 
improve oxygenation by the use of inotropes or red cell 
transfusion (to improve supply) or sedation (to reduce 
consumption).
Management of respiratory failure
It is beyond the scope of this book to discuss this topic 
in detail. Appropriate measures, depending on the cause, 
may include treatment of any airways obstruction, infec­
tion or pulmonary oedema, increasing FiO2, improving 
alveolar hypoventilation to decrease PaCO2, using ino­
tropic drugs to stimulate cardiac output, increasing the 
oxygen-carrying capacity of the blood by red cell trans­
fusion and the use of measures to increase tissue perfu­
sion or reverse the effects of toxins. Hypophosphataemia 
is a sometimes unrecognized cause of respiratory muscle 
weakness, especially in the critically ill, as is malnutrition. 
In patients with chronic hypercapnia who are hypoxae­
mic, it has long been thought that increasing the FiO2 
is potentially dangerous. The rationale for this notion 
FIGURE  5.9  ■  Oxygen delivery to, and consumption by, tis-
sues. Normally, consumption is independent of delivery; when 
delivery falls below a critical level, it results in decreased 
consumption.
92	
Clinical biochemistry
is that acquired insensitivity of the respiratory centre to 
carbon dioxide can cause hypoxaemia to be providing the 
major stimulus to respiratory effort, and that its abolition 
would lead to respiratory arrest. However, hypoxaemia is 
a greater threat to life than hypercapnia, and this danger 
is now thought too have been exaggerated.
There are many techniques for improving alveolar 
hypoventilation, including the provision of invasive re­
spiratory support through the use of a mechanical ven­
tilators or even extracorporeal oxygenation techniques. 
Ventilators may be used in a variety of modalities, for 
example to take over completely a patient’s breathing 
(e.g. when there is paralysis of the respiratory muscles or 
in deep coma leading to absent or poor respiratory effort) 
or to provide assistance to inspiratory efforts initiated by 
the patient. However, mechanical ventilation, although a 
potentially life-saving technique in critical hypoxia, is not 
without its disadvantages, including impaired cardiac fill­
ing (and hence a decrease in cardiac output); too rapid a 
fall in PaCO2; depressing the normal respiratory drive; 
dilutional hyponatraemia due to inappropriate anti­
diuresis, and a risk of mechanical damage to the airways 
and lungs (which may already be damaged). Oxygen in 
high concentrations is potentially toxic, and the lowest 
concentration compatible with reversing and preventing 
hypoxia should be used.
Ventilatory support is not synonymous with invasive 
mechanical ventilation. Patients able to breathe sponta­
neously may be helped by the maintenance of continu­
ous positive airways pressure (CPAP) through the use of 
tight-fitting nasal or facial masks. The increased pressure 
aids gas entry during inspiration and reduces airways col­
lapse during expiration.
CONCLUSION
Disorders of hydrogen ion metabolism and of tissue oxy­
genation are frequently encountered in clinical practice 
and may coexist, often because of a common aetiology, 
but sometimes because of a direct effect of one upon the 
other. For both groups of disorders, a sound understand­
ing of the physiological principles governing homoeosta­
sis in normal individuals is essential for correct diagnosis 
and effective management. These principles are essen­
tially simple, and pertain no matter how complex any 
particular disturbance may appear.
Further reading
Adrogué HJ, Madias NE. Renal tubular acidosis. In: Davison AM, 
Cameron JS, Grünfeld J-P et al. editors. Oxford textbook of clinical 
nephrology. 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2005. p. 976–94. 
A thorough review of these disorders.
Adrogué HJ, Gennan FJ, Gala JH et al. Assessing acid–base disorders. 
Kidney Int 2009;76:1239–47. 
This review provides a succinct description and comparison of the approaches 
to assessing acid–base disorders (including the strong ion approach) with 
numerous references, convincingly arguing that the physiological approach 
is to be preferred.
Cohen RD, Woods HF. Disturbances of acid–base homeostasis. 
In: Warrell DA, Cox TM, Firth JD, editors. Oxford textbook of 
medicine. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2010. p. 1738–51. 
In addition to providing a detailed account of non-respiratory acid–base 
disorders, this chapter also emphasizes the importance of the liver in acid–
base homoeostasis.
Gentile M, Davies JD. Bedside monitoring of pulmonary function. 
In: Vincent J-L, Abraham E, Moore FA et al. editors. Textbook of 
critical care. 6th ed. Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders; 2011. p. 279–87. 
A clear explanation of the principles, use and disadvantages of pulse 
oximetry and other bedside techniques.
Marini J, Dries DJ. Principles of gas exchange. In: Vincent J-L, 
Abraham E, Moore FA et al. editors. Textbook of critical care. 6th ed. 
Philadelphia: Elsevier Saunders; 2011. p. 288–95. 
A clearly written account of respiratory gas transport.
Palmer BP, Narins RG, Yee J. Clinical acid–base disorders. In: Davison AM, 
Cameron JS, Grünfeld J-P et  al. editors. Oxford textbook of clinical 
nephrology. 3rd ed Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2005. p. 321–46. 
A comprehensive account of non-respiratory disorders, with particularly 
good coverage of pathophysiology and extensive references.
Stewart PA. Independent and dependent variables of acid–base control. 
Respir Physiol 1978;33:9–26. 
The first description of the strong ion theory.
Critical Care Medicine Tutorials. http://www.ccmtutorials.com/rs/
oxygen/page11.htm; [Accessed 19.01.12].
A succinct explanation of the concept of delivery dependent oxygen 
consumption.
93
C H A P T E R  6
Calcium, phosphate 
and magnesium
Timothy Cundy  • Andrew Grey  •  Ian R. Reid
CHAPTER OUTLINE
CALCIUM METABOLISM  93
Biological role of calcium  93
Distribution of calcium  93
Calcium fluxes  94
Regulation of calcium metabolism  95
Biochemical assessment of calcium 
metabolism  99
Hypercalcaemia  100
Hypocalcaemia  105
PHOSPHORUS METABOLISM  109
Distribution of body phosphorus  109
Hyperphosphataemia  113
Hypophosphataemia  115
MAGNESIUM METABOLISM  117
Plasma magnesium  117
Magnesium homoeostasis  117
Hypomagnesaemia  118
Hypermagnesaemia  121
CONCLUSION  121
APPENDICES  121
CALCIUM METABOLISM
Biological role of calcium
Calcium is a divalent cation with multiple roles in 
­vertebrate physiology, which can be grouped as either 
structural or metabolic. Its structural role is in the skel-
eton where calcium deficiency leads to skeletal disease, 
either in the form of osteoporosis or osteomalacia. Its 
metabolic roles are more numerous.
The extracellular concentration of calcium ions influ-
ences the threshold for nerve action potentials, a high 
­calcium raising the threshold and a low calcium having the 
opposite effect. The extracellular calcium ­concentration 
appears to alter the gating of sodium and potassium chan-
nels, possibly the result of calcium ions being ­attracted to 
and ‘screening’ the negative charge on the cell surface in 
the region of these channels.
Calcium has a key role in intracellular signalling. The 
depolarization of nerve or muscle cells, or the binding of a 
hormone or cytokine to its receptor on the surface of other 
types of cell, results in an increase in ­cytosolic ­calcium 
concentration via either one or both of two mechanisms: 
the influx of calcium through plasma membrane channels 
and the release of calcium from intracellular stores (e.g. 
the sarcoplasmic or endoplasmic reticulum). The ­latter 
pathway depends on receptor-­activated ­hydrolysis of 
­inositol phospholipids in the plasma membrane, leading 
to the release of inositol trisphosphate into the cytosol. 
This compound binds to a receptor on the endoplasmic 
reticulum resulting in the release of calcium into the 
­cytosol. The regulation of a variety of cell functions can 
then follow, some enzymes being directly affected by the 
cytosolic calcium concentration (e.g. protein kinase C) 
and others indirectly by the calcium receptor protein, 
calmodulin. These pathways are integral to muscle con-
traction, neuroendocrine secretion, cell metabolism and 
growth.
Distribution of calcium
The total body calcium in a human adult is approxi-
mately 1 kg, 99% of which is contained in the skeleton. 
Approximately 1% of skeletal calcium is freely ex-
changeable with calcium in the extracellular fluid (ECF). 
Calcium ions diffuse freely throughout the extra­cellular 
space, where their concentration is approximately 
1.2 mmol/L. The plasma ionized calcium concentration 
is the same, but the plasma total calcium is approxi-
mately two-fold higher because of protein binding of 
calcium. Calcium also forms complexes with phosphate, 
citrate and bicarbonate in plasma and interstitial fluid 
(Table 6.1). It is the ionized calcium concentration that 
is physiologically important and closely regulated.
Calcium is principally an extracellular ion; cytosolic 
concentrations are of the order of 10
−4 to 10
−3 mmol/L. 
The low intracellular calcium concentration is necessary 
for calcium to function as an intracellular messenger. It 
is maintained by calcium pumps and exchangers on cell 
membranes. The endoplasmic reticulum and the mito-
chondria also have the capacity to remove calcium from 
the cytosol.
94	
Clinical biochemistry
Calcium fluxes
Three principal organs are involved in the body’s han-
dling of calcium: the gastrointestinal tract, bone and the 
kidneys (Fig. 6.1).
Gastrointestinal tract
Intestinal absorption of calcium is mediated by two 
mechanisms. One is an active transcellular process, 
regulated by calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D; 
1,25(OH)2D) in the duodenum. This involves uptake 
of calcium into the ­enterocyte by TRPV6 (membrane 
calcium channel ­transient receptor potential cation 
channel, subfamily V, member 6), followed by intracel-
lular binding of calcium to the calcium-binding ­protein 
CaBP-9k, then energy-dependent transport of the 
­calcium across the basolateral membrane via PMCA1b, 
an alternatively spliced transcript of plasma membrane 
Ca
2+-ATPase. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D increases gene 
expression of TRPV6 and CaBP-9k, thus increasing 
calcium absorption. Calcium is also absorbed passively 
throughout the small intestine and possibly in the colon. 
Because the duodenum is relatively short compared to 
the rest of the small bowel, it may account for less than 
half of the calcium absorbed at normal dietary intakes, 
despite its greater absorptive capacity per unit length. 
At low calcium intakes, active absorption predominates, 
but this is saturable, and at higher intakes, the change in 
net absorbed calcium in relation to any change in intake 
is relatively small and mediated by passive paracellular 
absorption.
The gut not only absorbs calcium but also secretes it 
in the digestive juices. The unabsorbed portion of this se-
creted calcium (approximately 2–3 mmol/24 h) is known 
as the endogenous faecal calcium. Thus at very low in-
takes, the absorbed dietary calcium will be less than that 
lost from secretion in digestive juice and the net calcium 
absorption will be negative. Net calcium absorption is 
positive in healthy adults when their daily calcium intake 
is greater than 5 mmol.
The absorption of calcium is influenced by other 
dietary constituents. The presence of anions such 
as phosphate, oxalate (found in some fruit and veg-
etables) and phytate (found in some unrefined cereals) 
diminishes calcium solubility and thus net absorption. 
Gastrointestinal absorption of calcium tends to decline 
with age, but is increased during pregnancy and lacta-
tion. The principal regulator of intestinal absorption is 
1,25(OH)2D, and so either deficiency or excess of this 
hormone is associated with parallel changes in calcium 
absorption.
The average calcium intake of healthy adults con-
suming a Western diet is about 20 mmol/day, of which 
20–40% is absorbed. The principal source of calcium in 
the Western diet is dairy products. There are significant 
amounts of calcium in some green vegetables such as 
spinach, though the bioavailability is lower.
Kidneys
The ionized and complexed fractions of plasma calcium 
are filtered at the glomeruli, amounting to approximately 
250 mmol/24 h. Of this, ~98% is reabsorbed, mostly 
in the proximal tubules. Calcium reabsorption in the 
proximal tubules is through a paracellular, therefore 
passive, process, which is closely linked with that of so-
dium and does not appear to be hormonally regulated. 
The fine-tuning of calcium excretion occurs in the distal 
parts of the nephrons where ~15% of the filtered load is 
­reabsorbed. This section consists of the distal convoluted 
tubules, the connecting tubules and the initial portion of 
the cortical collecting ducts. In these distal sites, calcium 
reabsorption is active and occurs against an electrochemi-
cal gradient.
Active calcium reabsorption is a multistep process 
with initial passage of Ca
2+ across the luminal membrane 
through the epithelial channel TRPV5 (membrane cal-
cium channel transient receptor potential cation channel, 
subfamily V, member 5), then cytosolic diffusion bound 
to vitamin D-sensitive calcium-binding proteins (calbi-
ndins), and finally active extrusion across the opposite 
basolateral membrane by a Na
+, Ca
2+-exchanger (NCX1) 
TABLE 6.1  Distribution of plasma calcium
Fraction
Total (%)
Ultrafilterable
53
  Ionized
47
  Complexed
  6
Protein bound
47
  Albumin
37
  Globulin
10
Total (2.2–2.6  mmol/L)
100
** Intestinal
absorption 8.3
Digestive juice 4
Food
20
Formation
5
Filtered
250
Kidneys
Intestine
24
Calcium
pool
Bone
Sweat
0.3
Urine
4
Reabsorbed
246
*
Resorption
*   5
Faeces
15.7
FIGURE  6.1  ■  Representative calcium fluxes (mmol/24 h) in a 
healthy adult (70 kg body weight) in zero calcium balance. The 
rapid exchange of calcium on bone surfaces and the exchange 
in soft tissues are not illustrated in this diagram. The major sites 
of action of parathyroid hormone (*) and 1,25(OH)2D (**) are 
indicated. (Modified from Wilkinson R. Absorption of calcium, phos-
phorus and magnesium. In: Nordin B E C (ed). Calcium, phosphate 
and magnesium metabolism. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 
1976, with permission).
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
95
and/or Ca
2+-ATPase (PMCA1b). This active calcium re-
absorption is subject to hormonal regulation – principally 
by parathyroid hormone (PTH) and extracellular calcium 
itself, but possibly also by 1,25(OH)2D, calcitonin, oes-
trogens and androgens.
Urine calcium excretion is increased in subjects con-
suming a high protein diet, because of acid production 
in the metabolism of sulphur-containing amino acids and 
sequestration of calcium by sulphate in the urine, result-
ing in inhibition of calcium reabsorption. Sodium intake 
can also influence calcium excretion by affecting proxi-
mal tubular sodium and calcium reabsorption (increased 
sodium intake increasing calcium excretion). Other fac-
tors that increase renal tubular calcium reabsorption are 
hypovolaemia, alkalosis and thiazide diuretics, whereas 
volume expansion, acidosis and loop diuretics (e.g. furo-
semide) have the opposite effect.
Bone
In the mature adult, the movement of calcium into bone 
equals its rate of efflux and bone mass remains constant. 
The situation is different in both growth and senescence. 
In spite of this constancy of adult bone mass, there is an 
active exchange of calcium between bone and the ECF. 
This can take place as a result of bone remodelling (see 
Chapter 31), or it can be accomplished by a process of 
mineral exchange between bone and the ECF, without 
local changes in bone matrix. Bone remodelling accounts 
for the changes in bone density that take place with age-
ing or disease. In the healthy adult, about 5% of the entire 
skeleton is remodelled in one year. In contrast, radioiso-
tope studies have indicated that 1–2% of total body cal-
cium can be exchanged between the bone and ECF over 
a period of several days. The precise mechanisms of this 
exchange and the factors influencing it are not known, 
but the quantities of calcium involved suggest that it may 
be an important part of normal calcium homoeostasis.
Calcium losses in sweat are in the order of 
0.3 mmol/24 h. Breast milk has a high calcium content 
(~7.5 mmol/L) and a breast-feeding woman can lose 
4–8 mmol/24 h in her milk.
Regulation of calcium metabolism
Plasma calcium concentration is principally controlled by 
PTH and 1,25(OH)2D. Calcitonin may also be regarded 
as a calcitropic hormone, although it has no clearly de-
fined physiological function in humans. Many other hor-
mones, growth factors and cytokines can influence bone 
metabolism.
Parathyroid hormone
Parathyroid hormone is an 84-amino acid, single-chain 
polypeptide secreted by the parathyroid glands. The 
gene is on chromosome 11 and consists of three exons 
encoding a peptide of 115 amino acids (pre-pro-PTH), 
which is cleaved to produce pro-PTH (90 amino acids) 
and subsequently the mature peptide (84 amino acids), 
before secretion. Most of the biological activity of PTH 
appears to reside in the 34 amino acids at the N-terminal 
end of the peptide.
The principal regulator of PTH secretion is the 
ECF ionized calcium concentration: low concentra-
tions ­stimulate secretion and high concentrations inhibit 
it. This regulation is mediated by the calcium sensing 
­receptor (CaSR), a cell membrane-bound, G-protein-
coupled receptor. The relationship between PTH 
­secretion and ionized calcium concentrations is not lin-
ear. Marked ­hysteresis is evident from experiments where 
ionized calcium concentrations are raised or ­lowered. 
The PTH concentration at any given concentration of 
plasma ionized calcium is lower when the ionized ­calcium 
concentration is rising than it is when ionized calcium is 
falling (Fig. 6.2). Plasma PTH concentrations exhibit a 
diurnal variation. They are stable during the afternoon 
and evening, but then rise by about 50% to peak at around 
02.00 h and subsequently fall to values approximately 
50% below afternoon values around 09.00 h. The zenith 
to nadir difference (in healthy men) is ~2.3 pmol/L, using 
an intact PTH assay.
Many other factors have been shown to influence 
PTH secretion, including 1,25(OH)2D, adrenergic ago-
nists, prostaglandins and magnesium, but whether any of 
these are physiologically important is debatable. Severe 
magnesium deficiency can produce a state of reversible 
hypoparathyroidism.
Parathyroid hormone binds to cell surface receptors in 
its target tissues. The PTH receptor has seven transmem-
brane domains, an extensive extracellular domain involved 
in hormone binding and an intracellular domain regulat-
ing intracellular signalling. In its two principal target tis-
sues, bone and kidney, this results in activation of both 
adenylate cyclase (with production of cyclic adenosine 
FIGURE 6.2  ■  Mean concentrations of plasma intact PTH in re-
lation to plasma ionized calcium concentration in response to 
infusions of citrate (■) and calcium gluconate (●), and during 
recovery from hypocalcaemia () and hypercalcaemia (). For 
any given ionized calcium concentration, the PTH concentration 
is lower when the ionized calcium is rising than when it is ­falling. 
(Data from Conlin P R et al. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and 
Metabolism 1989; 69:593–599, with permission of the Endocrine 
Society).
96	
Clinical biochemistry
monophosphate, cAMP) and phospholipase C (with produc-
tion of inositol trisphosphate) and subsequent mobilization 
of intracellular calcium.
In bone, PTH receptors are present on cells of osteo-
blastic lineage. The osteoblasts in turn regulate osteoclast 
maturation through production of RANKL (receptor ac-
tivator of nuclear factor κ-B ligand), which binds to the 
receptor, RANK, on pre-osteoclasts, leading to their 
maturation to osteoclasts. This process is modulated by 
osteoblast production of osteoprotegerin (OPG), which 
can also bind RANK-ligand, thus reducing its binding to 
RANK and so the stimulation of osteoclastogenesis.
Parathyroid hormone has three principal actions on 
the kidneys. It reduces proximal tubular reabsorption 
of phosphate, increases distal tubular reabsorption of 
­calcium and increases the activity of the 25-hydroxyvita-
min D 1α-hydroxylase enzyme in proximal tubular cells. 
It  also decreases proximal reabsorption of bicarbonate, 
leading to a mild hyperchloraemic acidosis in states of 
PTH excess.
Measurement of circulating parathyroid hormone. 
The development of assays for PTH has greatly simplified 
the investigation of patients with abnormal plasma cal-
cium concentrations, but these assays do have limitations. 
The parathyroid gland secretes both the intact 84-amino 
acid peptide and inactive PTH fragments. Hepatic and 
renal metabolism of intact PTH results in the appear-
ance of mid-region and carboxy-terminal peptides in the 
circulation. In vivo, the principal biologically active pep-
tide is intact parathyroid hormone, which is present at a 
low concentration (1–5 pmol/L) and has a short half-life 
(2–4 min). However, mid-molecule and carboxy-terminal 
fragments have significantly longer half-lives and accu-
mulate in concentrations 5–20 times greater than that of 
the intact peptide. These inactive fragments are cleared 
by the kidneys and their concentrations increase sub-
stantially in the presence of renal insufficiency. Although 
these fragments are not biologically active, they may be 
immunoreactive, if they cross-react with the particular 
antibodies used in the immunoassay. Assays that detect 
inactive fragments, therefore, report higher PTH con-
centrations than those that detect the intact molecule.
In recent years, two-site and immunoassays of ‘intact’ 
PTH, which purportedly measure only the biologically 
active intact peptide, have been widely used. However, 
there is evidence that these first-generation assays for 
intact PTH also detect non-(1–84)-PTH peptides, in 
particular PTH 7–84, which may have different biologi-
cal actions from the full-length peptide. Assays based on 
antibodies directed at the first four amino acids of PTH 
(second-generation intact PTH assays) reveal that non-
(1–84)-PTH peptides account for about 15% of circulat-
ing immunoreactive PTH (as detected by first-generation 
assays) in healthy patients, and at least 30% in patients 
with either primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism. 
There is also evidence that some non-intact peptides 
might be biologically active, possibly antagonizing the 
actions of the intact hormone. Whether assays based on 
antibodies directed at the extreme N-terminus of PTH 
offer important clinical advantage in the management of 
either primary hyperparathyroidism or renal bone disease 
over the widely available first-generation intact PTH im-
munoassays remains uncertain.
Both mid-molecule and intact PTH assays show 
an increase in reference values with age, though this is 
more marked for the mid-molecule assays because of 
increased fragment accumulation secondary to the age-
related decline in renal function. Because of the effect of 
renal function on measurements using mid-molecule and 
carboxy-terminal PTH assays, their interpretation must 
always take into account the patient’s estimated GFR. 
Owing to the heterogeneity of PTH immunoassays cur-
rently in use, it is important that laboratories use assay-
specific data for reference ranges and the ranges of values 
to be expected in hyperparathyroidism, hypercalcaemia 
of malignancy, hypoparathyroidism and renal disease. 
Failure to do so may result in inappropriate management 
of patients with renal disease.
The action of PTH on the kidney causes cAMP to ap-
pear in the urine. ‘Nephrogenous’ cAMP has been used 
in the past as a surrogate measure of PTH. Its current 
use is limited to the evaluation of PTH resistance (see 
Appendix 6.3, below).
Classification of hyperparathyroidism. Increases in 
plasma concentrations of PTH are seen in a variety of 
circumstances. It is useful clinically to distinguish condi-
tions in which the increased secretion of PTH is a nor-
mal physiological response to hypocalcaemia (secondary 
hyperparathyroidism) from those in which hypersecre-
tion of PTH is the principal abnormality (primary hy-
perparathyroidism). If secondary hyperparathyroidism 
persists over long periods then the parathyroids can 
become hyperplastic. A gradual rise in plasma calcium 
accompanies this change and overt hypercalcaemia can 
develop. This is known as tertiary hyperparathyroidism, 
and arises chiefly in long-term dialysis patients, but it has 
also been described in patients with malabsorption syn-
dromes. This classification is unsatisfactory in some re-
spects. For example, the kidney transplant recipient with 
hypercalcaemia due to hyperparathyroidism that devel-
oped while on dialysis is difficult to categorize.
An alternative classification, which has the attraction 
of being more closely related to treatment stratagems, 
is to describe hyperparathyroidism in relation to the 
prevailing plasma calcium concentration. Thus, hyper-
parathyroidism can be described as hypocalcaemic, nor-
mocalcaemic or hypercalcaemic.
Vitamin D
Synthesis and metabolism. Vitamins are defined as es-
sential organic compounds that the body cannot synthe-
size, and are therefore a vital component of the diet. The 
term ‘vitamin D’ is a misnomer as the majority of vitamin 
D is synthesized in the skin by the action of ultraviolet light 
on 7-dehydrocholesterol (Fig. 6.3). This produces chole-
calciferol (vitamin D3). Vitamin D is present in a variety 
of foodstuffs. It can be added to food in the form of ergo-
calciferol (vitamin D2 – an additive to margarine and some 
breakfast cereals and, in the USA, to milk) or may occur 
naturally in animal products in the form of cholecalciferol. 
Fish oils are the richest dietary source of cholecalciferol.
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
97
In most respects, these two forms of vitamin D have 
similar metabolism and action. The calciferols are fat sol-
uble and large quantities can be stored in adipose tissue. 
They are virtually without biological activity unless they 
have been hydroxylated. Hydroxylation by the enzyme 
vitamin D 25-hydroxylase (CYP2R1), takes place in the 
liver producing 25-hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D, cal-
cidiol), which is the principal circulating metabolite and 
the prohormone for 1,25(OH)2D (calcitriol). The depen-
dence on dermal synthesis for provision of vitamin D is 
well illustrated by the marked variation in plasma 25(OH)
D concentrations through the year in non-tropical areas 
of the world, where values are significantly higher in sum-
mer and autumn than in winter and spring. The vitamin 
D metabolites circulate in plasma bound to an α-globulin, 
vitamin D-binding protein and, to a lesser extent, to 
albumin (Table 6.2).
Most of the circulating 25(OH)D is metabolized in 
the liver via intermediates such as 23,25(OH)2D and 
25,26(OH)2D into inactive metabolites that are ­excreted 
into the bile. A small proportion of ­circulating 25(OH)
D undergoes further hydroxylation in the cells of the 
proximal renal tubules to produce either 1,25(OH)2D or 
24,25(OH)2D (secalciferol). The principal active metabo-
lite of vitamin D is 1,25(OH)2D. Although ­circulating 
concentrations of 24,25(OH)2D are normally ten times 
greater than those of 1,25(OH)2D, it has no definite 
physiological role.
In contrast to hepatic 25-hydroxylation, renal 
­1α-hydroxylation is closely regulated, being enhanced 
by low circulating concentrations of phosphate and 
1,25(OH)2D, and by high concentrations of PTH, 
and suppressed by high concentrations of the ­bone-derived 
hormone fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23). When 
the plasma concentration of phosphate is high and 
PTH low, 1α-hydroxylase activity (enzyme CYP27B1) 
­decreases and that of 24-hydroxylase (enzyme CYP24B) 
becomes greater. Other factors may also influence ­renal 
­hydroxylation of vitamin D. In vitro, low calcium can stim-
ulate ­1α-hydroxylation ­independently of PTH, ­although 
whether this is significant in vivo is not known. Direct or 
indirect effects of growth hormone, prolactin, oestrogens 
and calcitonin have also been described.
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D is inactivated by the for-
mation of more polar metabolites, which are excreted 
­primarily into bile. Over 96% of all vitamin D is ­ultimately 
eliminated through the bile into the faeces. Since this 
­excretion is largely in the form of inactive metabolites, 
it is doubtful if there is any enterohepatic recycling of 
physiological importance.
Although the kidneys are undoubtedly the major source 
of production of 1,25(OH)2D, there is evidence from 
­anephric haemodialysis patients that small quantities can 
be synthesized extrarenally. In pregnancy, 1,25(OH)2D is 
synthesized in the placenta, and in a variety of granulo-
matous diseases (sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, berylliosis) the 
macrophages of the granulomata can also 1α-hydroxylate 
vitamin D. In these circumstances, the synthesis is sub-
strate dependent, meaning that the more 25(OH)D that 
is available, the more 1,25(OH)2D is synthesized.
Actions. Vitamin D metabolites act via a cytosolic re-
ceptor that is translocated to the nucleus where it regu-
lates gene expression. The vitamin D receptor is similar 
in structure to the steroid and thyroid hormone recep-
tors, having an amino-terminal domain, a central DNA-
binding domain with ‘zinc fingers’ and a carboxy-terminal 
hormone-binding domain. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D 
has an affinity for the vitamin D receptor that is ap-
proximately 1000 times greater than that of 25(OH)D, 
which in turn is an order of magnitude more potent 
than 24,25(OH)2D. However, the circulating concen-
tration of 25(OH)D is substantially greater than that 
7-dehydrocholesterol
Ultraviolet
light
Calciferol
+
+
+
+
Dietary
sources
25(OH)D
1,25(OH)2D
PTH
Phosphate
Key
+ stimulation
- inhibition
GH(?)
- FGF23
1,25(OH)2D
1,25(OH)2D
24,25(OH)2D
23,25(OH)2D
25,26(OH)2D
Skin
Liver
Liver
Kidney
FIGURE 6.3  ■  A summary of vitamin D metabolism. Factors stimu-
lating (+) or inhibiting (−) metabolic conversions are indicated. All 
the dihydroxylated metabolites of renal or hepatic origin are fur-
ther metabolized before excretion. Ultimately, most vitamin D is 
excreted through the bile into the faeces, in the form of inert me-
tabolites. FGF23, fibroblast growth factor 23; GH, growth hormone.
TABLE 6.2  Circulating concentrations of vitamin D metabolites
Metabolite
Concentration
% Bound to DBP
c
% Bound to albumin
% Free
Calciferol
2.5–5.0 nmol/L
 
 
 
25-hydroxyvitamin D
50–125 nmol/L
a
88
12
0.03%
1,25-hydroxyvitamin D
50–150 pmol/L
b
85
15
0.5%
24,25-hydroxyvitamin D
1.3–3.8 nmol/L
 
 
 
aHigher in summer/autumn than winter/spring; 
bhigher in pregnancy and during puberty.
cVitamin D binding protein. Interconversions: 10 nmol ≡ 4 μg ≡ 160 international units.
98	
Clinical biochemistry
of 1,25(OH)2D, so it is possible that this metabolite has 
some biologically significant effect.
The principal site of action of 1,25(OH)2D is the intes-
tine, where it stimulates the production of the calcium 
­channels TRPV6 and TRPV5, and the ­calcium-binding 
protein CaBP-9k. In bone, it is a potent osteolytic ­factor 
in vitro, acting through osteoblast RANK-ligand produc-
tion to bring about fusion of osteoclast precursors to form 
­mature osteoclasts. The physiological importance of its 
bone ­resorbing effect is uncertain. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin 
D also has direct effects on the liver and kidney. In the 
liver, it enhances the production of inactive 25(OH)D de-
rived metabolites that are excreted in the bile, and in the 
kidney it stimulates the 24,25-hydroxylase – both these 
mechanisms protect against chronically high 1,25(OH)2D 
concentrations.
Several cells and tissues other than those involved in 
calcium and phosphorus metabolism, including mac-
rophages, activated T-lymphocytes, the placenta and 
keratinocytes, express vitamin D receptors and/or the 
1α-hydroxylase enzyme, suggesting that their functions 
might be regulated by components of the vitamin D 
system. Many malignant cells also express the vitamin 
D ­receptor. There is evidence that 1,25(OH)2D de-
creases the growth of several cancer cell lines, and slows 
or prevents the growth and/or development of cancers 
and autoimmune diseases in rodents. Genetic ablation 
of vitamin D signaling, by deleting the genes encoding 
either the vitamin D receptor or 1α-hydroxylase, leads 
to renin-­dependent hypertension and an increased pro-
pensity to tumour development. The consequences of 
complete absence of vitamin D signaling in rodents, 
however, are likely to be very different from minor 
decreases in 25(OH)D in humans. At present, there is 
no robust clinical trial evidence that vitamin D supple-
ments or bioactive vitamin D analogues favourably 
influence important outcomes such as cancer, hyper-
tension or autoimmune diseases. Accordingly, vitamin 
D supplements are not indicated in the management of 
non-skeletal diseases.
Synthetic vitamin D analogues. A variety of 
1,25(OH)2D analogues have been synthesized. 1α-
Hydroxyvitamin D3 (alfacalcidol) is rapidly metabo-
lized by the liver into 1,25(OH)2D and, although having 
roughly half the potency of 1,25(OH)2D on a weight 
basis, is similarly useful in conditions where the 1α-
hydroxylation step is impaired. A similar preparation, 
1α-hydroxyvitamin D2 (doxercalciferol) is also marketed. 
Other analogues such as 26,27-­hexafluorocalcitriol are 
more potent calcaemic agents.
A number of analogues with attenuated calcaemic 
properties have also been developed. Examples include 
calcipotriol (used in the treatment of psoriasis), parical-
citol (used in some countries in the treatment of hyper-
parathyroidism in chronic renal failure) and eldecalcitol 
(which has been investigated in osteoporosis). The di-
vergent effects of these analogues on cell differentiation, 
PTH secretion and calcium homoeostasis probably re-
flect pharmacokinetic differences rather than distinct 
1,25(OH)2D-sensitive pathways, since there is no evi-
dence that they act through different receptors.
Measurement of vitamin D metabolites. Measurements 
of 25(OH)D and 1,25(OH)2D can be of value in clinical 
practice, though the indications for 1,25(OH)2D mea-
surement are relatively few (e.g. obscure causes of hyper-
calcaemia). 25-Hydroxyvitamin D is the best measure of 
vitamin D status. While its synthesis is dependent upon 
25-hydroxylation in the liver, even advanced liver disease 
does not seem to be a limiting factor in its production. 
Free concentrations are normal in most patients with 
­cirrhosis, though total concentrations may be low because 
of associated hypoproteinaemia. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin 
D is present in concentrations only 1000th of those of its 
precursor (see Table 6.2). Its production is closely regu-
lated and so is not tied to concentrations of its precursor, 
except in patients with severe vitamin D deficiency or in 
granulomatous disease. Renal disease has a major impact 
on its circulating concentrations, as do states of parathy-
roid over- or underactivity.
A variety of assays have been used in the past, and a 
number have been withdrawn from the market because 
of unsatisfactory performance characteristics. Cross-
calibration of available assays has not always been within 
acceptable limits. The reference method uses liquid 
chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (MS/
MS), but as this is an expensive assay to run, many labo-
ratories use immunoassays based on automated plat-
forms. The acceptability of this compromise depends 
on the performance characteristics and calibration of 
the particular ­assay platform. Some of the commercially 
available assays have limited ability to measure 25(OH)
D2, which may be important when supplementation has 
been provided in the form of vitamin D2. It is evident 
that significant variation can occur in measurement of 
vitamin D metabolites, as a result both of differences 
between the available assays and in the implementation 
within individual laboratories.
Calcitonin
Calcitonin is a 32-amino acid peptide produced in hu-
mans in the parafollicular cells (C cells) of the thyroid 
gland. It contains a disulphide bridge and a proline-amide 
group at the C-terminus. Both of these and the full amino 
acid sequence are necessary for biological activity. It is 
metabolized in the kidneys and has a plasma half-life of 
approximately 5 min.
Secretion of calcitonin is stimulated by an increase in 
plasma calcium concentration and it is also released in 
­response to a number of gut hormones (e.g. gastrin, glu-
cagon, secretin, cholecystokinin-pancreozymin). It  re-
duces plasma calcium concentration by a direct ­effect on 
osteoclasts, which have a cell surface calcitonin ­receptor 
linked to adenylate cyclase. It causes contraction of os-
teoclasts and an acute reduction in osteoclastic bone re-
sorption. It also acts on the kidneys, where it decreases 
renal tubular reabsorption of calcium and phosphate.
Despite these clearly documented actions, its physio-
logical significance is uncertain because its actions ­appear 
to be transient. Furthermore, chronic calcitonin defi-
ciency (as in patients post-thyroidectomy) or excess (as 
in medullary carcinoma of the thyroid) do not result in 
significant changes in bone or mineral metabolism.
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
99
There are a number of different forms of calcitonin 
in the circulation, many of which are not biologically 
active. Thus, different immunoassays may detect differ-
ent molecular species. The measurement of calcitonin 
does not form a significant part of the clinical evaluation 
of ­calcium metabolism, but it is an important tumour 
marker for medullary carcinoma of the thyroid.
Procalcitonin. Procalcitonin, the 116 amino acid pep-
tide precursor of calcitonin, is produced not only by thy-
roid C-cells but also by the neuroendocrine cells of the 
lung and the intestine. The amount of procalcitonin pro-
duced by the cells of the lung and the intestine increases 
in ­response to proinflammatory stimuli, especially of bac-
terial origin. Measurement of procalcitonin can be used 
as a marker of severe sepsis and generally correlates well 
with the degree of sepsis.
Other hormones
A number of hormones influence calcium and bone me-
tabolism in  vitro, in normal physiology or in specific 
pathological circumstances. The oestrogen deficiency 
that develops at the time of the menopause results in 
­increases in cytokine production which leads to increases 
in bone resorption. Direct effects of oestrogen on os-
teoclasts and on osteoblastic production of RANKL and 
­osteoprotegerin are also important. Calcium absorption in 
the gut and reabsorption in the kidney are both ­reduced, 
and plasma calcium concentrations rise. These changes 
lead to a reduction in bone mass, but are ­reversible with 
oestrogen replacement therapy. Similarly, testosterone 
deficiency in men predisposes to osteoporosis, partly 
through loss of its direct anabolic effects on muscle and 
on osteoblasts, and partly through diminished conversion 
to oestrogen. Glucocorticoids can cause marked osteopo-
rosis. These hormones act at a number of sites and reduce 
osteoblastic activity, induce apoptosis of osteoblasts and 
osteocytes, reduce intestinal calcium absorption, increase 
urinary calcium loss and probably increase bone resorp-
tion. In children, glucocorticoid excess causes marked 
growth retardation. Glucocorticoid deficiency may be as-
sociated with hypercalcaemia.
Growth hormone accelerates linear growth in children 
and increases plasma phosphate concentration by in-
creasing renal tubular reabsorption of phosphate. These 
­effects are probably mediated by growth hormone-­
induced changes in the production of insulin-like growth 
factor 1 (IGF-1, somatomedin C). There is controversy 
as to the effect of the growth hormone–somatomedin axis 
on bone density.
Subjects with high total body fat mass have been 
shown to have higher bone densities. This appears to be 
mediated by a number of hormonal mechanisms. Insulin 
is anabolic to bone in vitro, and obesity is usually associ-
ated with hyperinsulinaemia. At least two other anabolic 
peptides, amylin and preptin, are co-secreted with insu-
lin and may contribute to the relationship. Leptin has 
been shown in vitro to stimulate osteoblast growth di-
rectly and to inhibit osteoclast development, so it is also 
likely to be an important factor. In contrast, when leptin 
is ­administered into the third ventricle of the brains of 
experimental animals, there is a profound reduction in 
appetite and fat mass, with resultant loss of bone mass. 
There is some evidence that central leptin administration 
activates the sympathetic nervous system and that this 
might also contribute to bone loss.
Thyroid hormones are potent stimulators of bone re-
sorption, and thyrotoxicosis can be associated with de-
creased bone density and hypercalcaemia. Prostaglandins 
of the E series also stimulate bone resorption in  vitro. 
Parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) is a 
141-amino acid peptide that is responsible for a large 
proportion of cases of humoral hypercalcaemia of ma-
lignancy. Eight of the 13 amino-terminal amino acids 
are identical to those found in PTH itself, and it ap-
pears to act on the PTH receptor. There is evidence for 
its production in both the fetal parathyroids and in the 
lactating breast, raising the possibility that it has a physi-
ological role in these contexts. A carboxy-terminal frag-
ment of PTHrP may act as an inhibitor of osteoclastic 
bone resorption. Direct measurement of PTHrP by im-
munoassay is possible, but is rarely necessary in clinical 
practice, since the malignant disease underlying humoral 
­hypercalcaemia is frequently evident at the time that the 
elevated plasma calcium is recognized.
Biochemical assessment of calcium 
metabolism
In addition to the assays of calcitropic hormones dis-
cussed above, estimation of calcium concentrations in the 
circulation and of calcium fluxes in the gut and kidney are 
of value in assessing patients with disorders of calcium 
metabolism.
Plasma calcium
As indicated previously, total plasma calcium comprises 
protein-bound, complexed and ionized fractions. Thus 
changes in plasma protein concentrations or acid–base 
status will affect the relationship between ionized and to-
tal calcium. Total serum calcium remains the most com-
monly measured index. It should always be accompanied 
by a measurement of the serum albumin concentration 
from which a ‘corrected serum calcium’ can be calculated:
corrected serum concentration mmol/L
 measured  calcium conce
(
) =
ntration
0.02 40
albuminconcentration g/L
+
−
(
(
))
Laboratories should derive their own correction 
formulae based on their own particular calcium and al-
bumin assays, as both the mean normal albumin concen-
tration (assumed here to be 40 g/L) and the amount of 
calcium bound to each gram of albumin (assumed here 
to be 0.02 mmol/g) can vary. The corrected calcium is 
only an approximation, and when there are significant 
dysproteinaemias or acid–base disturbances, ionized 
calcium should be measured directly. This measure-
ment is also useful in patients to whom large quanti-
ties of citrated blood products have been administered, 
since these individuals have an increased proportion of 
plasma calcium complexed to citrate. Ionized calcium is 
100	
Clinical biochemistry
measured using an ion-selective electrode. Specimens 
must be obtained anaerobically to minimize changes in 
specimen pH. The pH is also usually measured and re-
sults adjusted to a pH of 7.4.
There are diurnal variations in both total and ion-
ized plasma calcium concentrations (Fig. 6.4). Significant 
changes in plasma calcium take place following the inges-
tion of a calcium-rich meal or of calcium supplements. 
Posture and the application of tourniquets, both of which 
can influence plasma protein concentrations, may also in-
fluence total calcium estimations. Total plasma calcium 
rises significantly (by approximately 0.1 mmol/L) at the 
menopause.
Intestinal calcium absorption
This is not routinely measured in clinical practice, but 
knowledge of it is sometimes of value, e.g. in some 
patients with kidney stones and hypercalciuria. In the 
past, it was measured by metabolic balance, which re-
quired a period of 7–10  days as an inpatient, during 
which time subjects were given a diet with a constant 
calcium intake, and calcium absorption was estimated 
from precise measurements of faecal and urinary cal-
cium output.
Calcium absorption can be measured with a variety of 
stable or radioisotope techniques in which an oral cal-
cium load with a tracer is administered in the fasting state 
and absorption efficiency is estimated from the rate of 
appearance of the isotope in the blood. The size of the 
oral calcium load accompanying the isotope is important. 
Low doses reflect better the active duodenal transport, 
whereas high doses better reflect net intestinal absorp-
tion. The increment in urine calcium following the 
administration of a known calcium load has also been 
used as an index of calcium absorption (see Appendix 6.1, 
below). The clinical utility of these tests is limited and 
they are rarely used nowadays.
Urinary calcium
Calcium can be measured either in a 24 h urine or in urine 
collected after an overnight fast. In the latter instance, the 
subject empties the bladder on rising, has a glass of water 
and then collects the urine sample at any time between 
30 min and 2 h later. In both instances, acid (usually 6 M 
hydrochloric acid) is added either before collection or 
subsequently, to prevent crystallization of calcium salts. 
Creatinine is usually measured on both 24 h and fasting 
urine samples – in the former case to allow assessment of 
completeness of collection and in the latter as a denomi-
nator in relation to which the concentration of calcium 
(and other urinary constituents) can be expressed.
The reference range for 24 h urine calcium is 
1–7.5 mmol/24 h in men and 1–6.25 mmol/24 h in women. 
In the steady state, this reflects the absolute dietary in-
take of calcium and the net proportion absorbed from 
the intestine. Urine calcium excretion is usually increased 
with hypercalcaemia of any cause, and its measurement 
contributes little to the differential diagnosis of hypercal-
caemia, except in the diagnosis of familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcaemia.
Fasting urine calcium can be expressed as a simple 
molar ratio to creatinine (reference values 0.10–0.30 in 
adults). This is considered to be an index of bone re-
sorption, but newer markers of bone resorption are pre-
ferred in clinical practice (see Chapter 31). If the calcium: 
creatinine ratio is multiplied by the plasma creatinine 
concentration, the resulting product is the calcium excre-
tion per litre of glomerular filtrate (CaE). This is useful 
in assessing the contribution of abnormal renal tubu-
lar handling of calcium to disorders of plasma calcium 
homoeostasis (see Appendix 6.2, below).
Indices of bone turnover
Disorders of plasma calcium are often accompanied by 
abnormalities of bone turnover, so assessment of bone 
turnover can be useful. These measures are discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 31.
Hypercalcaemia
Hypercalcaemia develops when the rate of entry of cal-
cium into the ECF from bone and gut exceeds the ca-
pacity of the kidney to excrete it. Diminished excretory 
capacity can be the result of either increased renal tubular 
reabsorption (an important component, for example, in 
the hypercalcaemia of primary hyperparathyroidism and 
familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia) or of a reduction in 
glomerular filtration rate (in sarcoidosis, for example, hy-
percalcaemia is more frequently encountered in subjects 
with impaired renal function). However, hypercalcaemia 
itself can affect these processes, thus initiating a vicious 
cycle with worsening hypercalcaemia. By its actions on the 
kidney, hypercalcaemia leads to polyuria, volume deple-
tion and thus to a reduction in glomerular filtration rate 
and enhanced proximal tubular reabsorption of sodium, 
which carries calcium with it. This situation, termed ‘dis-
equilibrium hypercalcaemia’, is a medical emergency. It 
is important both to recognize this and to differentiate 
it from ‘equilibrium hypercalcaemia’ (e.g. due to mild 
FIGURE  6.4  ■  Diurnal variation in total plasma calcium (dot-
ted line), ionized calcium (solid line) and phosphate (broken 
line) in healthy subjects. (From Markowitz M et al. 1981 Science 
213:672–674, with permission from the American Association for the 
Advancement of Science).
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
101
primary hyperparathyroidism or familial benign hypercal-
caemia), where the plasma calcium remains stable.
Whether hypercalcaemia causes symptoms depends 
both upon the degree of elevation of plasma calcium and 
the rate at which it has risen. When plasma calcium is 
<3.0 mmol/L, a large proportion of patients are asymp-
tomatic. The clinical features of severe hypercalcaemia 
are summarized in Box 6.1.
Causes of hypercalcaemia
Box 6.2 lists the most frequently encountered forms of 
hypercalcaemia.
Primary hyperparathyroidism. Primary hyperparathy-
roidism is the most common cause of hypercalcaemia 
presenting outside hospital. Prior to the advent of large 
automated analysers, it was regarded as a rare disease, 
but is now a common incidental finding. Its prevalence 
is ­approximately 1 per 1000 and it is most frequently 
­diagnosed in the 6th decade of life, when it is two or three 
times as common in women as in men. To some ­extent, 
this can be explained by the postmenopausal rise in 
plasma calcium concentration. The normal ­distribution 
curve is shifted to the right and, therefore, a higher pro-
portion of postmenopausal women must necessarily have 
plasma calcium concentrations above the upper limit of 
normal for younger people. In younger patients, the sex 
incidences are equal.
In 90% of patients, primary hyperparathyroidism is 
attributable to a single parathyroid adenoma, and most 
of the remaining cases are attributable to four gland hy-
perplasia, sometimes as a part of the multiple endocrine 
neoplasia (MEN) syndrome type 1 (see Chapter 41). This 
syndrome accounts for the majority of patients with famil-
ial hyperparathyroidism. Parathyroid carcinoma, which 
usually presents with severe hypercalcaemia and very high 
PTH concentrations, accounts for <1% of all cases.
Adenomatous primary hyperparathyroidism appears 
to have a clonal origin. Two genetic mechanisms have 
been elucidated (Table  6.3). The PTH gene is located 
on the opposite side of the centromere of chromosome 11 
from the gene (PRAD1) that encodes cyclin D1, a proto- 
oncogene that regulates cell growth. In about 20% of spo-
radic parathyroid tumours, it has been shown that while 
one chromosome is intact, the other copy has under-
gone centromeric inversion, a rearrangement that places 
the PTH regulatory elements under the influence of cy-
clin D1, allowing deregulated parathyroid gland growth.
Germline mutations underlie several of the inherited 
syndromes that include primary hyperparathyroidism. 
The mutated gene in multiple endocrine neoplasia 1 
(MEN1) is also located on chromosome 11, and encodes 
a protein, menin, that acts as a tumour suppressor. Rare 
instances have been reported of kindreds with germline 
MEN1 mutations in which primary hyperparathyroidism 
is the only clinical feature. Primary hyperparathyroid-
ism is less frequently (~20%) a feature of the MEN 2 
syndromes, which result from activating mutations of 
the gene encoding the RET tyrosine kinase receptor. 
Germline mutations in the tumour suppressor gene 
CDC73, which encodes the protein parafibromin, causes 
the inherited disorder, hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumour 
syndrome. Somatic mutations in this gene are also present 
in a high proportion of sporadic parathyroid carcinomas.
Primary hyperparathyroidism may present with the 
symptoms of hypercalcaemia outlined in Box  6.1, but 
frequently patients are symptom-free. The prevalence of 
­osteoporosis is probably increased in patients with primary 
hyperparathyroidism, especially at skeletal sites enriched 
for cortical bone. The classic skeletal manifestations of 
BOX 6.1	
Clinical features and associations of 
hypercalcaemia
(Typically only present if hypercalcaemia is ≥3 mmol/L)
Neuropsychiatric
•	 Lethargy, depression
•	 Confusion, coma
•	 Hypotonia, hyporeflexia, muscle weakness
Gastrointestinal
•	 Anorexia, nausea, vomiting
•	 Abdominal pain
•	 Constipation
•	 Pancreatitis
Cardiovascular
•	 Electrocardiographic changes (reduced QT interval, 
prolonged PR interval)
•	 Arrhythmias
Renal
•	 Polyuria, polydipsia, volume depletion
•	 Reduced glomerular filtration rate
•	 Calculi, nephrocalcinosis
BOX 6.2	
Differential diagnosis of most 
frequently encountered forms  
of hypercalcaemia
Most common
Primary hyperparathyroidism
•	 Sporadic
•	 Familial (see Table 6.3)
Malignant disease
•	 Humoral hypercalcaemia of malignancy (PTHrP)
•	 Widespread skeletal metastases (most commonly 
breast cancer)
•	 Haematological malignancy (multiple myeloma, adult 
T cell leukaemia/lymphoma)
a
Less common
•	 Granulomatous disease
a (e.g. sarcoidosis, tuberculosis, 
histoplasmosis, leprosy)
•	 Toxicity with vitamin D or its derivatives
•	 Persistent hyperparathyroidism after renal 
transplan­tation
•	 Severe thyrotoxicosis
Rarer causes of hypercalcaemia are summarized in Table 6.4
aHypercalcaemia is typically steroid-responsive.
102	
Clinical biochemistry
primary hyperparathyroidism, which include subperios-
teal phalangeal resorption, a ‘salt and pepper’ appearance 
in the skull and bone cysts (‘brown tumours’) of the long 
bones or jaw (collectively termed ‘osteitis ­fibrosa cys-
tica’), are features of severe, longstanding ­disease, and are 
now uncommon in the developed world. Approximately 
15% of patients have renal complications in the form of 
nephrolithiasis or nephrocalcinosis.
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia. Familial hy-
pocalciuric hypercalcaemia (FHH) (also known as be-
nign familial hypercalcaemia) is an autosomal dominant 
condition in which mild hypercalcaemia with relative 
hypocalciuria is present throughout life. Patients with 
this disorder are most frequently heterozygous for 
inactivating mutations in the calcium sensing recep-
tor (CaSR). The ‘set-point’ for PTH release is raised, 
and mild PTH-dependent hypercalcaemia results. The 
CaSR is also expressed in the renal tubules, where it 
regulates renal tubular calcium reabsorption in a PTH-
independent fashion. The inactivating CASR gene mu-
tation promotes inappropriately avid tubular calcium 
reabsorption in the face of hypercalcaemia, explaining 
the relative hypocalciuria. Patients with FHH are usu-
ally asymptomatic, although non-specific symptoms of 
lethargy and polydipsia have been observed in some in-
stances. There may be an increased incidence of pan-
creatitis, but the frequency of nephrolithiasis and peptic 
ulcer disease is the same as in the general population. In 
most cases, the condition follows a benign course and 
the greatest danger to patients is being misdiagnosed as 
having adenomatous primary hyperparathyroidism and 
thus having inappropriate parathyroidectomy. Familial 
hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia accounts for about 2% of 
asymptomatic hypercalcaemia.
Neonatal severe primary hyperparathyroidism occurs 
in newborns who have inherited two inactivating CASR 
mutations – one from each parent. It presents as severe, 
life-threatening hypercalcaemia. Urgent total parathy-
roidectomy is indicated.
Hypercalcaemia of malignancy. Malignancy can result 
in hypercalcaemia by four general mechanisms:
•	 by the secretion into the circulation of factors that in-
crease bone resorption and/or decrease urine calcium 
loss (humoral hypercalcaemia of malignancy, HHM)
•	 as a result of osteolytic metastases that lead to local 
bone destruction
•	 osteolysis from bone marrow infiltration in haema-
tological disorders
•	 more rarely, accelerated conversion of plasma 25(OH)
D to 1,25 (OH)D2 by some haematological malignan-
cies, leading to vitamin D-dependent hypercalcaemia.
Parathyroid hormone-related peptide is the main me-
diator of humoral hypercalcaemia of malignancy. It is 
synthesized and secreted by a number of tumours, par-
ticularly those of epithelial cell origin (e.g. squamous cell 
carcinoma of the bronchus, renal cell carcinoma, breast 
carcinoma) and produces biochemical changes similar 
to those of primary hyperparathyroidism, although the 
degree of hypercalcaemia is often more severe in HHM, 
and plasma 1,25(OH)2D concentrations tend to be nor-
mal or low rather than increased.
Hypercalcaemia associated with osteolytic metastases 
is most commonly seen in advanced breast cancer, but 
can occur with other solid tumours that spread to bone. 
Hypercalcaemia is very common in some haematological 
malignancies, particularly multiple myeloma and acute 
human T cell leukaemia–lymphoma virus (HTLV)-1-
associated disease. The bone destruction is mediated by 
TABLE 6.3  Molecular genetics of primary hyperparathyroidism
Disorder
Inheritance 
OMIM 
number
Gene
Somatic/
germline
Protein 
product
Pathogenesis
Parathyroid adenoma
Sporadic
CCND1
somatic
cyclin D1
Oncogenic activation
Familial isolated 
hyperparathyroidism
AD 145000
MEN1
germline
menin
Tumour suppressor inactivation
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 1
AD 131100
MEN1
germline
menin
Tumour suppressor inactivation
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 2a
AD 171400
RET
germline
ret
Oncogenic activation
Hyperparathyroid-jaw tumour 
syndrome
AD 145000
CDC73
germline
parafibromin
Tumour suppressor inactivation
Parathyroid carcinoma
Sporadic 
608266
CDC73
somatic
parafibromin
Tumour suppressor activation
Familial hypocalciuric 
hypercalcaemia
 
 
 
 
 
    type 1
AD 145980
CASR
germline
CaSR
Decreased set-point for PTH 
secretion
    type 2
AD 145981
GNA11
germline
Gα11
 
    type 3
AD 600740
AP2S1
germline
AP17
 
Neonatal severe 
hyperparathyroidism
AR 239200
CASR 
(bi-allelic)
germline
CaSR
Parathyroid cell proliferation
AD, autosomal dominant; AR, autosomal recessive; CaSR, calcium sensing receptor
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
103
osteoclasts, activated by factors released by the tumour. 
A number of different cytokines have been implicated, 
including RANKL and TNF-α. In addition, bone forma-
tion may be impaired at sites of myelomatous skeletal dis-
ease, as a result of inhibition of Wnt signalling through 
the lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5). In 
contrast to the hypercalcaemia associated with metasta-
ses from solid tumours, hypercalcaemia associated with 
haematological malignancy typically responds rapidly to 
glucocorticoid treatment. In the rare cases of patients 
with hypercalcaemia associated with haematological ma-
lignancies that elaborate 1α-hydroxylase, the hypercal-
caemia also responds rapidly to glucocorticoid treatment.
Granulomatous disease. The macrophages in granulo-
mata occurring in sarcoid tissue, pulmonary tuberculosis 
and berylliosis are capable of 1α-hydroxylating 25(OH)
D, independently of normal homeostatic regulation. 
The production of 1,25(OH)2D is dependent on disease 
activity and circulating 25(OH)D concentrations. Thus, 
during the summer months, patients with active dis-
ease have increased intestinal calcium absorption. This 
is usually evident as hypercalciuria, but some patients, 
usually those with some pre-existing renal impairment, 
become hypercalcaemic. 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D 
production can be rapidly suppressed (and hypercal-
caemia corrected) by glucocorticoids, chloroquine or 
ketoconazole.
Vitamin D toxicity. Excessive intake of vitamin D or its 
analogues can produce hypercalcaemia. This may be iatro­
genic or the result of self-medication. On withdrawal of 
vitamin D, hypercalcaemia resolves. The rate of reversal 
is much more rapid in patients intoxicated with alfacal-
cidol or calcitriol than it is in patients intoxicated by cal-
ciferol. In the former instances, plasma calcium reverses 
with a half-time of 1–5 days, but in the latter, the half-
time is of the order of 10–30 days. Women being treated 
with vitamin D or its analogues for hypoparathyroidism 
may become hypercalcaemic during lactation or after 
stopping exogenous oestrogen therapy.
The vast majority of adult hypercalcaemic patients 
(>98%) will have one of the above diagnoses, but there are 
rarer causes of hypercalcaemia (summarized in Table 6.4). 
Hypercalcaemia in dialysis and kidney transplant recipi-
ents is discussed in Chapter 31. Hypercalcaemia in infants 
and children is much less common than in adults, and a dif-
ferent range of diagnoses needs to be considered (Box 6.3).
Investigation of hypercalcaemia
Figure 6.5 sets out an approach to the investigation of 
hypercalcaemia. Having confirmed that true hypercal-
caemia exists, a clinical assessment will in many cases, 
point to the appropriate diagnosis by revealing evidence 
of ­underlying diseases or medications that may be con-
tributing. The next stage is biochemical assessment, in 
which PTH measurement is pivotal. The currently avail-
able assays of intact PTH will usually produce either an 
elevated or suppressed value in hypercalcaemic subjects, 
thus ­establishing or excluding the parathyroids as the 
cause of the hypercalcaemia.
A normal intact PTH concentration in the face of an 
elevated plasma calcium may be consistent with either 
primary hyperparathyroidism or with FHH. The ratio of 
calcium clearance to creatinine clearance in a 2 h fasting 
TABLE 6.4  Uncommon causes of hypercalcaemia
Cause
Probable mechanisms
Other biochemical 
features (plasma)
Treatment
Comments
Thiazides
↑ Renal tubular 
reabsorption
–
Withdrawal
Often coexisting primary 
hyperparathyroidism
Lithium
? Enhanced sensitivity to 
PTH or ↑ PTH secretion
–
Withdrawal
Often coexisting primary 
hyperparathyroidism
Oestrogens/tamoxifen
↑ Bone resorption
–
Transient 
hypercalcaemia 
only
In women with skeletal 
metastases from 
breast cancer
Vitamin A toxicity
↑ Bone resorption
–
Withdrawal
Also described 
with retinoic acid 
derivatives
Immobilization
↑ Bone resorption
↓ [PTH], 
↑ [phosphate]
Mobilize or 
inhibitors of 
bone resorption
Occurs in individuals 
with high bone 
turnover rate (e.g. 
tetraplegia, extensive 
Paget disease)
Acute kidney injury 
(AKI) – diuretic phase
↑ Calcium absorption
↑ [1,25(OH)2D]
Resolves 
spontaneously
Occurs in recovery 
phase of AKI induced 
by rhabdomyolysis
Multiple organ 
dysfunction/systemic 
inflammatory 
response syndrome
Unknown
? ↑ [1,25(OH)2D]
Resolves 
spontaneously
Poor response to 
bisphosphonates
Islet cell tumours/
phaeochromocytoma
?↑ Bone resorption
? ↑ [PTHrP]
Surgery or 
inhibitors of 
bone resorption
–
Addison disease
↑ Renal tubular 
reabsorption
↓ [Na
+], ↑ [K
+]
Fluids, steroid 
replacement
–
Milk–alkali syndrome
↑ Calcium intake
–
Withdrawal
Often coexisting primary 
hyperparathyroidism
104	
Clinical biochemistry
urine collection is useful in distinguishing between these 
two possibilities – in FHH the ratio is usually < 0.01. 
However, clear distinction between adenomatous pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism and FHH is not always pos-
sible on biochemical grounds. Studying family members 
and/or sequencing the CASR gene may be necessary.
If plasma PTH concentration is low, then a variety 
of other investigations can be pursued. The order in 
which these are undertaken will be determined by the 
clinical clues. Cancer-associated hypercalcaemia is al-
most always a late complication of the disease, which is 
therefore ­either known or readily diagnosed when the 
hypercalcaemia is recognized. A search for malignancy 
may include radioisotope bone scanning, chest and ab-
dominal imaging and serum and urine protein electro-
phoresis. Assays for PTHrP are now available, but are 
rarely needed in the evaluation and treatment of hyper-
calcaemia. Plasma PTHrP concentrations are elevated 
in most patients with humoral hypercalcaemia of ma-
lignancy, and are low in healthy subjects (<2 pmol/L). 
Parathyroid hormone-­related peptide concentrations 
are also increased in about half of women with lytic bone 
metastases from breast cancer, irrespective of whether 
they are hypercalcaemic. In difficult cases, measurement 
of 1,25(OH)2D may be of value. Elevated concentrations 
are seen in granulomatous disease, some lymphomas 
and sometimes in primary hyperparathyroidism, and 
subnormal concentrations are usually found in HHM. 
Measurement of 25(OH)D will allow confirmation of 
vitamin D intoxication, but not if it is caused by 1α-
hydroxylated compounds such as alfacalcidol, calcitriol, 
paricalcitol or calcipotriol.
A number of investigations previously used in the 
­differential diagnosis of hypercalcaemia have limited util-
ity. Hypophosphataemia is a feature of both primary hyper-
parathyroidism and HHM, and phosphate concentrations 
tend to be increased in sarcoidosis and vitamin D toxicity 
or when there is renal impairment. Measurement of plasma 
chloride has been used because of the mild metabolic aci-
dosis associated with primary hyperparathyroidism. While 
chloride concentrations do tend to be higher in primary 
hyperparathyroidism than in HHM, this measurement has 
very little clinical utility in individual patients. The same 
considerations apply to plasma magnesium concentrations. 
Although plasma magnesium is higher in FHH than in pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism, it is of limited diagnostic value. 
Since both PTH and PTHrP stimulate renal adenylate cy-
clase, measurement of cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
excretion has no ­discriminant value.
Skeletal radiology may be of help, showing myeloma 
deposits (that may be missed by bone scintigraphy) or 
showing evidence of other malignancy or revealing the 
changes of hyperparathyroidism. Occasionally, use is 
still made of the glucocorticoid suppression test (pred-
nisolone 30 mg/day for a period of ten days). In primary 
hyperparathyroidism, no change in plasma calcium oc-
curs, but in granulomatous disease, vitamin D intoxica-
tion and in haematological malignancies, a significant fall 
in plasma calcium usually occurs. The analysis of renal 
tubular calcium handling (see Appendix 6.2, below) can 
provide information on the mechanisms underlying hy-
percalcaemia, but does not help to differentiate primary 
hyperparathyroidism from HHM.
In summary, measurement of intact PTH, accompa-
nied by clinical history and examination and ­targeted 
radiological investigations will allow the cause of 
­hypercalcaemia to be ascertained quite quickly in the vast 
­majority of patients.
Treatment of hypercalcaemia
Specific details of the treatment of hypercalcaemia are 
beyond the scope of this text, but its principles will be 
reviewed. In patients with mild asymptomatic primary 
hyperparathyroidism, long-term follow-up has revealed 
stability of plasma calcium and renal function, and low 
rates of disease complications. Consequently, some 
authorities feel that no intervention is necessary in pa-
tients who have not had renal stones and are at low frac-
ture risk, although this remains an area of controversy. 
Either ­medical treatment with bisphosphonates or sur-
gical ­correction are effective treatments for improving 
bone mineral density in patients with primary hyperpara-
thyroidism who are at increased risk of fracture. When 
definitive treatment is necessary, as in patients who de-
velop urolithiasis or severe hypercalcaemia (>3 mmol/L), 
removal of the causative adenoma by an experienced 
surgeon is usually curative. Recurrence is rare, except 
patients in whom hyperparathyroidism is caused by 
­multiglandular hyperplasia, as in the type 1 multiple 
­endocrine neoplasia ­syndrome. Calcimimetic drugs, such 
as cinacalcet, which act as allosteric agonists of the CaSR 
present on the parathyroid chief cells, suppress PTH 
secretion and lower plasma calcium in PTH-dependent 
hypercalcaemia. Studies indicate that treatment with 
BOX 6.3	
Causes of hypercalcaemia  
in infants and children
Hyperparathyroidism
•	 Severe neonatal hyperparathyroidism (bi-allelic CASR 
mutations)
•	 Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
•	 Parathyroid carcinoma
Malignancy
•	 Acute leukaemia
•	 Solid tumours
Syndromic
•	 Williams–Beuren syndrome (microdeletion of con-
tiguous genes on chromosome 7q11.23)
•	 Jansen syndrome (mutation of PTH/PTHrP receptor)
Vitamin D-related
•	 Iatrogenic
•	 Infantile 
hypercalcaemia 
(inactivating 
CYP24B 
mutations)
•	 Granulomatous disease (tuberculosis, sarcoidosis)
Immobilization
Miscellaneous
•	 Hypophosphatasia (TNSALP mutations)
•	 Subcutaneous fat necrosis
•	 Congenital lactase deficiency
•	 Primary hyperoxaluria type 1
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
105
cinacalcet can maintain normocalcaemia for at least five 
years in the vast majority of patients with mild primary 
hyperparathyroidism, and that it is moderately effec-
tive in lowering plasma calcium in patients with severe, 
symptomatic PTH-dependent hypercalcaemia. Thus, the 
­calcimimetics may acquire a role in the future in treating 
patients with severe, symptomatic primary hyperparathy-
roidism or parathyroid cancer in whom surgery has either 
failed or is not possible. In FHH, no therapy is required.
Individuals with disequilibrium hypercalcaemia are 
almost invariably volume depleted, and the first step in 
their management is rehydration with intravenous nor-
mal saline. This will be associated with increased renal 
blood flow and a resultant increased clearance of calcium 
through the kidneys. In those in whom hypercalcaemia 
is secondary to increased bone resorption, therapy with 
an inhibitor of bone resorption is appropriate. This is 
now satisfactorily achieved with intravenous infusions of 
bisphosphonates (e.g. pamidronate or zoledronate), with 
the majority of patients gradually returning to normocal-
caemia within about a week.
In the past, forced saline diuresis has been used to 
increase renal clearance of calcium. This is potentially 
hazardous, particularly in the elderly, in whom conges-
tive cardiac failure and electrolyte imbalances may cause 
significant morbidity. The infusion of phosphate, which 
can cause widespread metastatic calcification, is another 
dangerous and redundant therapy for hypercalcaemia. 
Steroids are helpful in haematological malignancies and 
in sarcoidosis.
Hypocalcaemia
Hypocalcaemia is a relatively uncommon finding, but 
true hypocalcaemia usually indicates a significant under-
lying abnormality requiring diagnosis and treatment.
Clinical features
Hypocalcaemia results in increased excitability of neu-
romuscular tissue. This may become clinically manifest 
as tetany, usually presenting as carpopedal spasm or, in 
FIGURE 6.5  ■  A flow diagram for investigation of hypercalcaemia.
106	
Clinical biochemistry
milder cases, as paraesthesiae in the perioral region or 
fingers. Laryngeal stridor and seizures may also occur. 
The electrocardiogram shows prolongation of the QT 
and ST intervals, and patients may develop arrhythmias, 
heart block and congestive heart failure.
In longstanding hypocalcaemia, calcification of the 
basal ganglia, psychiatric disturbances and cataracts may 
occur. Hypocalcaemic children may show abnormalities 
in dental development.
Causes of hypocalcaemia
Causes of hypocalcaemia are set out in Box 6.4. Because 
hypoalbuminaemia is observed in patients with a wide va-
riety of other diagnoses, it is mandatory to make allow-
ance for the plasma albumin concentration or to measure 
ionized calcium when entertaining the diagnosis of hypo-
calcaemia. The common causes of chronic hypocalcaemia 
relate to abnormalities in the synthesis, secretion or ac-
tion of PTH or 1,25(OH)2D, or both these hormones.
Hypoparathyroidism. The most common type of hy-
poparathyroidism is that occurring after surgery to the 
thyroid or, occasionally, to other structures in the neck. 
It varies widely in severity and, in some patients, is tran-
sient, with plasma calcium returning to normal in the 
weeks after surgery. Overt hypocalcaemia can be precipi-
tated in previously asymptomatic patients with partial hy-
poparathyroidism by therapy with exogenous oestrogens 
or proton pump inhibitors.
Spontaneous hypoparathyroidism is rare. It may occur 
as an isolated disorder or be part of a congenital disease 
complex. The most frequently encountered forms are 
listed in Table 6.5.
The complex forms are usually the result of mutation 
in or deletions of genes encoding transcription factors 
regulating pharyngeal pouch development.
Idiopathic isolated hypoparathyroidism is also likely to 
have a genetic basis. Mutations in or near the genes PTH 
and GCMB (encoding ‘glial cell missing’; a master regula-
tor of parathyroid development) have been described in 
kindreds with both autosomal recessive and autosomal 
dominant inheritance. A rare X-linked recessive form has 
also been described.
It is important to distinguish autosomal dominant 
hypocalcaemia with hypercalciuria (ADHH) from other 
forms of hypoparathyroidism. This is usually caused by 
activating mutations in the gene encoding the CaSR and 
is the genetic and phenotypic converse of familial hypo-
calciuric hypercalcaemia: PTH concentrations are low 
in the face of hypocalcaemia, and there is relative hyper-
calciuria. Most patients with this syndrome are asymp-
tomatic or minimally symptomatic, and do not require 
treatment. Treatment to raise plasma calcium should not 
be given to individuals known to have ADHH unless they 
are symptomatic, because it causes hypercalciuria, which 
can lead to nephrolithiasis and renal impairment.
Autoimmune hypoparathyroidism may occur alone 
or in association with additional features, including 
­mucocutaneous candidiasis and adrenal insufficiency, as a 
component of the autoimmune polyglandular syndrome 
type 1 (APS-1) or autoimmune polyendocrinopathy-
candidiasis–ectodermal dystrophy (APECED) syndrome. 
This may be sporadic or familial with an autosomal reces-
sive inheritance pattern. Less commonly, it may also be 
seen as part of the autoimmune polyglandular syndrome 
type 2 (APS-2), which is characterized by adult-onset 
adrenal insufficiency associated with type 1 diabetes and 
thyroid disease and is believed to be a polygenic disorder 
with apparent dominant inheritance. The parathyroid 
glands are an infrequent target for autoimmunity; anti-
bodies directed against the parathyroid CaSR may have a 
direct pathogenetic role.
Hypoparathyroidism is characterized by hypocalcae-
mia, with plasma total calcium concentrations as low as 
1.25 mmol/L being found. Urine calcium excretion is 
subnormal and the TmP/GFR (see p. 111) is increased, 
leading to hyperphosphataemia. Bone turnover is re-
duced, as are intestinal calcium absorption and circulat-
ing concentrations of both 1,25(OH)2D and intact PTH. 
Some PTH immunoassays are not able to distinguish low 
concentrations from those within the reference range.
Pseudohypoparathyroidism. This term refers to a 
heterogeneous group of rare conditions characterized 
by the combination of resistance to the actions of PTH 
and, ­variably, other glycoprotein hormones, and Albright 
hereditary osteodystrophy (short stature, obesity, short 
BOX 6.4	
Differential diagnosis  
of hypocalcaemia
Hypoparathyroidism
•	 Genetic (see Table 6.5)
•	 Idiopathic
•	 Post-surgical, post-neck irradiation
•	 Severe hypomagnesaemia
•	 Infiltrative
•	 β-thalassaemia (iron)
•	 Wilson disease (copper)
•	 Malignancy
Parathyroid hormone resistance
•	 Pseudohypoparathyroidism (types Ia, Ib, Ic, II)
Abnormalities of vitamin D metabolism
•	 Vitamin D deficiency
•	 Deficient 1α-hydroxylation
•	 Renal impairment
•	 Acidosis
•	 Vitamin D-dependent rickets, type I
Vitamin D resistance
•	 Vitamin D-dependent rickets, type II
•	 Severe gluten enteropathy
Other causes
•	 Acute pancreatitis
•	 Hyperphosphataemia
•	 Acute rhabdomyolysis
•	 Multiple transfusions of citrated blood
•	 Severe acute illness (e.g. toxic shock syndrome, Gram-
negative sepsis)
•	 Osteoblastic metastases (e.g. prostate, breast)
•	 Neonatal hypocalcaemia
•	 Abrupt inhibition of bone resorption (hungry bone 
syndrome)
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
107
metacarpals and metatarsals, heterotopic ossification). 
These patients present with much the same clinical and 
biochemical findings as in hypoparathyroidism, but their 
concentrations of immunoreactive PTH are high rather 
than low. The resistance to PTH seems primarily to be 
in the kidneys, so some patients may have evidence of hy-
perparathyroid bone disease. The hypocalcaemia may be 
less severe than in ­hypoparathyroidism and may fluctu-
ate. The current classification of the disorder is shown in 
Table 6.6.
The most common forms of the disorder, type Ia, Ib and 
pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP), are caused by 
mutations in the GNAS gene. This encodes the signalling 
protein Gsα, that is part of the guanine ­nucleotide-binding 
protein complex linking the PTH receptor (and the re-
ceptors for other glycoprotein hormones) to the adenylyl 
cyclase catalytic unit. The phenotype that ensues is de-
pendent upon the gender of the ­parent transmitting the 
mutant allele (genetic imprinting). Added complexity is 
provided by the fact that tissue- or cell-specific imprinting 
of Gsα occurs, thereby explaining the phenotypic differ-
ences in hormone resistance that are observed.
The diagnosis of pseudohypoparathyroidism and 
the classification of patients as type I or type II are 
dependent upon the modified Ellsworth–Howard test (see 
Appendix 6.3, below).
Vitamin D disorders. Hypocalcaemia is frequently en-
countered where abnormalities of vitamin D ­metabolism 
lead to failure to synthesize adequate quantities of 
1,25(OH)2D. This can result from insufficient supplies of 
the precursors (privational vitamin D deficiency) or defects 
in hepatic 25-hydroxylation or renal ­1α-hydroxylation 
(either inherited or acquired). Finally, there can be 
­end-organ resistance to the actions of 1,25(OH)2D. In 
these disorders, in addition to hypocalcaemia, there is 
usually ­secondary hyperparathyroidism with hypophos-
phataemia and, in bone, osteomalacia or rickets. These 
disorders are discussed more fully in Chapter 31.
Other causes of hypocalcaemia. Acute hypocalcaemia 
can result from the release into the circulation of any 
­factor capable of binding substantial amounts of ­calcium. 
In acute pancreatitis, free fatty acids can do this, whereas 
in acute rhabdomyolysis and in the tumour lysis syn-
drome, large quantities of intracellular phosphate are 
­released. Incautious infusion or ingestion of phosphate 
can also result in hypocalcaemia by the same mechanism, 
TABLE 6.6  Classification and features of pseudohypoparathyroidism
Type
Responses to PTH
a
Hormone 
resistance
c
AHO
Genetic abnormality
Phosphaturic
cAMP
Ia
b
↓
↓
+
+
Inactivating mutation Gsα of maternal origin
PPHP
b
Normal
Normal
−
+
Inactivating mutation Gsα of paternal origin
Ib
↓
↓
Rare
−
Gsα mutation causing imprinting defect, 
maternal-specific
Ic
↓
↓
+
?
? Receptor-adenylate cyclase complex
II
↓
Normal
−
±
? cAMP-dependent protein kinase
? Calcium-inositol second messenger system
aSee Appendix 6.3 for testing protocol.
bType Ia and pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP) commonly occur within the same kindred.
cOther than PTH, e.g. thyrotrophin (TSH), gonadotrophins, glucagon. AHO, Albright hereditary osteodystrophy (see text); Gsα, a protein 
­forming part of the guanine nucleotide-binding protein complex that links the PTH receptor to the adenylyl cyclase catalytic unit.
TABLE 6.5  Genetic causes of hypoparathyroidism
Disorder
OMIM
a
Inheritance
Locus
Gene
Isolated hypoparathyroidism
 
 
 
 
  Familial hypocalcaemic hypercalciuria type 1
601199
AD
3q13
CASR
	 	
type 2
145981
AD
19p13
GNA11
  Familial isolated hypoparathyroidism
168450
AD or AR
11p15
PTH
  Familial isolated hypoparathyroidism
603716
AD or AR
6p24
GCMB
  X-linked hypoparathyroidism
307700
X-linked
Xq27
SOX3
Complex congenital disorders with 
hypoparathyroidism
 
 
 
 
  DiGeorge syndrome
188400
AD
22q11
TBX1
  Hypoparathyroidism-sensorineural  
deafness-renal disease
146255
AR
10p15
GATA3
  Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy syndrome
240300
AR
21q
AIRE
  Kenny-Caffey syndrome 1/Sanjad-Sakati 
syndrome
244460/241140
AR
1q42
TCBE
  Kenny-Caffey syndrome 2
127000
AD
?
?
  Kearns-Sayre syndrome
530000
Maternal
Mitochondrial
?
a	Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man catalogue number. Note that the biochemical changes of hypoparathyroidism can be a mainfestation 
of the genetic pseudohypoparathyroid syndromes (Table 6.6) and genetic causes of hypomagnesaemia (Table 6.12). AD, autosomal domi-
nant; AR, autosomal recessive.
108	
Clinical biochemistry
and the infusion of large quantities of citrate as a result of 
blood transfusions has a similar effect. Some radiographic 
contrast dyes contain either citrate or the calcium chela-
tor EDTA, and can also produce hypocalcaemia. These 
mechanisms, together with magnesium deficiency, which 
impairs both PTH secretion and action, contribute to the 
hypocalcaemia observed in 25–50% of patients admitted 
to intensive care units.
In patients with widespread osteoblastic metastases, 
modest hypocalcaemia may occur secondarily to in-
creased incorporation of calcium into bone around the 
secondary deposits. Severe, prolonged hypocalcaemia 
may occur in patients following parathyroidectomy for 
longstanding hyperparathyroidism (hungry bone syn-
drome). Hypocalcaemia is sometimes seen in the neona-
tal period, being more common in premature infants and 
in the offspring of diabetic and hyperparathyroid moth-
ers. Its aetiology is varied (see Chapter 25).
Investigation of hypocalcaemia
Figure 6.6 sets out an approach to the differential diagno-
sis of hypocalcaemia. Clearly, the first step is to confirm 
that hypocalcaemia is not just a reflection of low plasma 
Low total
plasma calcium
Plasma albumin
± ionized calcium
True hypocalcaemia
No action
required
Investigate
appropriately
Renal
impairment
+ve
Increased
Low
Hypo-
magnesaemia
Clinical
assessment
Plasma creatinine
Plasma magnesium
Plasma PTH
Normal
Normal
Increased
Low/normal
Hypoparathyroidism
(seek cause)
Plasma phosphate
Low
Low
Low
VDDR type I
VDDR type II
Osteoblastic metastases
Acute pancreatitis
Multiple blood transfusions
Inhibitors of bone resorption
Vitamin D
deficiency
Normal/
high
Normal/
high
Normal/
high
1,25(OH)2D
25(OH)D
Acute
Hyperphosphataemia
Cell lysis
Pseudohypopara-
thyroidism
Chronic
High
Hypoalbuminaemia
Normal ionized/
‘corrected’ calcium
FIGURE 6.6  ■  A flow diagram for investigation of hypocalcaemia. (For abbreviations, see text.)
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
109
albumin concentration. An ionized calcium measurement 
may be necessary, particularly in acutely ill patients in 
whom calcium binding to albumin or other components 
of plasma may be abnormal. A number of the causes of 
hypocalcaemia shown in Box 6.4 are easily distinguished 
clinically. The acutely ill patient is clearly distinguishable 
from someone with chronic hypocalcaemia. The family 
history may be contributory, there may be an abnormal 
phenotype, evidence of other hormonal abnormalities 
associated with autoimmune hypoparathyroidism, a past 
history of thyroid surgery, clinical evidence of osteoma-
lacia etc. Data gained at this point may allow some of 
the investigations outlined below to be bypassed, or may 
­direct the clinician towards specific diagnoses.
In the absence of such clues, serum creatinine and 
magnesium should be measured at an early stage, since 
renal failure and magnesium deficiency are relatively 
frequent causes of hypocalcaemia. Parathyroid hormone 
should also be assayed to determine whether parathy-
roid gland hypofunction is the cause. Serum phosphate 
­measurement is useful, the phosphate concentration 
being high in hypoparathyroidism, syndromes of PTH 
resistance and when hyperphosphataemia is the primary 
disturbance, and (provided renal function is adequate) low 
in states of abnormal vitamin D activity and/or ­secondary 
hyperparathyroidism.
The plan of investigations outlined in Figure  6.6 
is only a guide, and some patients will have multiple 
­pathologies, which complicate the interpretation of their 
biochemistry. This is particularly true in those with acute 
illness or malignancy.
Some investigations not shown in this scheme may 
also be of value. A measurement of TmP/GFR is use-
ful in confirming the diagnosis of hypoparathyroidism, 
and the modified Ellsworth–Howard test in the diag-
nosis of pseudohypoparathyroidism. Plasma alkaline 
phosphatase activity is normal or low in hypoparathy-
roidism, but elevated in most patients with secondary 
hyperparathyroidism.
Treatment of hypocalcaemia
A detailed discussion of treatment is beyond the scope 
of this text, but the principles involved will be outlined. 
Clearly, the underlying condition needs to be sought and, 
in some cases, appropriate treatment of that will correct 
the hypocalcaemia. In acute symptomatic hypocalcaemia, 
intravenous calcium treatment may be necessary. A typi-
cal regimen in an adult would be to give 10–20 mL 10% 
calcium gluconate over 5 min (2.26–4.52 mmol calcium), 
followed by a continuous intravenous infusion supplying 
9–18 mmol calcium in 2 L of fluid over 24 h.
In vitamin D deficiency, treatment should be with vita-
min D itself, for reasons of both cost and safety. Repletion 
of vitamin D does not bypass the body’s homoeostatic 
­control of plasma calcium concentration, as will occur 
if 1α-hydroxylated vitamin D metabolites are used. In 
an adult, adequate vitamin D stores can be achieved by 
­administering 50 000 IU cholecalciferol monthly.
1α-Hydroxylated vitamin D derivatives are preferred 
in those conditions in which 1α-hydroxylation is impaired 
and pharmacological doses of vitamin D would otherwise 
be needed, such as hypoparathyroidism, pseudohypopara-
thyroidism and vitamin D-dependent rickets (VDDR) 
type I. Typical doses for an adult would be 1–4 μg/day 
of alfacalcidol or 0.75–2.25 μg/day of calcitriol. Calcium 
supplements are not usually required. The aim is to get 
the plasma calcium concentration just high enough to re-
lieve symptoms, and this is usually achieved around the 
lower limit of the reference range. Running the plasma 
calcium concentration higher than this increases the risk 
of vitamin D toxicity.
PHOSPHORUS METABOLISM
Distribution of body phosphorus
Phosphorus accounts for about 1% of the weight of the 
elementary composition of the human body; about 23 mol 
in a 70 kg adult human. Of this, the bulk (85%) is in the 
skeleton and teeth (largely in the form of hydroxyapatite) 
and some 14% is located within the cells of the soft tissues. 
Within different cell types, the phosphorus content may 
vary from 300 to 1300 mmol/kg. Only 1% of total body 
phosphorus is present in extracellular fluids (Box 6.5).
In the blood, phosphorus is present in both organic 
forms (phosphoproteins, phospholipids etc.) and the 
inorganic form (as phosphate). The inorganic moiety, 
which is what is measured routinely in laboratories, 
­exists predominantly in the form of the ions HPO4
2− 
and H PO
2
4
− in a ratio of about 4:1. Some 15–20% of 
inorganic phosphate is non-covalently bound to plasma 
proteins and is not ultrafilterable.
Intracellular phosphorus
Phosphorus is important in the metabolism of all cells. It is 
a key component of a wide array of biological molecules, in-
cluding the phospholipids of cell membranes and intracellu-
lar organelles, nucleic ­acids, enzyme ­cofactors and glycolytic 
intermediaries. Phosphorylation or dephosphorylation in-
duces dramatic shifts in the ­activity of many enzymes and 
cellular signalling ­proteins. Organophosphate compounds 
such as adenosine ­trisphosphate (ATP), creatine phosphate 
and diphosphoglycerate store chemical energy in their high 
energy phosphate bonds. Hydrolysis of ATP provides the 
main energy source for many metabolic processes and for 
BOX 6.5	
Distribution of body and blood 
phosphorus
Body phosphorus
•	 Bone ~85%
•	 Soft tissue cells ~14%
•	 Extracellular fluid ~1%
Blood phosphorus
•	 Organic (covalently bound) ~70%
•	 Inorganic
•	 Free (ions, salts) ~25%
a
•	 Protein-bound (non-covalent) ~5%
a
aThe phosphorus content in plasma that is commonly measured and 
described as phosphate concentration.
110	
Clinical biochemistry
muscle contraction. In muscle, ATP is replenished by the 
donation of phosphate groups from creatine phosphate. 
In the ­mitochondria, phosphate-­containing proteins play 
­essential roles in the electron transport system. Other phos-
phate-containing intracellular molecules include cyclic ad-
enosine monophosphate and inositol trisphosphate, which 
act as second messengers.
Although organically-bound phosphorous concen-
trations within cells are much greater, non-­organically 
bound intracellular phosphate also has important di-
rect effects on cellular energy metabolism. For exam-
ple, ­glucose uptake, lactate production and quantity of 
ATP all vary directly with the intracellular phosphate 
concentration. The amount of intracellular phosphate is 
also an important regulator of enzyme activity in the 
­glycolytic pathway. Within red cells, the concentration of 
­2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) plays a crucial role in 
oxygen availability to the tissues. In severe phosphate de-
ficiency, 2,3-DPG synthesis is decreased, which increases 
the ­affinity of oxygen to haemoglobin and thus decreases 
the release of oxygen to the tissues.
Cytoplasmic inorganic phosphate concentrations 
are similar to those in the extracellular fluid (ECF) 
(1–1.3 mmol/L), but are not in simple equilibrium. 
The electrical potential of cells in relation to the ECF 
means there is a negative potential across the membrane, 
­tending to repel phosphate ions from the cytoplasm. An 
active process pumps phosphate ions into cells against 
this membrane potential in order to maintain cytoplasmic 
phosphate concentrations.
Cytoplasmic inorganic phosphate concentrations 
change in response to shifts in the balance between the 
organic phosphorous pool and cytosolic phosphate. 
Examples of this are in skeletal muscle, when an increase 
in workload leads to the net degradation of creatine 
phosphate and generation of cytoplasmic phosphate. In 
cells in which glycolysis is taking place, such as erythro-
cytes, a rise in cytoplasmic hydrogen ion concentration 
stimulates glycolysis. Glycolytic intermediaries, which 
are ­organic phosphates, accumulate in the cytoplasm and 
cause a marked depletion of cytoplasmic phosphate.
Although cells can regulate their steady-state concen-
trations of phosphate metabolites in the face of changes 
in extracellular phosphate, severe hypophosphataemia 
can deplete intracellular phosphate. Large fluxes of 
phosphate across the cell membrane can, in turn, affect 
extracellular phosphate concentrations. Various intracel-
lular metabolic disturbances, hormones and hydrogen 
ion shifts can all cause clinically significant redistribu-
tion of phosphate. Examples of mechanisms that permit 
shifts of phosphate into cells include systemic alkalosis, 
the stimulation of adrenoreceptors by catecholamines or 
sympathomimetic agents, and the insulin-mediated entry 
of glucose into cells.
Phosphate homoeostasis
The main sources of phosphate transfer to and from the 
plasma pool are the intestine, bone, soft tissues and the 
kidneys. Under steady-state conditions, the net intesti-
nal phosphorus absorption equals the net urine excretion 
(Fig.  6.7). Small amounts of phosphate (~1 mmol/24 h) 
may be lost in the sweat. The phosphate content of breast 
milk is ~1.8 mmol/L, and a fully breast-feeding woman 
will lose ~1.4 mmol/24 h in the milk.
There are two interrelated mechanisms that react to 
variations in phosphate status in order to maintain phos-
phate homoeostasis, despite fluctuations either in supply 
(diet, intestinal absorption) or demand (growth, mineral-
ization, cellular metabolism). These two mechanisms are 
mediated by:
•	 1,25(OH)2D, synthesis of which occurs in response to 
hypophosphataemia through the 1α-hydroxylation 
of 25(OH)D by the cells of the proximal tubules of 
the kidney
•	 fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23), synthesis and re-
lease of which is stimulated by hyperphosphataemia.
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D regulates plasma phosphate 
primarily by its stimulatory action on intestinal ­phosphate 
absorption, whereas FGF23 primarily ­regulates plasma 
phosphate by decreasing renal tubular phosphate reab-
sorption. The two hormonal systems interact: FGF23 
production is activated by 1,25(OH)2D, and in turn po-
tently inhibits the activity of 1α-hydroxylase required 
for synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D. Fibroblast growth factor 
23 is most highly expressed in bone, particularly by dif-
ferentiated osteoblasts and osteocytes, but is also ex-
pressed in thymus, brain and heart. It signals through a 
co-receptor complex comprising the FGF receptor 1 and 
the β-glycosidase-like protein, klotho, and is catabolized 
intracellularly by subtilisin-like enzymes that cleave the 
native protein at a specific site to generate fragments 
that are thought to be biologically inert. Murine trans-
genic experiments demonstrate a critical role for FGF23 
** Intestinal
absorption 33
Digestive 
juice 1.5
Food
45
Formation 7
Filtered
160
Kidneys
Intestine
52
Phosphate
pool
Bone
Sweat
1.0
Urine
25
†
Reabsorbed
135
*
Resorption 7
Faeces
19
FIGURE 6.7  ■  Representative fluxes (mmol/24 h) in a healthy adult 
(70 kg body weight) for phosphate. The exchanges with soft tis-
sues are not illustrated in this diagram. For phosphate metabo-
lism the major sites of action of parathyroid hormone (*), FGF23 
(†) and 1,25(OH)2D (**) are indicated. Parathyroid hormone and 
FGF23 reduce renal tubular reabsorption of phosphate and in-
crease urine phosphate excretion. (Modified from Wilkinson R. 
Absorption of calcium, phosphorus and magnesium. In: Nordin B E C 
(ed). Calcium, phosphate and magnesium metabolism. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone; 1976, with permission).
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
111
in phosphate homoeostasis: deletion of the FGF23 gene 
is accompanied by hyperphosphataemia, enhanced renal 
tubular reabsorption of phosphate, and elevated concen-
trations of 1,25(OH)2D; overexpression of the protein 
causes renal phosphate wasting, decreased concentrations 
of 1,25(OH)2D and osteomalacia. Fibroblast growth 
­factor 23 induces phosphaturia by decreasing expression 
of the two active phosphate transporters in the luminal 
membrane of the proximal renal tubule, the types 2a 
and 2c ­sodium-phosphate co-transporters (NaPi-2a and 
NaPi-2c, respectively). It further lowers plasma phosphate 
by inhibiting the activity of renal 1α-hydroxylase and in-
creasing the activity of the 25(OH)D-24-hydroxylase, 
thereby decreasing synthesis of 1,25(OH)2D, and intesti-
nal phosphate absorption. The concentration of FGF23 
rises in response to an increase in plasma phosphate as 
glomerular function declines, and, by directly promoting 
an increase in urinary phosphate excretion and indirectly 
reducing intestinal phosphate absorption, allows the 
maintenance of normal plasma phosphate concentration 
in early renal failure.
Fibroblast growth factor 23 is the best characterized 
of a group of circulating compounds that induce phos-
phaturia, collectively termed ‘phosphatonins’. Other 
­putative phosphatonins, such as the skeletal product 
­matrix extracellular phosphoglycoprotein (MEPE), and 
secreted frizzled-related protein 4, may be involved in 
the pathogenesis of pathological states of renal phos-
phate wasting, hypophosphataemia and osteomalacia 
(including X-linked hypophosphataemic rickets and 
oncogenic ­osteomalacia), but no evidence currently 
exists for a role of either in physiological phosphate 
homoeostasis.
Dietary phosphate and intestinal absorption
Phosphate is present in a wide range of foodstuffs, so 
that if the diet is adequate in other nutrients, it is usu-
ally also adequate in phosphate. A typical Western diet 
contains around 0.65 mmol/kg body weight/24 h. There 
is a considerable capacity to adapt to low phosphate 
intake, so it is difficult to establish a minimum dietary 
­requirement. Hypophosphataemia resulting solely from 
inadequate ­dietary intake is extremely rare. A measurable 
increment in 1,25(OH)2D production, one of the adap-
tive responses, occurs when dietary phosphate is reduced 
to <0.32 mmol/kg per 24 h.
Phosphate absorption takes place most efficiently in 
the duodenum and jejunum, though the ileum contrib-
utes most in absolute quantity because of its greater 
length. Approximately 67% of dietary phosphate is ab-
sorbed from the jejunum and ileum even under condi-
tions of phosphate repletion, by a passive non-saturable 
mechanism. Thus, net absorption increases in parallel 
with dietary phosphate content. The active, 1,25(OH)2D-
dependent, saturable component of phosphate absorption 
mainly increases jejunal uptake. The bioavailability of in-
testinal phosphate is reduced by a high calcium intake, 
as calcium forms insoluble complexes with phosphate 
in the intestinal lumen. Aluminium salts react similarly. 
Phosphate is secreted in the digestive juices at a rate of 
~0.1 mmol/kg per 24 h, about 67% of which is reabsorbed 
from the intestine. Phosphate fluxes are summarized in 
Figure 6.7.
The renal tubular reabsorption of phosphate
A high proportion of the phosphate in plasma is ultrafil-
terable and about 75% of filtered phosphate is reabsorbed 
by the proximal tubules. A further 5–20% is reabsorbed 
in the distal tubules and/or cortical collecting ducts and 
the remainder (20–30 mmol/24 h in an adult) appears in 
the urine.
If phosphate is infused intravenously and the urinary 
excretion rate of phosphate measured, then above a cer-
tain plasma concentration of phosphate all additional 
increments in the filtered load will be paralleled by the 
same increment in urinary phosphate; that is, the rela-
tionship between the phosphate excretion rate and the 
plasma phosphate is linear, with a slope that equates to 
glomerular filtration rate at high (saturating) filtered 
loads. Extrapolating this line back to where the urine 
phosphate excretion rate is zero defines the threshold 
of glomerular filtrate (and hence plasma) phosphate 
concentration (TmP, tubular maximum for phosphate) 
that the renal tubular homoeostatic mechanism is seek-
ing to maintain, in relation to glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR). In vivo, this can be determined by calculating 
the clearance of phosphate relative to that of creatinine 
on a fasting urine sample and using the nomogram of 
Walton and Bijvoet (1975), which relates this value to 
the prevailing plasma phosphate concentration (TmP/
GFR). This is performed fasting to avoid changes in 
plasma phosphate due to food intake, and requires a 
urine sample and a plasma sample (see Appendix 6.4, 
for method).
Factors regulating TmP/GFR. A number of endo-
crine and non-endocrine factors are involved in the 
regulation of TmP/GFR and hence plasma phosphate 
(Table 6.7). The most important are FGF23 and PTH. 
Fibroblast growth factor 23 production is affected by 
perturbations in plasma phosphate, such that a rise in its 
­concentration stimulates an increase in FGF23 produc-
tion, which in turn increases urinary phosphate loss. It 
is not clear whether plasma phosphate concentrations 
directly ­affect FGF23 production, or do so by an as yet 
unknown ­intermediary pathway. Changes in plasma 
phosphate do not directly ­affect PTH secretion, but 
PTH acts on the renal tubules, to reduce TmP/GFR. 
Plasma phosphate concentrations are thus usually low 
when there is an elevation in PTH (e.g. in primary hy-
perparathyroidism 
or 
secondary 
hyperparathyroid-
ism due to vitamin D deficiency) and renal function is 
­normal. TmP/GFR is increased when PTH concentra-
tions are low, or there is insensitivity to the hormone (e.g. 
in ­hypoparathyroidism or ­pseudohypoparathyroidism). 
Parathyroid ­hormone-related peptide has similar effects 
to PTH on renal phosphate handling. The phosphaturic 
effects of PTH and PTHrP result from action at multiple 
sites along the nephrons and are mediated through cAMP 
production.
The high TmP/GFR seen in childhood and in acro-
megaly is mediated through insulin-like growth factor 
112	
Clinical biochemistry
1 (IGF-1). TmP/GFR is increased in thyrotoxicosis and 
decreased by corticosteroids.
The increase in plasma phosphate seen after the 
menopause is abolished by oestrogen replacement ther-
apy. There is little evidence that 1,25(OH)2D greatly 
affects renal phosphate handling. Calcitonin, given in 
pharmacological doses, acutely decreases the TmP/
GFR. In ­general, acidosis (whether respiratory or meta-
bolic) reduces renal tubular phosphate reabsorption, 
whereas alkalosis has the opposite effect. Calcium it-
self can affect phosphate transport in the kidneys. In 
healthy subjects, this is difficult to demonstrate because 
of concurrent changes in PTH, but calcium infusion in 
hypoparathyroid subjects ultimately increases urinary 
phosphate losses and reduces plasma phosphate by re-
ducing TmP/GFR.
Various drugs may induce changes in TmP/GFR. In 
general, these changes are small, the exceptions being 
glucocorticoids and acetazolamide, which reduce TmP/
GFR, and the bisphosphonate, etidronate which, when 
given at doses of 10 mg/kg, causes a dose-dependent in-
crease in TmP/GFR and plasma phosphate.
Renal phosphate handling may also be affected by 
haemodynamic changes. Patients with a single kidney 
(e.g. transplant recipients or live kidney donors) have a 
high filtered load per nephron and lower TmP/GFR as 
an adaptation. Phosphaturia also accompanies the na-
triuresis that follows volume loading, poorly controlled 
diabetes or diuretic use, because renal phosphate 
transport is related to sodium transport. Parathyroid 
hormone is needed for the full expression of this 
phenomenon.
Disorders of renal phosphate metabolism. There are 
a number of conditions that share as a central feature a 
combination of low TmP/GFR, hyperphosphaturia, 
­hypophosphataemia and osteomalacia: the defect may be 
inherited or acquired. The clinical manifestations depend 
on the severity of the renal phosphate leak, the degree 
of response of the 1α-hydroxylase enzyme to the ensu-
ing hypophosphataemia, the age at onset and associated 
defects. In some instances (e.g. in some patients with id-
iopathic hypercalciuria), the primary defect appears to 
be a low TmP/GFR with modest hypophosphataemia 
and, in response to this, there is an appropriate increase 
in 1,25(OH)2D production. Intestinal absorption of cal-
cium and phosphate is enhanced and the extra calcium 
that is absorbed appears in the urine, predisposing to re-
nal stones.
There are several syndromes of hyperphosphaturia 
and hypophosphataemia, accompanied by inappropri-
ately low concentrations of 1,25(OH)2D and osteomala-
cia, including autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic 
rickets (ADHR), X-linked hypophosphataemic rickets 
(XLH) and oncogenic osteomalacia (OOM) (Table 6.7). 
In most instances, an abnormality in FGF23 metabolism 
underlies the phenotype.
Oncogenic osteomalacia is a paraneoplastic syndrome, 
in which tumours of mesenchymal origin elaborate and 
secrete excess amounts of FGF23, and possibly other 
phosphatonins, such as MEPE or secreted frizzled-related 
protein 4. Detection and removal of the tumour reduces 
FGF23 concentrations and corrects the biochemical and 
skeletal phenotype. In autosomal dominant hypophospha-
taemic rickets, affected individuals harbour a mutation in 
TABLE 6.7  Factors and disorders affecting TmP/GFR
Factor
Increased TmP/GFR
Decreased TmP/GFR
Endocrine
Hypoparathyroidism
Hyperparathyroidism
Pseudohypoparathyroidism
PTH-related peptide
Growth hormone/IGF-1
Corticosteroids
Recovery from vitamin D deficiency
Lactation
Oestrogen replacement therapy
Drugs
Bisphosphonates  
(particularly etidronate)
Calcitonin
Tyrosine kinase inhibitors (imatinib, nilotinib)
Diuretics (particularly acetazolamide)
Intravenous iron replacement therapy
Natriuresis
 
Volume loading
Single kidney, diuretics
Poorly controlled diabetes
Metabolic
Acidosis
Alkalosis
Genetic
Tumoral calcinosis  
(autosomal recessive)
Hypophosphataemic conditions with hypercalciuria and/or 
osteomalacia/rickets
GALNT3 (601756)
FGF23 (605380)
KL (604824)
X-linked hypophosphataemic rickets (307800)
AD hypophosphataemia (193100)
AR hypophosphataemia type 1 (241520)
AR hypophosphataemia type 2 (613312)
Osteoglophonic dysplasia (166250)
McCune–Albright syndrome/fibrous dysplasia (174800)
Epidermal nevus syndrome (162900)
Hypophosphataemic rickets with hyperparathyroidism (612089)
Acquired
 
Oncogenic osteomalacia
Distal (type 1) renal tubular acidosis
Renal Fanconi syndrome
Neurofibromatosis
Numbers in brackets refer to Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) catalogue number.
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
113
the gene encoding FGF23, which renders the full-length 
protein resistant to normal (inactivating) proteolysis. 
Patients with X-linked hypophosphataemia carry a mu-
tation in the PHEX (phosphate-regulating gene with ho-
mologies to endopeptidases on the X chromosome) gene, 
which encodes an endopeptidase that is believed to seques-
ter and stabilize a secreted FGF23-stimulating bone matrix 
protein. Inactivation of PHEX allows accumulation of the 
matrix-bound FGF23-stimulating protein and an increase 
in local, and then systemic, FGF23 production. Whether 
the PHEX endopeptidase also inactivates FGF23 in vivo is 
currently uncertain, but thought to be unlikely.
In all three of these phosphaturic syndromes, circu-
lating concentrations of FGF23 are typically elevated. 
Circulating concentrations of FGF23 can also be elevated 
in patients with polyostotic fibrous dysplasia/McCune–
Albright syndrome (caused by somatic activating mu-
tations in GNAS1) in 50% of whom renal phosphate 
wasting occurs. Two autosomal recessive conditions are 
associated with FGF23-dependent hypophosphataemia. 
In type 1, autosomal recessive hypophosphataemic rick-
ets (ARHR), inactivating mutations of DMP1, which 
encodes an osteocyte protein that restrains FGF23 pro-
duction, produce a phenotype similar to that of ADHR. 
Inactivating mutations of ENPP1, which encodes an 
enzyme important in regulating ­hydroxyapatite depo-
sition, cause type 2 autosomal recessive hypophospha-
taemic rickets. This is a rare syndrome of generalized 
arterial calcification of infancy and, in those who survive 
to adulthood, FGF23-dependent hypophosphataemia.
The recessively inherited condition, hereditary 
­hypophosphataemic rickets with hypercalciuria, is caused 
by inactivating mutations in the gene SLC34A3, which 
encodes the NaPi-2c transporter. In this hypophos-
phataemic disorder, which is not mediated by FGF23, 
chronic hypophosphataemia is accompanied by an appro-
priate increment in 1α-hydroxylase activity and plasma 
1,25(OH)2D. In a few patients, a milder phenotype of 
hypophosphataemia with nephrolithiasis and osteo­penia 
has been associated with mutations in NaPi-2a. The bone 
diseases associated with hypophosphataemia are discussed 
in Chapter 31.
Plasma phosphate concentrations
There are marked age-related changes in plasma phos-
phate, with the highest concentrations seen in early 
infancy when growth velocity is highest. Throughout 
childhood and adolescence, plasma phosphate concen-
trations remain higher than in adults. In adulthood, a 
decline in fasting plasma phosphate concentrations is 
seen in men after the age of 40. In women, there is little 
change, but a small increment (~0.07 mmol/L) occurs 
after the menopause. Plasma phosphate does not change 
during pregnancy, but is increased during lactation. The 
age- and lactation-related changes in plasma phosphate 
are mediated through changes in TmP/GFR (Table 6.8).
There is marked diurnal variation in plasma phosphate. 
During the day, concentrations are substantially higher in 
the mid-afternoon than in the early morning and there 
is a second peak in the early hours of the morning (see 
Fig. 6.4). This early morning peak is attenuated with age. 
Plasma phosphate rises after food and subsequently falls 
as phosphate either enters cells or is excreted. The fall 
in plasma phosphate after a meal is partly attributable to 
insulin-dependent stimulation of glycolysis, which in-
creases intracellular phosphate utilization.
Hyperphosphataemia
The major causes of hyperphosphataemia are listed in 
Box  6.6. Hyperphosphataemia may arise through an 
­increase of phosphate input into the blood or decreased 
TABLE 6.8  Plasma phosphate concentrations 
according to age and sex
Age
Sex
Reference range for plasma 
phosphate (mmol/L)
Last trimester in 
utero
M, F
0.8–1.4
1 day
M, F
1.0–2.6
1 day–1 month
M, F
1.8–3.2
1–12 months
M, F
1.4–2.1
1–14 years
M, F
1.2–1.7
14–18 years
M, F
a
1.0–1.6
18–45 years
M, F
0.8–1.4
>45 years
F
0.8–1.4
>45 years
M
0.7–1.2
Lactation
F
1.1–1.5
aThe decline in plasma phosphate concentrations from adolescent 
to adult values occurs, on average, two years earlier in girls than 
boys. Adult concentrations are reached around age 15 in girls and 
age 17 in boys. This parallels the earlier start and finish to the 
adolescent growth spurt in girls.
BOX 6.6	
Causes of hyperphosphataemia
Pseudohyperphosphataemia
•	 Haemolysed specimen
•	 Myeloma
•	 Delayed separation from red cells
Increased phosphate input
•	 Intravenous phosphate
•	 Rectal phosphate
Shift from intracellular to  
extracellular fluid
•	 Cell death
•	 Tumour lysis syndrome
•	 Rhabdomyolysis
•	 Malignant hyperpyrexia
•	 Heat stroke
Diminished phosphate excretion
•	 Reduced GFR
•	 Acute kidney injury
•	 Chronic kidney disease
•	 Increased TmP/GFR
•	 Physiological (normal childhood, lactation, recovery 
from vitamin D deficiency)
•	 Pathological (reduced PTH or PTH resistance), 
vitamin D toxicity, thyrotoxicosis, acromegaly, 
­etidronate, tumoral calcinosis (genetic conditions, 
see text)
114	
Clinical biochemistry
excretion. The latter may result from a reduction in GFR 
or an increase in TmP/GFR. Conditions in which the 
TmP/GFR is raised, generally cause modest hyperphos-
phataemia (plasma phosphate 1.4–2.4 mmol/L). Tumoral 
calcinosis in non-uraemic subjects is a rare recessively 
inherited disorder associated with a high TmP/GFR, 
elevated 1,25(OH)D2 concentrations and hyperphospha­
taemia; a biochemical phenotype that is the mirror im-
age of autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic rickets. 
It is most commonly caused by inactivating mutations in 
the GALNT3 gene. GALNT3 encodes a glycosyltransfer-
ase known as ppGalNac-T3. This enzyme O-glycosylates 
the subtilisin-like proprotein convertase recognition site 
in the FGF23 protein, thereby protecting FGF23 from 
proteolytic cleavage and permitting intact FGF23 to be 
secreted. In the absence of this enzyme, most FGF23 is 
processed into inactive fragments before secretion, lead-
ing to low or undetectable circulating concentrations of 
biologically active FGF23. Tumoral calcinosis can also 
result from mutations in the genes encoding FGF23 or 
klotho, leading to impaired secretion of FGF23, and re-
sistance to the actions of FGF23, respectively. A feature 
of tumoral calcinosis is the presence of large periarticu-
lar calcific masses, which are subject to breakdown and 
chronic inflammation.
Renal impairment, whether acute or chronic, can cause 
hyperphosphataemia, but this does not usually occur un-
til the GFR falls below 30 mL/min. As renal function 
deteriorates further, plasma phosphate rises sharply and 
may reach 6 mmol/L in established renal failure. Other 
abnormalities of phosphate metabolism that present early 
in the course of chronic kidney disease are important in 
the aetiology of hyperparathyroidism and are discussed 
further in Chapter 31.
The diet rarely contains sufficient phosphate to cause 
significant postprandial hyperphosphataemia, but exces-
sive input of phosphate can occur with the use of intra-
venous phosphate salts or phosphate enemas. The latter 
is particularly liable to occur with children unless the 
dose of phosphate in the enema is reduced. Massive cell 
death with release of intracellular phosphate can cause 
­hyperphosphataemia. Examples of the latter ­include 
rhabdomyolysis and the tumour lysis syndrome, seen, 
for example, after the initiation of chemotherapy in 
childhood leukaemia. It should be emphasized that, as 
with hypercalcaemia, an increased input of phosphate 
into the circulation is much more likely to cause severe 
­hyperphosphataemia if there is coexistent renal impair-
ment and thus a reduced capacity to excrete phosphate. 
This is often the case in critically ill patients.
Plasma phosphate may be artefactually raised 
(by ~30%) in very haemolysed samples or if separation 
from red cells is delayed. Pseudohyperphosphataemia 
has also been described with certain chromogenic assay 
methods of automated analysis in patients with parapro-
teinaemia or hypertriglyceridaemia.
Consequences of hyperphosphataemia
No specific symptoms are directly attributable to hy-
perphosphataemia. However, when the product of the 
­calcium and phosphate concentrations in blood exceeds the 
solubility product (approximately 4.85 × 10
−6 molar units), 
soft tissue (metastatic) calcification occurs. This is seen 
most frequently in chronic kidney disease, where calcifica-
tion occurs in blood vessels, the skin, heart, lungs, kidneys, 
conjunctivae and around joints. Interstitial ­calcification of 
the kidneys is of particular importance, since it impairs 
renal function further and reduces the ability to excrete 
phosphate loads. The ­deposition of ­calcium phosphate 
salts in the skin is thought to ­contribute to the pruritus 
of chronic uraemia, a symptom that may ­improve with 
better control of hyperphosphataemia. The syndrome of 
progressive ischaemic skin ulceration ­(calciphylaxis) in 
­patients with established renal failure has also been attrib-
uted to calcium phosphate deposition. In this syndrome, 
ulcers spread rapidly with ­secondary infection of the 
­necrotic tissues. Histologically, there is extensive arterial 
and arteriolar calcification and ­thrombosis. These lesions 
do not respond to local therapy, but do heal after para-
thyroidectomy (which reduces the ­[calcium] × ­[phosphate] 
product acutely). Urgent parathyroidectomy is ­indicated 
in this condition.
If plasma phosphate rises acutely, then plasma calcium 
concentrations fall by a mass action effect; this is seen, for 
example, with the tumour lysis syndrome and rectal or in-
travenous phosphate administration. This was the basis of 
the former use of intravenous phosphate in the manage-
ment of malignant hypercalcaemia. However, the perils 
of soft tissue calcification induced by this treatment out-
weigh any benefit.
Diagnostic approach to hyperphosphataemia
The clinical history should reveal excessive exogenous 
phosphate supply (intravenous or rectal). Massive cell 
death in, for example rhabdomyolysis or the tumour lysis 
syndrome, should also be evident from the clinical set-
ting. Rhabdomyolysis can be confirmed by measurement 
of serum creatine kinase activity.
Diminished excretion of phosphate due to severe 
renal impairment is evident from measurement of the 
plasma creatinine. The most convenient method of de-
tecting changes in TmP/GFR is to use the nomogram 
of Walton and Bijvoet (see Appendix 6.4, below). Other 
measures of urinary phosphate clearance have theoreti-
cal failings compared with the TmP/GFR. In interpret-
ing the result, it is important to bear in mind the normal 
age-related changes in this index. There is no diagnostic 
value in measuring the 24 h urine phosphate excretion 
which, in steady-state conditions, reflects the product 
of dietary phosphate content and fractional phosphate 
absorption.
Therapeutic approach to hyperphosphataemia
Hyperphosphataemia due to a raised TmP/GFR is 
rarely high enough to require specific action. Phosphate 
control is, however, important in patients with estab-
lished renal failure, both to limit damaging metastatic 
and vascular calcification and to control the develop-
ment of hyperparathyroidism. There are various salts 
of aluminium, magnesium and calcium which, when ad-
ministered orally, bind phosphorus in the intestine and 
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
115
limit its absorption. Aluminium hydroxide is the most 
effective of these agents, but significant quantities of 
aluminium, which has toxic effects on bone, may be ab-
sorbed. Calcium-based phosphate binders (such as cal-
cium acetate or calcium carbonate) are generally used in 
preference to aluminium salts. However, calcium-based 
phosphate binders tend to worsen hypercalcaemia in 
­dialysis patients, and have been linked to adverse vascu-
lar outcomes, so calcium-free phosphate-binding agents, 
such as lanthanum carbonate and sevelamer hydrochlo-
ride are increasingly used. In dialysis patients, inadequate 
phosphate control may be due to a number of factors (see 
Box 31.6).
Acute kidney injury can complicate the tumour ­lysis 
syndrome and is attributable to phosphate and urate 
released from cells. Maintaining a brisk saline diuresis 
at the time chemotherapy is begun reduces the risk of 
­developing acute kidney injury.
Hypophosphataemia
Mechanisms
Hypophosphataemia can arise by any one or combination 
of three mechanisms:
•	 inadequate phosphate absorption from the 
intestine
•	 shifts of phosphate from extracellular fluid into 
cells
•	 abnormal urinary phosphate losses (Table 6.9).
As indicated earlier, it is very rare that the diet is so 
inadequate in phosphate that, on its own, it can cause 
hypophosphataemia. However, chronic malnutrition 
can result in a deficit of whole body phosphate such 
that, when conditions occur in which there is a shift 
of phosphate from the extracellular to the intracellular 
compartment, such as during refeeding, profound hypo-
phosphataemia may develop. Inadequate dietary phos-
phate may thus be a predisposing factor to, rather than 
a direct cause of, hypophosphataemia. Clinically signifi-
cant hypophosphataemia due to the use of phosphate-
binding antacids has been described, but this is now rare 
because of the availability of alternative therapies for 
peptic ulcer disease.
Hypophosphataemia can result from the acute shift of 
phosphate into cells. Less than 1% of total body phos-
phate is in the extracellular space, so small shifts of no 
more than 6 or 7 mmol can induce significant changes 
in plasma phosphate concentrations. If this occurs with-
out prior intracellular phosphate depletion, then the 
condition is usually benign and self-limiting. The most 
frequently encountered conditions in which this phe-
nomenon occurs are the following.
•	 Refeeding syndrome. Providing sufficient calories, 
protein and other nutrients to malnourished patients 
allows accelerated tissue accretion. The cellular up-
take and utilization of phosphate increases, initially 
for the purpose of phosphorylation of glucose and 
fructose, and ATP synthesis. When insufficient 
quantities of phosphate are provided, an acute state 
of severe hypophosphataemia, with intracellular 
phosphate depletion, occurs. The clinical and meta-
bolic consequences can be serious. Examples of situ-
ations in which this mechanism can operate, include 
the treatment of diabetic ketoacidosis and during 
parenteral nutrition.
TABLE 6.9  Mechanisms underlying common causes of hypophosphataemia
Aetiology of 
hypophosphataemia
↑ Cellular uptake
↓ Gastrointestinal 
input
↑ Urinary 
loss
 
Respiratory 
alkalosis
Refeeding
Muscle
Inadequate 
intake
Poor 
absorption
↓ TmP/GFR
Primary 
hyperparathyroidism
 
 
 
 
 
●
 Plasma 
phosphate 
typically 0.35–
0.80 mmol/L
Vitamin D deficiency 
with secondary 
hyperparathyroidism
 
 
 
●
●
●
Post renal transplant
 
 
 
 
●
●
Hypophosphataemic 
rickets or osteomalacia
 
 
 
 
(●)
a
●
Antacid consumption
 
 
 
 
●
 
Sepsis, burns
●
 
 
●
●
 
Alcoholism
 
 
 
●
 
●
Sympathomimetics (e.g. 
β-agonists)
 
 
●
 
 
 
Salicylate poisoning
●
 
 
 
 
 
Early asthmatic crisis
●
 
(●)
b
 
 
 
Alcohol – withdrawal
●
●
 
●
 
 
 Plasma 
phosphate 
may be 
<0.35 mmol/L
Diabetic ketoacidosis 
– recovery
 
●
 
 
 
(●)
c
Hyperalimentation
 
●
 
●
 
 
Hepatic failure
●
●
 
●
●
 
Long distance running
 
 
●
 
 
 
aContribution of phosphate malabsorption depends on 1,25(OH)2D response to hypophosphataemia.
bDue to β-agonist use.
cPhosphaturia associated with glycosuria.
116	
Clinical biochemistry
•	 Respiratory alkalosis. Hyperventilation due to any 
cause will reduce the carbon dioxide content of the 
blood and cells. Intracellular hydrogen ion concentra-
tion falls, which activates the enzyme phosphofruc-
tokinase, which in turn accelerates phosphorylation 
of glucose. Phosphate is taken up rapidly from the 
plasma and hypophosphataemia results. Examples of 
clinical situations in which this mechanism may oc-
cur include liver failure, severe burns, salicylate poi-
soning, alcoholic ketoacidosis, alcohol withdrawal 
and sepsis. Hyperventilation in these situations may 
be the result of either ­direct metabolic effects or sim-
ply fear and pain. It is ­commonly observed in hos-
pitalized patients, but is typically mild and transient 
and does not require specific treatment; correction 
of the underlying cause of hyperventilation also cor-
rects the hypophosphataemia.
•	 Increased muscle uptake. Prolonged intense exercise 
can increase uptake of phosphate into muscle in an 
attempt to replenish creatine phosphate stores. This 
has caused profound hypophosphataemia in mara-
thon runners.
Increased urinary phosphate loss is usually a chronic 
phenomenon resulting from a low TmP/GFR and gives 
rise to moderate hypophosphataemia and osteomalacia 
(see above, and Chapter  31). In uncontrolled diabetes, 
osmotic diuresis causes loss of phosphate in the urine, and 
this contributes to the occurrence of hypophosphataemia 
once insulin therapy is begun. A reduction in TmP/GFR 
also contributes to the hypophosphataemia that can occur 
in paracetamol overdose, even in the absence of signifi-
cant hepatic damage. A reduction in TmP/GFR, along 
with other renal tubular function abnormalities, may 
be seen in patients with severe alcohol dependency. It 
­reverses on abstinence.
Consequences of hypophosphataemia
Mild to moderate hypophosphataemia (0.35–0.80 mmol/L 
in an adult) is not harmful in the short term, but if chronic 
it may induce osteomalacia. When plasma phosphate 
concentrations fall below 0.35 mmol/L, the syndrome 
of acute phosphate deficiency may develop. The major 
manifestations are listed in Table 6.10.
Diagnostic approach to hypophosphataemia
The acute phosphate deficiency syndrome often arises in 
patients who are critically ill from other causes, and the 
symptoms of phosphate deficiency may mimic ­features 
of these illnesses. Examples of this include deteriorat-
ing mental function simulating encephalopathy in the 
hepatic failure patient, and tremor and irritability simu-
lating alcohol withdrawal symptoms. The detection of 
severe phosphate deficiency thus depends on anticipating 
the circumstances in which it might occur and requesting 
laboratory confirmation. In these circumstances, mea-
surement of plasma phosphate is usually sufficient, but 
assessments of recent dietary and intravenous phosphate 
intake may also be helpful. In all patients with severe 
acute hypophosphataemia, phosphate disappears from 
the urine so little information can be gained from its 
measurement.
In the case of chronic hypophosphataemia causing 
osteomalacia, the critical investigation is determina-
tion of the TmP/GFR. An inappropriately low TmP/
GFR should prompt evaluation for one of the causes of 
renal phosphate wasting, discussed under Disorders of 
renal phosphate metabolism (see p. 112). Measurement 
of ­serum concentrations of FGF23 can be helpful in 
­identifying FGF23-dependent causes of hypophos-
phataemia. Development of FGF23 immunoassays is 
­continuing; there is an assay that measures the full-
length peptide only and a C-terminal assay that rec-
ognizes both full length and the cleaved C-terminal 
fragment.
Nuclear magnetic resonance has been used to detect 
changes in intracellular phosphate metabolism and has 
proved particularly valuable in research into muscle dis-
eases. The technique is not, however, generally available 
for clinical practice. Isotopic tests of intestinal phosphate 
absorption have also been used in research, but have little 
practical clinical application.
Therapeutic approach to hypophosphataemia
Mild to moderate acute hypophosphataemia secondary 
to redistribution (plasma phosphate 0.35–0.80 mmol/L 
in adults) is usually transient and requires no specific 
TABLE 6.10  The acute phosphate deficiency syndrome
System affected
Mechanism/site
Clinical consequence
Haemopoietic 
system
↓ 2,3-DPG in red cells, reduced 
O2 release to peripheral tissues
Tissue hypoxia
 
↑ Red cell fragility
Haemolysis (plasma phosphate <0.1 mmol/L)
 
Abnormal leukocyte function
↓ Resistance to infection
 
Abnormal platelet function
↓ Platelet survival, abnormal clotting
Striated muscle
↓ Contractility of diaphragm, 
heart, skeletal muscles
Respiratory failure
↓ Stroke work
Stiffness, weakness, debility
 
Rhabdomyolysis
Muscle pain, weakness
 
 
↑ Plasma creatine kinase
Nervous system
Brain
Lethargy, confusion, irritability, dysarthria, 
tremor, seizure, coma
 
Peripheral nerves
Paraesthesiae
 
↓ conduction velocity
 
Gastrointestinal
Smooth muscle
Gastric atony, ileus
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
117
treatment. Severe hypophosphataemia (<0.35 mmol/L) 
­occurs only when there has been a cumulative net loss 
of ~100 mmol phosphate. Symptoms of hypophos-
phataemia appear when net losses reach ~300 mmol. 
However, the deficit in total body phosphate can-
not be predicted reliably from the plasma phosphate 
concentration.
Treatment may be given orally in the form of sodium 
or potassium hydrogen phosphate (100 mmol phosphate 
daily in divided doses for a week), but often with critically 
ill patients, intravenous replacement is necessary, particu-
larly in those with symptomatic acute hypophosphatae-
mia. Intravenous therapy can safely be undertaken using 
monobasic potassium phosphate (KH2PO4) in a dose of 
50–100 μmol/kg body weight in half normal saline by 
continuous infusion over 12 h. This can be repeated every 
12 h with monitoring of plasma calcium, phosphate and 
potassium. Intravenous administration can be stopped 
when plasma phosphate has risen above the symptomatic 
watershed of 0.35 mmol/L, assuming the rest of the defi-
cit can be replaced orally.
Prevention is appropriate for at-risk patients. For 
­example, many patients receiving parenteral nutrition 
require about 0.5 mmol phosphate/kg body weight/24 h, 
and occasionally more. Malnourished alcoholic patients 
receiving ­intravenous glucose should receive phosphate 
supplementation too.
The complications of intravenous phosphate admin-
istration include hyperphosphataemia, hypocalcaemia, 
hyperkalaemia and acidosis. Oral phosphate is a laxative 
that may induce diarrhoea.
MAGNESIUM METABOLISM
Most magnesium is in the mineral phase of bone or 
within the cells of the soft tissues. After potassium, it 
is the most abundant intracellular cation. Within cells, 
magnesium is a cofactor in over 300 enzymatic reactions, 
involving energy metabolism, control of various calcium 
and potassium channels, membrane stabilization and 
neuromuscular excitability, protein and nucleic acid syn-
thesis and oxidative phosphorylation. It is of particular 
importance in those processes involving the formation 
and utilization of ATP. All enzymatic reactions involv-
ing ATP have an absolute requirement for magnesium. 
Less than 0.5% of total body magnesium is present in 
the plasma, although, for practical purposes, measure-
ments of plasma ionized or total magnesium are the only 
widely used methods for determining magnesium status. 
However, such measurements may not accurately reflect 
whole body magnesium status. The body distribution 
of magnesium in an adult is summarized in Table 6.11. 
The magnesium content of infants is lower than adults 
(approximately 10 mmol/kg body weight, compared with 
16 mmol/kg body weight in adults).
Plasma magnesium
In plasma, ~60% of the total magnesium is in the ionized 
form and ~15% complexed (with phosphate, citrate or bi-
carbonate), the remainder (~25%) being protein-bound, 
mainly to albumin. Plasma magnesium concentrations 
can be adjusted for albumin concentration by the formula:
Mg
Mg
Alb
C
T
2
2
0 005 40
+
+
=
+
−
.
(
) ; where 
MgC
2+  
is the corrected value and MgT
2+  is the measured total 
value. The ionized and complexed magnesium fractions 
are ultrafilterable. The precise distribution of magne-
sium in the various plasma fractions may, as in the case of 
calcium, be altered by changes in protein and hydrogen 
ion concentrations. Plasma magnesium concentrations 
do not show any major changes with age or between the 
sexes, apart from a small increment at the menopause 
of ~0.06 mmol/L. Plasma magnesium falls to premeno-
pausal concentrations with oestrogen replacement, in the 
same way that calcium does.
Magnesium homoeostasis
Magnesium is widely distributed in foods. Being the min-
eral ion of chlorophyll, green vegetables are an important 
source. Daily intakes range from 6 to 20 mmol, with a 
median of ~12 mmol. Hard water contains an appreciable 
amount of soluble magnesium (up to 5 mmol/L), which 
may be more available than some of the intracellular mag-
nesium in particular foods. Food processing can remove 
much of the magnesium from cereals and carbohydrate 
foodstuffs. The wide reference range for 24 h urinary 
magnesium excretion (2.0–7.5 mmol) largely reflects dif-
ferent magnesium intakes.
Of the typical dietary intake of 12 mmol, 6 mmol is 
absorbed, mainly in the small intestine. There are two 
separate transport systems. One, an active transport, is 
saturated at low intraluminal concentrations; the other 
is a passive diffusion mechanism that absorbs a constant 
fraction (~7%) of ingested magnesium. Some magnesium 
can be absorbed from the large bowel, as demonstrated 
by the occurrence of hypermagnesaemia after the use 
of magnesium-containing enemas. About 2 mmol mag-
nesium is secreted into the intestine, thus the net daily 
intestinal absorption is ~4 mmol, which is balanced by 
­excretion of this amount into the urine.
Approximately 75% of the total plasma magne-
sium is filtered through the glomeruli. Of that, ~20% 
is reabsorbed in the proximal tubules by paracellular 
absorption. The majority of the ultrafilterable mag-
nesium (~65%) is reabsorbed in the cortical thick as-
cending limb of the loop of Henle. This is a passive 
paracellular process, driven by a positive transepithelial 
TABLE 6.11  Magnesium content and distribution 
in a typical 70 kg adult
 
Total (mmol)
Concentration
Bone
600
100 mmol/kg dry 
weight
Intracellular
 
 
  Soft tissues
500
12–18 mmol/kg
  Red cells
5.5
2.7 mmol/L
ECF
 
 
  Interstitial fluid
7.0
0.7 mmol/L
  Plasma
2.5
0.8–1.0 mmol/L
  Ionized
1.5
0.5–0.6 mmol/L
118	
Clinical biochemistry
Intestinal
absorption 6.2
Digestive juice 1.5
Food
12
Formation
0.1
Filtered
100
Kidneys
Intestine
13.5
Magnesium
pool
Bone
Sweat
0.2
Urine
4.5
Reabsorbed
96
Resorption
0.1
Faeces
7.3
FIGURE  6.8  ■  Representative fluxes (mmol/24 h) in a healthy 
adult (70 kg body weight) for magnesium. The exchanges with 
soft tissues are not illustrated in this diagram. (Modified from 
Wilkinson R. Absorption of calcium, phosphorus and magnesium. In: 
Nordin B E C (ed). Calcium, phosphate and magnesium metabolism. 
Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 1976, with permission).
voltage gradient and mediated by a tight-junction Mg
2+ 
pathway, which involves the molecules claudin-16 and 
claudin-19.
The distal convoluted tubules regulate the final ­urinary 
magnesium excretion by active transcellular reabsorption 
of Mg
2+ (~5–10% of ultrafilterable magnesium). Active 
magnesium reabsorption is a multistep process. A nega-
tive membrane potential maintained by the voltage-gated 
K
+ channel Kv1.1 provides the driving force for Mg
2+ 
transport across the apical, epithelial channel, TRPM6 
(transient receptor potential cation channel M6). 
Epidermal growth factor regulates active Mg
2+ transport 
through TRPM6 in a paracrine/autocrine manner. The 
Na
+,K
+-ATPase situated in the basolateral membrane 
generates a local negative membrane potential helping to 
drive Mg
2+ across the TRMP6 channel in the basolateral 
membrane. The transcription factor HNF1β (hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 1β) affects the expression of the regula-
tory protein γ-subunit that binds and modulates Na
+K
+-
ATPase. There is a probable active extrusion mechanism, 
either via a Mg
2+ pump or a Na
+–Mg
2+ exchanger, with 
the transmembrane protein CNNM2 (cyclin M2) a likely 
candidate.
There is no significant reabsorption in the collecting 
ducts. Between 3% and 5% of the filtered magnesium 
finally appears in the urine. The kidney has a maximal 
limit for tubular reabsorption (TmMg), above which all 
the ultrafilterable magnesium is excreted. Calculating 
either the TmMg or the fractional urinary magnesium 
excretion from magnesium infusion experiments can 
be helpful in characterizing genetic hypomagnesaemic 
disorders.
Renal magnesium clearance is increased by osmotic 
diuretics, loop diuretics and thiazides. The kidneys of the 
premature newborn differ from those of adults in that the 
proximal tubules can reabsorb up to 70% of the ultrafil-
terable magnesium.
There are clear homoeostatic mechanisms for regulat-
ing magnesium status, although the magnesium ‘sensor’ 
has not been characterized. The kidneys appear to be the 
prime organs in the fine regulation of magnesium ho-
moeostasis. In times of magnesium deprivation, the kid-
neys can reduce magnesium excretion to <1 mmol/24 h. 
There is intestinal adaptation too, with the proportion 
of dietary magnesium absorbed higher (up to 75%) 
when the diet is magnesium-depleted, but lower (down 
to 25%) when the load is greater. Intestinal magnesium 
absorption can be inhibited by binding agents such as cel-
lulose phosphate. Faecal magnesium output is normally 
<15 mmol/24 h.
Magnesium appears to regulate parathyroid hormone 
secretion in a manner similar to calcium, but is only one-
half to one-third as potent. Parathyroid hormone secre-
tion is thus stimulated by modest hypomagnesaemia and 
suppressed by hypermagnesaemia. Paradoxically, pro-
found hypomagnesaemia actually inhibits parathyroid 
hormone secretion. Although PTH may enhance the re-
nal tubular reabsorption of magnesium, it is probably of 
little importance in the overall regulation of magnesium 
metabolism.
Magnesium losses through sweat may be great. At high 
temperatures, 10–15% of total magnesium output can be 
found in the sweat. Typical magnesium fluxes in an adult 
are illustrated in Figure 6.8. The magnesium content of 
breast milk is ~1.6 mmol/L, and a breast-feeding woman 
may lose up to 1.2 mmol/24 h through this route.
Hypomagnesaemia
Causes
Hypomagnesaemia may arise through inadequate absorp-
tion (or intake), by excessive urinary or gastrointestinal 
losses, or by redistribution of magnesium from extracel-
lular to intracellular sites. Hypomagnesaemia in adults is 
usually an acquired condition, the major causes of which 
are listed in Box  6.7. It is important to recognize that 
­several drugs can cause symptomatic hypomagnesaemia, 
and that withdrawal of the drug concerned will resolve 
the problem. Most drugs associated with hypomagne-
saemia affect renal tubular magnesium reabsorption. 
The exceptions are proton pump inhibitors (PPI), which 
probably affect intestinal transport or increase intesti-
nal loss. This is a class effect and hypomagnesaemia will 
­recur if a second PPI is substituted for the first. In adults, 
severe symptomatic hypomagnesaemia (<0.35 mmol/L) 
is seen in patients having platinum-based chemotherapy 
or taking proton pump inhibitors, or who are very unwell 
in intensive care settings.
There are a number of familial disorders (predomi-
nantly affecting renal tubular magnesium handling) that 
have helped understanding of magnesium homoeostasis 
(Table 6.12). The recessively-inherited forms tend to be 
more severe and present in infancy or childhood. The 
dominantly inherited forms tend to be milder (although 
hypomagnesaemia can be severe with KCNA1 mutations, 
plasma calcium is often unaffected).
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
119
Consequences
Symptoms directly attributable to hypomagnesae-
mia ­occur at plasma concentrations <0.5 mmol/L and 
­include anorexia, nausea, tremor, apathy, depression, 
agitation and confusion. Severely hypomagnesaemic 
­patients ­usually have coexistent hypokalaemia and a 
cellular ­potassium deficit; probably because of reduced 
activity of the magnesium-dependent Na
+,K
+-ATPase 
system of cell membranes. Potassium is lost from cells 
into the ECF and is then lost in the urine because mag-
nesium ­deficiency also impairs the renal conservation 
of potassium. If severe hypomagnesaemia is prolonged 
then hypocalcaemia may also develop, principally be-
cause of impaired parathyroid hormone secretion. With 
the development of ­hypocalcaemia, neuromuscular signs 
such as muscle weakness, tremor and twitching, a posi-
tive Chvostek sign, delirium, convulsions and ultimately 
coma may occur.
The effects of hypomagnesaemia on the excitability of 
nerve, muscle and cardiac cells appear not to be direct 
since, as far as is known, magnesium is not involved in 
the normal action potential, in conduction or contrac-
tion. The effects appear to be mediated by inhibition of 
the Na
+,K
+-ATPase enzyme and, in practice, it is difficult 
to distinguish direct neuromuscular and cardiac effects of 
severe hypomagnesaemia from those secondary to altera-
tions in potassium and calcium metabolism.
Cardiac effects. Hypomagnesaemia of a more ­modest 
degree (0.5–0.8 mmol/L) is not uncommon and, while it 
is not associated with obvious symptoms, it is not neces-
sarily benign. In patients admitted to coronary care units, 
there is a relationship between ­hypomagnesaemia and 
the incidence of serious dysrhythmias ­(including multifo-
cal atrial tachycardia, ­ventricular ­tachycardia, ventricular 
­fibrillation and torsades de pointes). However, hypomag-
nesaemia is strongly ­associated with hypokalaemia, and 
this is itself a potent cause of dysrhythmias. The associa-
tion between low plasma concentrations of magnesium 
and potassium is again explicable by reduced membrane 
ATPase activity, a loss of intracellular ­potassium and sub-
sequent urinary losses. The ratio of intra- to extracellular 
potassium, which largely determines the resting mem-
brane electrical potential, is reduced with a consequent 
increase in electrical ­excitability. Hypokalaemia can be 
refractory to replacement therapy while magnesium 
deficiency ­persists. Some cardiac ­dysrhythmias are less 
responsive to antidysrhythmic therapy in the presence 
of hypomagnesaemia. In addition to the dysrhythmias, 
magnesium depletion is associated with other electrocar-
diographic abnormalities, including PR and QT interval 
prolongation and T-wave flattening. Following acute 
myocardial infarction, plasma magnesium concentra-
tions typically fall and are at their lowest 12–24 h after 
admission to hospital. Drug therapy, particularly non-­
potassium-sparing diuretics, may exacerbate this hypo-
magnesaemia by increasing urinary losses.
Diagnostic approach to hypomagnesaemia
Plasma magnesium concentration remains the only 
widely available measure of magnesium status. Attempts 
to assess intracellular magnesium more reliably have in-
cluded the measurement of erythrocyte, monocyte and 
muscle cell concentrations, but these experimental ap-
proaches are not widely available. Hypomagnesaemia is 
common in the critically ill, occurring in up to 50% of 
such patients. However, only about 25% have low ionized 
magnesium concentrations.
A magnesium retention test, which aims to detect a 
total body deficit, has been proposed. The urinary excre-
tion of magnesium is measured over 24 h following the 
parenteral administration of 0.1 mmol/kg magnesium (in 
the form of magnesium sulphate). Normally 75–80% of 
the dose is excreted, but less if there is magnesium defi-
ciency (see Appendix 6.5, for method).
To assess renal magnesium handling in patients with 
suspected renal tubular abnormalities, the fractional uri-
nary magnesium (FEMg) can be estimated on fasting urine 
(U) and plasma (P) samples:
FE
U
P
P
U
Mg
Mg
creat
Mg
creat
%
( ) =
×
×
(
) ×
×
0 75
100
.
Values >2%, while the patient is hypomagnesae-
mic, suggest renal magnesium wasting. Renal tubular 
BOX 6.7	
Acquired causes of 
hypomagnesaemia
Inadequate intake
•	 Alcoholism
•	 Protein calorie malnutrition
•	 Prolonged infusion or ingestion of low Mg solutions 
or diet
Malabsorption
•	 Inflammatory bowel disease
•	 Proton pump inhibitor treatment (may be excessive 
gut loss rather than malabsorption)
a
•	 Gluten enteropathy
•	 Intestinal bypass
•	 Radiation enteritis
Renal tubular dysfunction
•	 Alcoholism
•	 Hyperaldosteronism
•	 Hyperparathyroidism
•	 Post renal obstruction
•	 Post renal transplant
•	 Nephrotoxic drugs (amphotericin
a, cisplatin
a, ciclo-
sporin
a, cetuximab, amikacin, gentamicin, laxatives, 
pentamidine, tobramycin, tacrolimus and carboplatin)
•	 Potassium depletion
•	 Diuretics (non-potassium-sparing)
•	 Osmotic diuresis
Intracellular shift
•	 Post-myocardial infarction
•	 Post-parathyroidectomy
•	 Recovery from diabetic ketoacidosis
•	 Recovery from starvation (refeeding syndrome)
•	 Acute pancreatitis
aMost common causes of severe drug-induced hypomagnesaemia.
120	
Clinical biochemistry
magnesium handling can be assessed more rigorously by 
magnesium infusion testing. It is possible to combine an 
infusion test to determine TmMg with a magnesium re-
tention test to determine if there is a magnesium deficit 
(see Appendix 6.6, for a suggested protocol).
Where hypomagnesaemia is due to inadequate intake 
or malabsorption, urinary magnesium falls rapidly to 
<0.7 mmol/24 h from the usual 2–7 mmol/24 h.
The main diagnostic step must remain thinking of 
hypomagnesaemia as a potential problem and making 
a request for plasma measurement. Studies comparing 
physician-initiated testing and ‘routine’ measurement 
have shown that hypomagnesaemia is very common in 
hospitalized patients, that it is frequently associated with 
hypokalaemia and that only about 10% of hypomag-
nesaemic patients are identified by physician-initiated 
requests. This has been used as an argument for includ-
ing magnesium among the routine hospital analyses of 
plasma ‘electrolytes’.
The ingestion of large quantities of magnesium (in 
the form of antacids or laxatives) can induce diarrhoea. 
In magnesium-related diarrhoea, the faecal magnesium 
TABLE 6.12  Genetic causes of hypomagnesaemia
Disorder
OMIM
a
Inheritance 
locus
Gene
Mutated 
protein
Mechanism
Phenotype
Hypomagnesaemia 1 
(HOMG1)
602014
AR 9q21
TRPM6
Transient 
receptor 
potential 
channel M6 
(TRPM6)
Reduced absorption 
of Mg from distal 
convoluted tubule 
and impaired 
intestinal Mg 
absorption
Neonatal 
convulsions, tetany
Hypomagnesaemia 2 
(HOMG2)
154020
AD 11 q23
FXYD2
Na
+,K
+-ATPase  
γ subunit
Reduced absorption 
of Mg from distal 
convoluted tubule
Often asymptomatic, 
hypocalciuria
Hypomagnesaemia 3 
(HOMG3)
248250
AR 3q27
CLDN16
Paracellin-1 
(Claudin-16)
Reduced 
paracellular 
absorption of Mg 
(and Ca) from 
thick ascending 
limb
Neonatal 
convulsions, 
polyuria, 
nephrocalcinosis
Hypomagnesaemia 4 
(HOMG4)
611718
AR 4q25
EGF
Epidermal 
growth factor
Impaired activation 
of TRPM6 
and reduced 
absorption of 
Mg from distal 
convoluted tubule
Learning disability, 
epilepsy
Hypomagnesaemia 
5 (with ocular 
involvement) 
(HOMG5)
248190
AR 1p34
CLDN19
Claudin-19
Reduced 
paracellular 
absorption of Mg 
(and Ca) from 
thick ascending 
limb
Nephrocalcinosis, 
renal impairment, 
macular 
colobomata
Hypomagnesaemia 6 
(HOMG6)
613882
AD 10q24
CNNM2
CNNM2
Basolateral renal 
tubular epithelial 
transport
 
Gitelman syndrome
263800
AR 16q 13
SLC12A3
Thiazide-
sensitive 
Na–Cl 
co-transporter
Reduced absorption 
of Mg from distal 
convoluted tubule
Hypokalaemia, 
tetany precipitated 
by non-
specific illness, 
hypocalciuria
Hypomagnesaemia, 
hypertension 
and hyper­
cholesterolaemia
500005
Maternal 
(mito­
chondrial)
tRNA(Ile)
tRNA isoleucine
Unknown
Migraine, deafness, 
hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy in 
adults
Hypocalcaemia with 
hypercalciuria
601199
AD 13q 13
CASR
Calcium-
sensing 
receptor
b
? Reduced 
renal tubular 
reabsorption
Usually 
asymptomatic
Myokymia with 
hypo­magnesaemia
160120
AD 12p 13
KCNA1
Voltage-gated 
potassium 
channel, 
Shaker-
related 
subfamily 1 
(Kv1.1)
Impaired renal 
tubular 
reabsorption
Myokymia, episodic 
ataxia.
Plasma calcium 
usually unaffected 
despite significant 
hypomagnesaemia
MODY 5
125853
AD 17q12
HNF1B
Hepatic nuclear 
factor 1B
Impaired renal 
tubular 
reabsorption
Diabetes with renal 
cysts
aOnline Mendelian Inheritance in Man phenotype catalogue number.
bIndicates an activating mutation; all others are thought to be inactivating.
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
121
content is high (>15 mmol/24 h). This measure is of 
­occasional value in the diagnosis of factitious diarrhoea.
Therapeutic approach to hypomagnesaemia
Conditions that may benefit from magnesium repletion 
are listed in Box 6.8. The amount and rate of magnesium 
administration depends on the cause and severity of the 
magnesium depletion and on renal and intestinal function.
Symptomatic deficiency is best treated by the intra-
venous route. Adults with good renal function should 
be given 12 mmol magnesium (in the form of magne-
sium sulphate in saline or 5% dextrose) over 2–3 h and 
a ­further 12 mmol infused slowly over the following 
24 h. This ­regimen may need to be repeated over sev-
eral days, as the tissue magnesium deficit takes longer 
to correct than the plasma concentration. If the plasma 
concentrations are increased too much, urinary magne-
sium losses increase. In infants, replacement is given in a 
similar ­manner, but the dosage should be reduced to 0.2–
0.3 mmol/kg. Plasma magnesium concentrations need to 
be ­monitored during and after replacement therapy. The 
intramuscular route can also be used for replacement, 
but the injections are painful.
Where feasible, magnesium supplements may also be 
given orally (5–10 mmol/24 h, in divided doses). Suitable 
preparations include magnesium oxide and its sulphate 
and carbonate salts, which are available as antacids or 
purgatives. Higher doses may cause diarrhoea.
With drug-induced hypomagnesaemia, the offending 
agent should of course be withdrawn.
Hypermagnesaemia
The kidneys normally excrete excess magnesium very 
­efficiently and can handle loads of up to 400 mmol/24 h, 
so hypermagnesaemia as a clinical problem is largely re-
stricted to patients with acute or chronic renal failure. 
Hypermagnesaemia is, however, seen in familial hypo-
calciuric hypercalcaemia (FHH), and can also occur with 
magnesium-containing enemas and cathartics. In subjects 
with renal failure, the potential sources of excess magne-
sium loads are the dialysate, magnesium-containing ant-
acids (as phosphate-binding agents) and, in acute kidney 
injury, release of magnesium from tissues.
Hypermagnesaemia in patients with renal impairment 
can also occur with the use of citrate-gluconic acid solu-
tions. These solutions, which contain substantial quan-
tities of magnesium salts, are used either for bladder 
irrigation or are infused into the renal pelvis through a 
nephrostomy tube for the dissolution of renal stones.
Hypermagnesaemia in the order of 1.5–2.5 mmol/L 
may be associated with hypotension but is commonly 
asymptomatic. In the range 2.5–5.0 mmol/L, areflexia 
may be present and electrocardiographic changes ­occur 
(prolonged PR and QRS interval, peaked T waves). At 
higher concentrations, respiratory paralysis and car-
diac arrest ensue: concentrations >8 mmol/L ­(almost 
always iatrogenic) are frequently fatal. At these very 
high plasma concentrations, magnesium has ­direct 
­effects on neuromuscular cells; inhibiting acetylcho-
line release and causing peripheral blockade. Use is 
made of this in the pharmacological management of 
seizures associated with eclampsia of pregnancy, where 
an effective remedy is the parenteral administration of 
magnesium sulphate to maintain plasma concentra-
tions at 3–4 mmol/L.
The treatment of hypermagnesaemia initially con-
sists of cessation of magnesium administration. In an 
emergency, intravenous calcium gluconate (10 mL, 10% 
solution; 2.2 mmol calcium) will reverse the effects of 
­hypermagnesaemia. Dialysis is also effective.
CONCLUSION
The physiology and pathology of calcium, phosphate 
and magnesium are closely related. The principal hor-
mones involved in calcium and phosphate homoeostasis 
are 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D, FGF23 and parathyroid 
hormone. The great majority of calcium and phosphate 
is present in the skeleton, as is over half the magnesium, 
but all three ions have many other vital functions.
Pathological increases and decreases in concentrations 
of calcium, phosphate and magnesium can occur, and all 
can have serious consequences. For each disorder, a rela-
tively small number of conditions account for the major-
ity of presentations.
Further reading
Rosen CJ, editor. Primer on the metabolic bone diseases and disorders 
of mineral metabolism. 7th ed. Washington: American Society of 
Bone and Mineral Research; 2008. 
A succinct and authoritative account of the current state of knowledge in 
the fields of bone biology, calcium metabolism and metabolic bone disease, 
written by the leaders in the respective fields.
Walton RJ, Bijvoet OL. Nomogram for derivation of renal threshold 
phosphate concentration. Lancet 1975;309–10.
APPENDIX 6.1: CALCIUM ABSORPTION 
TEST
This test was originally described by Broadus et  al. 
(1978) for use in the investigation of hypercalciuria, but 
it can also be used to estimate intestinal calcium absorp-
tion in other contexts. The patient takes a low calcium 
diet (10 mmol (400 mg)/24 h) for one week and is studied 
­after an overnight fast (distilled water only). A water in-
take of 250 mL/h is maintained from 1 h before the test 
until its completion. The test consists of three consecu-
tive 2 h urine collections for measurement of calcium and 
creatinine, with a plasma calcium and creatinine mea-
surement at the midpoint of the first and third of these 
BOX 6.8	
Conditions that may benefit from 
magnesium supplementation
•	 Ventricular tachyarrhythmias
•	 Hypokalaemia unresponsive to potassium supplementation
•	 Neurological manifestations of hypomagnesaemia
•	 Hypomagnesaemia without clinical manifestations
•	 Diuretic therapy
•	 Hypocalcaemia unresponsive to calcium supplementation
From Reinhart R A 1988 Magnesium metabolism. Archives of 
Internal Medicine 148:2415–2420.
122	
Clinical biochemistry
collections. At the beginning of the second urine collec-
tion, a 1 g (25 mmol) oral calcium load is taken.
Interpretation
Reference values:
risein urinecalcium output
mmol
h
riseinplasmacalci
=
−
0 18
0 73
2
.
.
/
um
mmol
L
=
−
0 07
0 30
.
.
/
Reference
Broadus AE, Dominguez M, Bartter FC. Pathophysiological 
studies in idiopathic hypercalciuria: use of an oral calcium 
tolerance test to characterize distinctive hypercalciuric 
subgroups. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1978;47:751–760.
APPENDIX 6.2: ANALYSIS OF TUBULAR  
HANDLING OF CALCIUM
The relationship between urine calcium excretion per 
­litre of glomerular filtrate (CaE) and plasma calcium has 
been established from calcium infusion experiments in 
healthy subjects. The renal tubular handling of calcium 
can be assessed by reference to this normal relationship. 
CaE is estimated from:
urine calcium
plasma creatinine
urine creatinine
[
]
[
]
[
]
×
obtained from the second void sample after rising in the 
morning, while still fasting. All these concentrations are 
expressed as mmol/L. The units of CaE are mmol/L glo-
merular filtrate.
Interpretation
Hypercalcaemic patients falling to the right of the ref-
erence range (Fig.  6.9) are excreting less calcium than 
expected for their prevailing plasma calcium concen-
tration. Provided that this is documented at a time 
when the patient is not volume depleted, it can then be 
inferred that abnormally high renal tubular calcium reab-
sorption is contributing to the patient’s hypercalcaemia. 
Typically, this is seen in primary hyperparathyroidism, 
familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia and malignant 
hypercalcaemia due to PTHrP. Similar considerations 
apply in the investigation of hypocalcaemia. Patients in 
whom CaE falls to the left of the reference range are ex-
creting more calcium than would be predicted from the 
low plasma calcium concentration, and it can be inferred 
that abnormally low renal tubular calcium reabsorption 
is contributing to the hypocalcaemia (typically seen in 
hypoparathyroidism).
APPENDIX 6.3: CLASSIFICATION OF 
PSEUDOHYPOPARATHYROIDISM
This protocol is a modification of the Ellsworth–Howard 
and Chase–Auerbach tests. It measures the response of 
urine cAMP and TmP/GFR to an injection of synthetic 
human PTH (1–34).
The test is performed in a fasting patient, who ingests 
250 mL/h of water between 06.00 and 12.00 noon. Two 
30 min urine collections are collected before 09.00, at 
which time PTH (1–34), 0.625 μg/kg (maximum dose 
25 μg) is infused intravenously over 15 min. Consecutive 
urine collections are made from 09.00–09.30; 09.30–
10.00; 10.00–11.00 and 11.00–12.00, with blood samples 
taken at 09.00 and 11.00.
Analysis
Urine specimens: cAMP, creatinine, phosphate concen­trations.
Blood specimens: creatinine, phosphate concentrations.
cAMP excretion is expressed as nmol/L glomerular 
filtrate (GF):
urine cAMP
plasma cre inine
urine creatinine
[
] ×
[
]
[
]
at
Urine and plasma creatinine concentrations are 
­expressed in the same units.
Phosphate excretion expressed as TmP/GFR (mmol/L 
glomerular filtrate; see Appendix 6.4).
Interpretation
Reference
Mallette LE, Kirkland JL, Gagel RF et  al. Synthetic 
human parathyroid hormone (1–34) for the study of 
pseudohypoparathyroidism. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
1988;67:964–72.
Normal response:
10–20-fold increase in cAMP 
excretion, fall in TmP/GFR of 
20–30%
Pseudohypo- 
parathyroidism:
Type I, <5-fold increase in cAMP
Type II, normal increase in cAMP
Both types, <10% fall in TmP/GFR
FIGURE 6.9  ■  Renal tubular handling of calcium (see text). (From 
Nordin B E C. Diagnostic procedures. In: Nordin B E C (ed). Calcium, 
phosphate and magnesium metabolism. Edinburgh: Churchill 
Livingstone; 1976, with permission).
	
6  Calcium, phosphate and magnesium	
123
APPENDIX 6.4: ESTIMATION OF TMP/GFR
A fasting, second voided urine sample is obtained in the 
morning. The convention is that this should be a 2 h col-
lection, but the timing is in fact immaterial since time 
does not enter into the calculation. A plasma sample is 
obtained at the same time.
Measurements: plasma phosphate and creatinine; urine 
phosphate and creatinine (all expressed in the same units).
The ratio of the clearance of phosphate (Cphosphate) 
to the clearance of creatinine (Ccreatinine) is calculated:
C
C
urine phosphate
plasma creatinine
p
phosphate
creatinine
=
×
[
]
[
]
lasma phosphate
urine creatinine
[
]
[
]
×
The 
tubular 
reabsorption 
of 
phosphate 
(TRP) = 1 − (Cphosphate/Ccreatinine).
TmP/GFR is read from the nomogram which relates 
the prevailing plasma phosphate concentration [PO4] to 
TRP (Fig. 6.10).
A straight line through the appropriate values of 
plasma phosphate and TRP (or Cphosphate/Ccreatinine) passes 
through the corresponding value of TmP/GFR. It 
should be noted that TmP/GFR and plasma phosphate 
concentrations are expressed in the same units. Two 
scales have been given: the 0.0–2.0 scale is suitable for 
estimating values of TmP/GFR close to the reference 
range expressed in SI units (0.80–1.35 mmol/L glomer-
ular filtrate) and the 0.0–5.0 scale for values ­expressed 
in mass units (2.5–4.2 mg/100 mL glomerular filtrate).
APPENDIX 6.5: MAGNESIUM  
RETENTION TEST
Suggested schema for clinical use of magnesium toler-
ance test in normomagnesaemic patients:
1.	 Collect baseline urine (spot or timed) for magne-
sium/creatinine molar ratio
2.	 Infuse 0.1 mmol MgSO4/kg lean body weight in 
50 mL dextrose saline over 4 h
3.	 Collect urine for 24 h (starting with infusion) for 
measurement of excretion of magnesium and creat­
inine (Cr) (both in mmol)
4.	 Calculate % Mg retained using the following formula:
1
postinfusion urine Mg
(preinfusion urine
Mg / [Cr])
posti
−
[
] −
×
([
]
nfusion urine [Cr])
total elemental Mg infused












5.	 Criteria for Mg deficiency: >50% retention at 24 h.
Reference
From Ryzen E, Elbaum N, Singer FR, Rude RK. 
Parenteral magnesium tolerance testing in the evaluation 
of magnesium deficiency. Magnesium 1985;4:137–47. 
With permission of the publishers Karger, Basel.
APPENDIX 6.6: RENAL TUBULAR  
REABSORPTION OF MAGNESIUM
1.	 A fasting urine and blood sample are obtained after 
an overnight fast.
2.	 A loading dose of 0.4–0.8 mmol magnesium is in-
fused (1–2 mL 10% MgSO4 solution), and then a 
continuous infusion of 8 mmol over 2 h (in 50 mL 
5% dextrose) is begun.
3.	 Over the third and fourth hours of the test, 16 mmol 
magnesium are infused.
4.	 For the fifth and sixth hours of the test, 32 mmol 
magnesium are infused. (Quantities shown are for 
an adult.)
5.	 Urine specimens are collected hourly for the mea-
surement of magnesium and creatinine concentra-
tions. Blood specimens are collected at the midpoint 
of each hour for the measurement of magnesium 
and creatinine.
6.	 A graph is plotted of magnesium excretion/litre of 
glomerular filtrate (Mgexcr: y-axis) vs ultrafilterable 
plasma magnesium (ufMg: x-axis).
Mg
urine magnesium
plasma creatinine
/urine creatin
excr =
×
(
[
]
[
])
[
ine
ufMg
0.75
plasma magnesium
]
[
]
=
×
The graph should show a line roughly parallel to the 
line of identity. The TmMg is the vertical distance ­between 
these parallel lines. A typical normal value is ~0.6 (meaning 
that when ufMg is less than 0.6 mmol/L, virtually all filtered 
magnesium is reabsorbed). In patients with impaired renal 
tubular reabsorption, TmMg values may be close to zero.
It is possible to combine both retention and tubular 
reabsorption tests in hypomagnesaemic patients, if the 
volume of each of the six urine samples is measured.
In addition to calculating magnesium excretion/litre of 
glomerular filtrate (as above) for each collection, the total 
amount of magnesium excreted over the 6 h of the test can 
be calculated. A collection is then made of the next 18 h 
urine to calculate 24 h urine excretion for determination of 
magnesium retention (as in Appendix 6.5).
FIGURE 6.10  ■  Estimation of TmP/GFR (see text). (From Walton R J, 
Bijvoet O L M 1975 Lancet 2: 309–310, with permission).
124
ANATOMY
Gross anatomy
The kidneys are located against the posterior ­abdominal 
wall on either side of the vertebral column. They lie ante-
rior to the diaphragm and various muscles; their anterior 
surfaces are covered by parietal peritoneum. The left kid-
ney is posterior to the stomach, pancreas, spleen and de-
scending colon, and the right to the liver, the second part 
of the duodenum and the ascending ­colon. Their supe-
rior poles are covered by the suprarenal (adrenal) glands. 
In the adult, the kidneys are about 11–13 cm long, 6 cm 
wide and 4 cm thick. They weigh approximately 150 g 
each, yet together receive about 25% of the resting car-
diac output. This blood is supplied by the renal arteries, 
which are branches of the aorta. Venous drainage is into 
the renal veins, which drain into the inferior vena cava. 
The kidneys are ­innervated by sympathetic nerves aris-
ing from the sympathetic chains and by parasympathetic 
fibres ­arising from the vagus nerve.
Each kidney is covered by a poorly distensible cap-
sule. This limits the swelling that can occur during acute 
inflammation, and in such circumstances there is an in-
crease in tissue pressure that tends to decrease the glo-
merular filtration rate (GFR).
Congenital absence of one kidney occurs in approxi-
mately 1 in 2400 individuals; this is only of significance 
if renal surgery is contemplated for any reason. The re-
maining kidney usually undergoes compensatory hyper-
trophy. Another common (approximately 1 in 10 000) 
congenital anomaly is the single ‘horseshoe’ kidney, in 
which the lower poles of the potential two kidneys are 
conjoined; renal function is normal but, occasionally, ure-
teric obstruction may predispose to calculus formation 
and infection.
Microstructure
Each kidney contains approximately one million func-
tional units, called nephrons. These are tubular struc-
tures, consisting of various histologically and functionally 
C H A P T E R  7
The kidneys, renal function 
and kidney disease
David Makanjuola  •  Marta Lapsley
CHAPTER OUTLINE
ANATOMY  124
Gross anatomy  124
Microstructure  124
RENAL FUNCTION  127
Renal blood flow and its control  127
Glomerular function  127
Tubular function  128
RENAL DISEASE AND ITS PRESENTATION  129
Introduction  129
Manifestations of renal disease  129
Diseases affecting the kidneys  130
THE ASSESSMENT OF RENAL  
FUNCTION  130
Introduction  130
Biochemical tests of renal function  130
ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY (ACUTE RENAL  
FAILURE)  136
Introduction  136
Classification and causes  136
Prerenal acute kidney injury  137
Intrinsic acute kidney injury  138
Obstructive (postrenal) kidney injury  139
Acute kidney injury in the setting of chronic 
kidney disease  139
Hepatorenal syndrome  139
Metabolic consequences and management 
of acute kidney injury  140
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE  141
Introduction  141
Aetiology and pathogenesis of chronic kidney 
disease  141
The uraemic syndrome  142
Growth retardation  144
Sexual dysfunction  145
Thyroid abnormalities  146
Anaemia  147
Endocrine control of salt and water 
balance  147
Carbohydrate metabolism and lipid 
metabolism  148
Management  148
CONCLUSION  151
Note about terminology  151
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
125
distinct elements. Each nephron has a single glomerulus, 
which is located in the outer part of the kidney (the cor-
tex) and is responsible for the ultrafiltration of the blood. 
The remainder of the nephron consists of several con-
tiguous tubular structures that progressively modify the 
composition of the ultrafiltrate before it is passed out as 
urine. These structures (Fig. 7.1) are:
•	 the proximal convoluted tubule, also located in the 
cortex
•	 the loop of Henle, which has the configuration of 
a hairpin and extends into the deeper part of the 
kidney (the medulla), then doubles back on itself to 
return to the cortex
•	 the distal convoluted tubule, located in the cortex
•	 the collecting duct, which extends down through 
the medulla to the renal papillae, whence the urine 
drains into the renal pelvis. The renal pelvices are 
drained by the ureters, and the right and left ureters 
themselves drain into the urinary bladder, where 
urine is stored prior to voiding.
The glomerulus
Each glomerulus consists of a tuft of capillaries that 
protrudes into the dilated, blind end of the nephron 
(the Bowman capsule) (Fig. 7.2). The nephron is com-
posed of epithelial cells, and these and the endothelial 
cells of the glomerular capillaries are separated by a 
basement membrane. This visceral basement membrane 
is continuous with a parietal basement membrane asso-
ciated with the epithelial cells forming the outer part 
of the Bowman capsule, which are continuous with the 
epithelium of the proximal convoluted tubule. The mi-
crostructure of the glomerulus is described in detail in 
Chapter 8.
The glomerular filtrate is formed by the passage of 
fluid from the capillaries through fenestrations in the 
endothelial cells and through the basement membrane. 
This is covered on its epithelial aspect by the interdigi-
tating foot processes of the epithelial cells, or podocytes, 
and the ultrafiltrate passes across a thin membrane (the 
epithelial slit diaphragm) into the filtration slits between 
the foot processes and then into the Bowman space, 
which is continuous with the lumen of the nephron. The 
selective retention of different constituents of the blood 
occurs at different stages. The endothelial fenestrations 
are too small to permit significant passage of erythro-
cytes, leukocytes or platelets; the major barrier to the 
filtration of proteins is mechanical and provided by the 
inner layer of the basement membrane, but the anionic 
surface layer also selectively retards anionic proteins. 
Finally, the foot processes and slit diaphragms also act 
as a mechanical barrier. The relative rate of progres-
sion of the constituents of the plasma into the Bowman 
space, therefore, depends on molecular mass, shape and 
charge. Glomeruli also contain mesangial cells. These 
stellate cells are contractile, are involved in the regula-
tion of glomerular filtration and have phagocytic proper-
ties. The basement membrane does not extend between 
the mesangial cells and endothelial cells. This facilitates 
their ability to phagocytose large particles from the 
plasma. Their ability to ingest immune complexes plays 
an important part in the pathogenesis of certain forms of 
glomerular disease.
The proximal convoluted tubule
This structure is about 15 mm long and is composed of a 
single layer of inter-digitating epithelial cells united at their 
apices by tight junctions. The luminal surfaces of these cells 
have microvillous brush borders that provide the large sur-
face area required for the absorptive function of the proxi-
mal tubule. The proximal tubule drains into a short straight 
segment directed towards the outer medulla and continu-
ous with the descending limb of the loop of Henle.
The loop of Henle
The descending limb of the loop of Henle (Fig. 7.1) is 
composed of flat epithelial cells. The majority of the 
loops, whose glomeruli lie in the outer part of the cortex, 
are relatively short, but those with more deeply situated 
glomeruli have longer loops (up to 14 mm), which extend 
down into the medullary pyramids.
The thin descending limb turns back on itself, ascend-
ing towards the medulla, and the epithelial cells become 
cuboid, rich in mitochondria and have an invaginated lu-
minal surface. The thick ascending limb extends towards 
the glomerulus of the same nephron and then leads into 
the distal convoluted tubule.
Cortex
Cortico-
medullary
junction
Loop of Henle
Medulla
Proximal
convoluted tubule
Glomerulus
Thick
descending limb
Distal convoluted
tubule
Thick
ascending limb
Thin segment
Collecting duct
FIGURE  7.1  ■  Diagram of a nephron showing the structure of 
typical tubular cells.
126	
Clinical biochemistry
The distal convoluted tubule and collecting duct
The distal convoluted tubule is about 5 mm long and is 
made up of typical absorptive epithelial cells, although 
without a brush border. It passes close to the afferent and 
efferent arterioles of the same nephron. The tubular epi-
thelial cells in this area have a special function in relation 
to the control of renin secretion and are known as the 
macula densa. Renin is secreted by myoepithelioid jux-
taglomerular cells in the walls of the afferent arterioles. 
These cells, together with those of the macula densa and 
some other nearby cells (lacis cells), constitute the juxta-
glomerular apparatus.
The distal convoluted tubule also contains intercalated 
(I) cells, responsible for the secretion of acid.
The collecting ducts are composed of I cells and also 
principal (P) cells, which become permeable to water un-
der the influence of vasopressin. The ducts descend from 
the cortex down through the medulla, opening to the re-
nal pelvis from the renal papillae.
FIGURE 7.2  ■  Diagram of a glomerulus with detailed enlargement to show the cellular relationships.
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
127
Other specialized cells
In addition to the cells of the nephron and blood vessels, the 
kidneys contain medullary interstitial cells. These charac-
teristically contain lipid droplets and secrete prostaglandins.
Blood vessels
Blood leaving glomerular capillary tufts passes not into 
venules, but into efferent arterioles. Those draining the 
cortical glomeruli divide into a capillary plexus that en-
meshes the renal tubules. Those draining the juxtamed-
ullary glomeruli form the vasa recta; these are bundles of 
vessels that plunge into the medulla to varying depths, 
forming capillary plexi that envelop the loops of Henle 
and then rejoin to form the ascending vasa recta, which 
eventually drain into the renal veins. The vasa recta form 
a countercurrent exchange system (see below), which is 
essential to the formation of both concentrated and dilute 
(with respect to plasma) urine.
RENAL FUNCTION
The principal functions of the kidneys are to excrete 
water-soluble (mostly nitrogenous) waste products 
and toxins from the body, and to control the volume 
and composition of the extracellular fluid (ECF). The 
kidneys also have important endocrine functions. It is 
perhaps surprising that the kidneys produce some 170 L 
of glomerular filtrate per 24 h, but only 1–2 L of urine. 
The bulk of the solvent and solute filtered is reabsorbed, 
but the control of the processes responsible gives con-
siderable scope for the composition and volume of the 
urine to be adjusted to meet the physiological needs of 
the individual.
The physiology of the kidneys is well described in 
many standard physiology textbooks and will not be re-
counted in detail in this chapter. Rather, a brief summary 
is given and certain features that are pertinent to an un-
derstanding of the investigation of renal function and the 
mechanisms and consequences of renal impairment are 
emphasized.
Renal blood flow and its control
At rest, 20–25% of the cardiac output flows through the 
kidneys (1.1–1.3 L/min). The bulk of this blood perfuses 
the cortex; indeed, the flow rate to the medulla is actually 
less than to most other tissues.
The process of glomerular filtration is essential to renal 
function and is dependent on an adequate renal perfusion 
pressure. Autoregulatory mechanisms allow maintenance 
of renal blood flow and GFR within narrow limits in the 
face of a wide variety of external variables, including arte-
rial pressure, venous pressure, ureteric hydrostatic pres-
sure and plasma oncotic pressure. Renal blood flow and 
GFR are independent of mean arterial blood pressure 
over the range 80–200 mmHg. This is achieved by intrin-
sic, and humorally and neurally mediated, alterations in 
the tone of the renal blood vessels and, in particular, of 
the efferent glomerular arterioles.
Renal hypoperfusion stimulates the release of ­renin 
from juxtaglomerular cells. This enzyme converts circu-
lating angiotensinogen to angiotensin I, which is in turn 
converted by angiotensin-converting-enzyme to angio-
tensin II, a powerful vasoconstrictor. This contributes to 
the maintenance of systemic blood pressure and, in the 
kidney, by causing efferent arteriolar vasoconstriction, 
helps to maintain the intraglomerular pressure despite 
a reduction in perfusion pressure. Various other mecha-
nisms are involved in the maintenance of systemic blood 
pressure, but in the poorly perfused kidney, release of 
prostaglandins causes vasodilatation which, at least in 
mild hypotension, helps to maintain renal blood flow. 
A perfusion pressure of at least 50–60 mmHg is required to 
overcome the combined hydrostatic and oncotic ­pressures 
that oppose filtration; if mean arterial pressure falls below 
80 mmHg, renal blood flow and GFR decline rapidly.
Glomerular function
Glomerular filtration is fundamental to the production 
of urine and to the homoeostatic functions of the kidney. 
Techniques for measuring the GFR, the amount of fil-
trate formed per unit time, are described in a later section 
(p. 131).
The glomerular filtration rate is determined by the bal-
ance of pressures across the filtration barrier in the glom-
erulus, and the physical nature and extent of the barrier 
itself. The forces include the difference between afferent 
and efferent glomerular arteriolar pressures (promoting fil-
tration) opposed by the difference in osmotic pressures be-
tween the ultrafiltrate and the plasma, and the hydrostatic 
pressure in the Bowman space. The net filtration pressure 
is normally approximately 15 mmHg at the afferent end of 
the capillaries, falling to zero at the efferent ends. Factors 
influencing the GFR are summarized in Box 7.1.
A decrease in the area available for filtration can oc-
cur in many renal diseases in which there is glomerular 
damage. It can also result from contraction of mesan-
gial cells mediated by agents such as angiotensin II, 
vasopressin, noradrenaline (norepinephrine), throm-
boxane A2 and prostaglandin F2; dopamine, natriuretic 
peptides and prostaglandin E2 have opposite effects. A 
reduction in filtration area may be an important physi-
ological mechanism for reducing GFR and thus con-
serving fluid.
BOX 7.1	
Factors affecting glomerular 
­filtration rate
•	 Renal blood flow
•	 Glomerular capillary hydrostatic pressure
•	 Systemic blood pressure
•	 Afferent/efferent arteriolar vasoconstriction
•	 Hydrostatic pressure in the Bowman space
•	 Ureteric obstruction
•	 Renal oedema (with restricting capsule)
•	 Plasma protein concentration
•	 Glomerular ultrafiltration coefficient
•	 Glomerular permeability
•	 Number of glomeruli
128	
Clinical biochemistry
Tubular function
The proximal convoluted tubule
The proximal tubules are responsible for the active re-
absorption of the bulk of filtered solute, accompanied 
by an iso-osmotic amount of water. Thus, virtually all 
the filtered glucose, amino acids, bicarbonate and potas-
sium are absorbed here, together with some two-thirds 
of the filtered sodium. Absorption of solutes is an ac-
tive, energy-requiring process and is isotonic, so that an 
equivalent amount of water is also absorbed and the fluid 
entering the descending limb of the loop of Henle is iso-
tonic with plasma.
Transport occurs by way of ion channels, exchangers, 
co-transporters and pumps; filtered proteins are taken up 
into tubular cells by endocytosis and broken down into 
their constituent amino acids. Transport mechanisms 
have finite capacities and these may be exceeded in some 
circumstances. For example, glucose begins to be ex-
creted in the urine if the plasma concentration exceeds 
about 10 mmol/L. Isolated or generalized disorders of re-
nal tubular function result in the excretion of solutes nor-
mally reabsorbed in the proximal tubule even at normal 
plasma concentrations, as discussed further in Chapter 9.
The sodium content of the ECF is the primary de-
terminant of ECF volume, the maintenance of which is 
critical to life. Given that about 26 000 mmol of sodium 
are filtered at the glomeruli each day (equivalent to some 
8–9 times the total body sodium), it is clearly essential 
that most of the filtered sodium is reabsorbed. Indeed, 
the bulk of sodium reabsorption is obligatory. However, 
an increase in GFR (which potentially could lead to a 
massive increase in sodium excretion) results in increased 
proximal tubular sodium absorption and vice versa. This 
process, termed glomerulo-tubular balance, is thought to 
be mediated largely through changes in the oncotic pres-
sure in the peri-tubular capillaries. This increases when 
the GFR increases, owing to the increase in the volume 
of water removed from the plasma. The re-absorption 
of several other solutes is affected similarly. Normal kid-
neys are capable of excreting between virtually zero and 
more than 400 mmol of sodium per 24 h. The fine con-
trol of sodium excretion is achieved in the distal convo-
luted tubule, where sodium reabsorption is stimulated by 
aldosterone.
Most of the filtered bicarbonate is absorbed in 
the proximal convoluted tubule, although indirectly. 
Hydrogen ions are generated in the tubular cells and are 
secreted into the tubular lumen (mainly in exchange for 
sodium) where they combine with the filtered bicarbon-
ate ions. Bicarbonate ions are formed pari passu with hy-
drogen ions and are co-transported with sodium across 
the basolateral membranes of the tubular cells into the 
interstitial space (see Chapter 5).
Some substances are secreted into the urine from the 
proximal tubule. Examples include penicillins, creati-
nine, certain steroids and their glucuronides and deriva-
tives of hippuric acid, for example p-aminohippuric acid 
(PAH). This property of PAH allows physiologists to 
use measurements of PAH clearance to determine renal 
plasma flow, but this is not an investigation that is used 
clinically.
The loop of Henle
This structure provides the countercurrent multiplier that 
generates the medullary hypertonicity that is essential for 
the regulation of water excretion and the production of 
concentrated urine.
Essentially, the process involves the active transport of 
solute (principally chloride and sodium ions) out of the 
thick ascending limb of the loop of Henle. This solute is 
not accompanied by water. As a result, the fluid within the 
­lumen becomes hypotonic and the interstitial fluid sur-
rounding the loop becomes hypertonic. Since water can 
diffuse out of the thin descending limb, but not the thick 
ascending limb, the net effect is that the fluid within the 
loop of Henle and the surrounding interstitial fluid become 
progressively hypertonic from the corticomedullary junc-
tion down into the medulla. There is further sodium and 
chloride absorption from the thick ascending limb. As water 
cannot diffuse out of the thick limb, the fluid entering the 
distal convoluted tubule is hypotonic with respect to plasma.
The anatomical disposition of the vasa recta allows 
them to act as a countercurrent exchanger, maintaining 
(though not actively contributing to) the osmotic gradi-
ent. The flows of water and solutes in the nephron are 
summarized in Figure 7.3. Whereas 60–70% of the fil-
tered loads of solute and water have been reabsorbed 
from the glomerular filtrate at the beginning of the loop 
of Henle, a further 15% of water is removed during 
passage through this structure, so that only 10–20% of 
filtered water and somewhat less solute reach the distal 
convoluted tubule.
Tubuloglomerular feedback. There is a reciprocal re-
lationship between the rate of flow of fluid through the 
ascending limb of the loop of Henle and the first part of 
the distal convoluted tubule of individual nephrons, and 
the rate of glomerular filtration through the same neph-
ron. Thus, a decrease in flow rate increases filtration and 
vice versa. This process tends to result in a constant load 
of solute being presented to the distal convoluted tubule. 
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
Glucose
Fraction remaining in tubular fluid
Proximal tubule
Loop of Henle
Distal tubule
Collecting duct
Water
Urea
Inulin
Creatinine
Osmoles
Na+
FIGURE 7.3  ■  Changes in the fraction of the filtered amounts of 
substances remaining in the tubular fluid along the length of 
the nephron.
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
129
Feedback is mediated through constriction and dilatation 
of the afferent arteriole by factors such as renal prosta-
glandins, adenosine and the renin–angiotensin system, in 
response to changes in chloride absorption in the macula 
densa. This mechanism becomes more sensitive when 
ECF volume is decreased and vice versa.
Tubuloglomerular feedback should not be confused 
with glomerulotubular balance, the change in proximal 
tubular sodium reabsorption in response to changes in 
GFR that has been discussed above and in Chapter 4.
The role of urea. Urea has an essential role in the 
generation of medullary hypertonicity. The thick ascend-
ing limb of the loop of Henle is permeable to urea (and 
sodium) but not to water. Movement of urea down its con-
centration gradient into the interstitium contributes sig-
nificantly to medullary hypertonicity; the inner medullary 
portion of the collecting duct (see below) is also perme-
able to urea. The poor concentrating ability of the kidneys 
in the newborn is due to the decreased availability of urea 
to maintain medullary hypertonicity. In adults, renal con-
centrating power is dependent on an adequate protein in-
take (the source of urea) and is lower on a low protein diet.
The distal convoluted tubule
This part of the nephron is responsible for the ‘fine 
tuning’ of urinary composition. Aldosterone stimulates 
sodium reabsorption, generating an electrochemical 
gradient that allows the secretion (and thus excretion) 
of potassium and hydrogen ions. Normal distal tubular 
function is essential to the maintenance of hydrogen ion 
homoeostasis.
The collecting duct
These structures extend from the ends of the distal con-
voluted tubules to the renal papillae. Their main func-
tion is to permit the reabsorption of solute-free water 
and thus regulate the osmolality of the urine. This is 
achieved through the action of vasopressin (antidiuretic 
hormone). The cells of the collecting ducts are normally 
impermeable to water. Under the influence of vasopressin, 
aquaporin-2 water channels are inserted into the tubular 
wall, such that they become permeable, allowing water to 
move out of the hypotonic fluid in the tubular lumen into 
the hypertonic interstitium, so producing concentrated 
urine. In the absence of vasopressin, no water is removed 
and the urine is hypotonic.
The extremes of achievable urine osmolality are 
30–1400 mmol/kg. When maximally dilute, as much as 
13% of the filtered water is excreted and the rate of urine 
production is about 16 mL/min; when maximally con-
centrated, <0.5% of filtered water is excreted and urine 
production is as little as 500 mL/24 h.
Some solute is also absorbed in the collecting ducts. 
In the cortical portion, sodium reabsorption takes place 
in exchange for potassium and hydrogen ions, as in the 
distal convoluted tubules. The medullary segment is par-
tially permeable to urea, which moves passively out into 
the interstitium and helps to maintain the high osmolality 
of the medulla.
Diuresis. While the maximal urine flow rate when a 
water load is being excreted is approximately 16 mL/
min (assuming an average solute load), higher rates are 
attainable if there are increased quantities of non-reab-
sorbed solutes in the tubules. This osmotic diuresis is 
due to the direct osmotic effect of the solutes and to a 
secondary effect on sodium reabsorption. The retention 
of water in the lumen of the proximal tubules increases 
the concentration gradient against which sodium must be 
reabsorbed; the same factor limits sodium reabsorption 
in the thick ascending part of the loop of Henle, thus in-
terfering with the generation of medullary hypertonicity. 
This is the explanation for the diuresis characteristic of 
hyperglycaemia.
RENAL DISEASE AND ITS PRESENTATION
Introduction
There are many specific renal diseases; these may pres-
ent with clinical features clearly referable to the kidneys 
(e.g. a decrease or increase in urine output), but fre-
quently have systemic manifestations (e.g. the ‘uraemic 
syndrome’ (see p. 142) and hypertension). The kidneys 
can also be involved in multisystem disease, for example 
diabetes mellitus, the connective tissue disorders and 
amyloidosis.
Manifestations of renal disease
There are relatively few cardinal manifestations of re-
nal disease and none is specific to any one underlying 
disorder. They include anuria, oliguria and polyuria; 
respectively a complete absence, decreased production 
and excessive production of urine. Polyuria may come to 
notice only by virtue of causing excessive production of 
urine at night (nocturia). These are usually symptoms of 
disordered renal function, although anuria and oliguria 
can be secondary to obstruction of the urinary tract and 
polyuria can be due to extrarenal disease that impairs the 
ability of the kidneys to concentrate the urine.
Urinary frequency (the passing of urine more fre-
quently than normal, but in normal total 24 h volumes) 
must be distinguished from polyuria; it is often related to 
irritation of the urinary tract, for example by infection, 
but can also be due to prostatic enlargement. Irritation of 
the urinary tract is frequently accompanied by dysuria – 
pain on micturition. Patients with renal disease may ex-
perience loin pain or have tenderness in the loins. Renal 
or ureteric colic, an intermittent pain of considerable se-
verity, is characteristic of the passage of urinary calculi.
Patients with renal disease may present with systemic 
abnormalities, including hypertension, pyrexia, oedema 
and the ‘uraemic syndrome’. This latter term is used to 
describe the protean manifestations of renal failure. The 
urine may appear abnormal in renal disease; the causes 
are discussed in a later section (p. 130).
Finally, renal disease may be revealed for the first time 
by the finding of a biochemical abnormality, particularly 
an elevated plasma creatinine or urea concentration, or 
positive urine dip-stick tests for protein or blood.
130	
Clinical biochemistry
Diseases affecting the kidneys
Although patients with renal disease frequently present 
with an obvious functional abnormality, for example in-
creased plasma creatinine or proteinuria, these are not 
specific to any one renal disease.
A full discussion of the nature of individual renal 
diseases is beyond the scope of this chapter. Many re-
nal diseases specifically affect one part of the kidney. 
Glomerulonephritis, which is often of immunological 
origin, can manifest by decreases in the GFR or changes 
in glomerular permeability (e.g. causing proteinuria). 
Glomerulonephritis may be of primary renal origin, or oc-
cur secondarily to an extrarenal disorder (see Chapter 8).
A considerable number of conditions, both inherited 
and acquired, limited to the kidneys and having extrare-
nal manifestations, can cause disorders of renal tubular 
function. They are discussed in detail in Chapter 9.
The kidneys can be affected by infection, tumours and 
infiltrative and degenerative disorders. Generalized dis-
orders, particularly shock, hypertension, connective tis-
sue diseases and diabetes, are also frequent causes of renal 
dysfunction. The kidneys are also susceptible to the ef-
fects of toxins, including many widely used drugs (e.g. the 
aminoglycoside antibiotics and some cytotoxic drugs), as 
well as industrial and other toxins, and exposure to such 
agents is another frequent cause of renal dysfunction.
The major part of this chapter is devoted to a discus-
sion of generalized renal failure, both acute and chronic. 
These are potentially life-threatening conditions and the 
clinical biochemistry laboratory plays a major part in their 
diagnosis and management.
THE ASSESSMENT OF RENAL FUNCTION
Introduction
Many techniques are of value in the investigation of the 
kidneys and renal function. The major groupings of tech-
niques are laboratory tests, particularly biochemical and 
immunological, radiological imaging and the histological 
examination of renal tissue usually obtained by percuta-
neous biopsy.
Imaging techniques: standard radiography, ultraso-
nography, computed tomography, magnetic resonance 
imaging, the use of radionuclides and duplex scanning, 
can provide valuable anatomical information. Such tech-
niques can be used to diagnose, for example, structural 
abnormalities, tumours, hydronephrosis, polycystic dis-
ease and the scarring of pyelonephritis. Radionuclide 
techniques can also provide information concerning renal 
function, particularly divided function (the separate func-
tion of the two kidneys) and glomerular function. Duplex 
scanning is a good screening test to assess renal blood 
flow before proceeding to magnetic resonance angiogra-
phy or renal angiography.
Useful immunological markers include the detection 
in serum of antiglomerular basement membrane antibod-
ies (positive in Goodpasture syndrome), antineutrophil 
cytoplasmic antibodies (in vasculitis), antinuclear anti-
bodies and double-stranded DNA antibodies (in systemic 
lupus erythematosus), complement components (in vari-
ous types of glomerulonephritis) and antistreptolysin O 
antibodies (in post-streptococcal glomerulonephritis). 
Immunological techniques are also widely used in the 
histological examination of renal tissue. However, given 
the pivotal role of the kidneys in body fluid homoeostasis, 
it is not surprising that biochemical investigations that in-
dicate derangements of homoeostasis are the most widely 
used tests of renal function. The remainder of this section 
covers such tests.
Biochemical tests of renal function
Urinalysis
The assessment of renal function should start with exami-
nation of the urine. Simple observations on the urine still 
contribute to the investigation of patients with suspected 
renal disease. To be valid, they must be made on a freshly 
passed sample.
Appearance. The normal colour of urine is due to uro-
chrome pigments, and the deepness of the colouration, 
which can vary from a pale straw colour to deep am-
ber, depends on urinary concentration. There are many 
causes of abnormal colouration of the urine, some of 
the more frequently encountered of which are indicated 
in Box 7.2. In some cases, the colour is pH dependent. 
The distinction between haemoglobin or myoglobin and 
other causes of a reddish-brown urine can simply be ac-
complished by testing the urine with a suitable reagent 
stick; both myoglobin and haemoglobin will give a posi-
tive reaction for ‘blood’.
Turbidity in a fresh sample suggests infection, but 
can also be due to the presence of fat in patients with 
the nephrotic syndrome. The presence of chyle in the 
urine may cause turbidity so severe that the urine appears 
milky. Anything more than a scant amount of foaming 
BOX 7.2	
Some causes of abnormal urinary 
colouration
Blue-green
•	 Methylene blue
•	 Pseudomonas infection
•	 Riboflavin
Pink-orange-red
•	 Haemoglobin
•	 Myoglobin
•	 Phenolphthalein
•	 Porphyrins
•	 Rifampicin
Red-brown-black
•	 Haemoglobin
•	 Myoglobin
•	 Red blood cells
•	 Homogentisic acid
•	 Levodopa
•	 Melanin
•	 Methyldopa
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
131
when the urine is shaken, suggests proteinuria. The most 
frequent abnormal odour is that of ammonia, owing to 
the presence of urea-splitting microbes, either because 
the patient has a urinary infection or, in stale samples, 
because of contamination.
Specific gravity and osmolality. Both of these give an 
indication of the concentration of the urine. When this 
needs to be known accurately, for example in tests of renal 
concentrating ability, measurements of osmolality are es-
sential. A reagent stick assessment of specific gravity may 
sometimes help in the interpretation of a screening test for 
proteinuria, since false negative results can occur with very 
dilute urine and vice versa. However, these reagent sticks 
detect ionic species only, and underestimate the specific 
gravity if other substances, for example glucose, are present.
pH. Normal urine is acidic, except after meals. 
Measurements of urine pH are important in the investi-
gation of renal stone formers and as part of a test of uri-
nary acidification in the investigation of suspected renal 
tubular acidosis.
Glucose. Glycosuria can occur either because of an in-
crease in blood glucose concentration or because of a low 
renal threshold for glucose, owing to impaired proximal 
tubular reabsorption. In the latter instance, the blood 
glucose concentration will be normal. Renal glycosuria is 
discussed further in Chapter 9.
Protein. Proteinuria is an important feature of renal dis-
ease. Normal urine protein excretion is <200 mg/24 h 
and is not detectable with standard reagent sticks (e.g. 
‘Albustix’). Pathological proteinuria may be:
•	 overflow (due to raised plasma concentrations of 
low molecular weight proteins)
•	 glomerular (due to increased glomerular permeabil-
ity to protein)
•	 tubular (due to decreased tubular reabsorption of 
filtered protein or saturated reabsorption)
•	 secreted (derived from the epithelium of the urinary 
tract).
Further details of the causes, detection and investiga-
tion of proteinuria are discussed in Chapter 8 and will not 
be considered further here.
Urinary sediment. Microscopic examination of the sedi-
ment obtained by centrifuging a freshly passed sample 
of urine frequently reveals a few cells (e.g. erythrocytes, 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes and cells derived from 
the kidney and urinary tract), hyaline (or rarely granular) 
casts composed of uromodulin (Tamm–Horsfall protein), 
and sometimes fat droplets, mucus threads and pigment 
granules.
Increases in any of these may occur in renal diseases. 
Abnormal casts are also frequently present. These are ac-
cretions of uromodulin with other material, for example 
cells or cellular debris. Red cell casts imply haematuria 
from glomerular disease, and white cell casts, the presence 
of white cells within the renal tubules. In acute pyelone-
phritis, there is an increase in polymorphs and various types 
of cast, in contrast to lower urinary tract infection where 
polymorphs, but not casts, are increased. Microbiological 
examination in acute pyelonephritis will usually reveal bac-
teriuria. In acute glomerulonephritis, haematuria causes 
the urine to appear reddish-brown or smokey, and the 
sediment contains large numbers of red and white blood 
cells, and red cell, haemoglobin and other casts. In chronic 
glomerulonephritis, the amount of sediment is much less, 
but there is usually an excess of dysmorphic red blood 
cells, which suggests that red cells have passed through 
the glomerular membrane. Red cell and haemoglobin 
casts are sometimes present. Granular casts are seen in the 
urinary sediment in many renal diseases, but particularly 
in acute tubular necrosis; in this condition, casts contain-
ing tubular cells are also often present, but red cell casts 
are uncommon. Characteristic crystals may be seen when 
specific substances are present in excess or the pH of the 
urine promotes crystallization, for example, hexagonal cys-
tine crystals, birefringent calcium oxalate crystals, calcium 
phosphate or uric acid crystals (see Chapter 9).
Other substances. Many other substances can be de-
tected in the urine in appropriate circumstances, for ex-
ample drugs or bilirubin. Their presence is due to the 
normal excretory function of the kidneys and is not a 
reflection of renal dysfunction, so they will not be con-
sidered further here.
Measurement of glomerular filtration rate
Glomerular filtration is essential to renal function, and 
investigations designed to measure the GFR are the most 
frequently performed tests of renal function. The factors 
that determine the GFR have been discussed above. Its 
measurement is based on the concept of clearance – the 
determination of the volume of plasma from which a sub-
stance is completely removed (the plasma is ‘cleared’ of 
the substance) by glomerular filtration during its passage 
through the kidney. Clearance is a theoretical concept – 
no substance is cleared completely from the plasma in 
this way – but can nevertheless be used as a valid measure 
of the GFR.
For the clearance of a substance to equal the GFR, it 
must be freely filtered by the glomeruli and eliminated 
from the body solely by this route (e.g. it must not be 
metabolized by the liver or secreted into or reabsorbed 
from the urine). The substance should be non-toxic and 
accurate measurement should be easily available in a rou-
tine laboratory. The clearance of a substance requires 
measurements of the plasma concentration and urinary 
excretion rate:
Clearance
P
=
×
(
) /
U
V
where U is the concentration of the substance in the 
urine, V is the rate of formation of urine and P the 
plasma concentration of the substance. It should be 
noted that V is a rate; it has the dimensions (volume/
time) and its determination requires the collection and 
measurement of the total amount of urine formed over 
a known period of time. The units of the various quan-
tities are usually adjusted so that the clearance is ex-
pressed as mL/min.
132	
Clinical biochemistry
The critical properties of some of the substances used 
in clearance measurements to assess GFR are shown in 
Table 7.1.
Clearance can also be used to determine renal plasma 
flow, using a substance such as p-aminohippuric acid, 
which is almost completely cleared from the blood in a 
single passage through the kidneys by a combination of 
glomerular filtration and secretion.
Inulin clearance. Inulin is a plant polysaccharide that 
satisfies all the physiological criteria mentioned in the 
previous section. The measurement of inulin clearance 
remains the ‘gold standard’ for the estimation of GFR. 
However, it is a relatively complex procedure and, al-
though test kits are commercially available, it is infre-
quently used in clinical practice. In essence, the test 
involves the injection of a bolus dose of inulin, followed 
by a maintenance infusion designed to produce a con-
stant plasma concentration. Once this has been achieved, 
a series of timed urine samples is collected and blood is 
drawn for the measurement of inulin at the midpoints of 
the collection periods. The GFR is taken as the mean of 
the inulin clearances for each period.
Creatinine clearance. Creatinine is an endogenous 
substance, a normal product of muscle metabolism. Its 
rate of production is fairly constant from day-to-day, be-
ing determined by muscle bulk rather than by activity. 
Creatinine is removed from the body mainly by glomeru-
lar filtration and its clearance can be measured as an index 
of GFR, although in the UK, it is much less frequently 
used than previously.
Creatinine is actively secreted into the urine, so that 
its clearance tends to overestimate the GFR. This effect 
is of little significance at normal filtration rates, the ratio 
(creatinine clearance/inulin clearance) being between 1.1 
and 1.2, but in advanced renal disease the contribution of 
active secretion to the total amount of creatinine excreted 
in the urine becomes high in relation to the amount fil-
tered, and creatinine clearance may significantly over-
estimate the true GFR. This is despite the fact that in 
established renal failure, bacterial degradation of creati-
nine secreted into the gut may contribute approximately 
2 mL/min to the total clearance.
Inaccuracies arising from methodological problems 
with creatinine measurement have largely been overcome, 
but the major cause of inaccuracy in the determination 
of GFR by creatinine clearance is the accurate measure-
ment of urine volume. Traditionally, patients have been 
required to collect urine over a 24 h period. This is a 
convenient time, but requires the patient to void their 
urine completely at the beginning of the 24 h period and 
collect all the urine passed over the ensuing 24 h, making 
a final collection at the end of this period. The possibili-
ties for mistakes resulting in an incomplete collection are 
considerable and even under ideal conditions, for exam-
ple in a metabolic unit with highly motivated patients, 
the coefficient of variation for repeated measurements 
in the same individual is >10%. The critical difference 
(the amount by which two estimates must differ to give 
a 95% probability that there has been a true change in 
GFR) is therefore >33%. The accuracy of estimates of 
the GFR by measurement of creatinine clearance may be 
improved by making two or more consecutive 24 h urine 
collections, but this is often not practical even if it is ac-
ceptable to the patient.
There is, however, nothing special about the 24 h 
period. The use of shorter periods, although more con-
venient for the patient, may reduce accuracy through in-
adequate bladder emptying, but a good compromise is to 
make a collection overnight. As long as the bladder was 
emptied at the beginning of the test (before retiring) and 
when the final collection was made (on rising), the urine 
production rate can be calculated and substituted in the 
(U × V)/P formula.
It is essential that a reliable method is employed to 
measure plasma and urine creatinine concentrations. 
Colorimetric assays tend to overestimate creatinine since 
they detect non-creatinine chromogens. But even when 
reliable methods are used, it should be appreciated that 
the creatinine clearance is based on four measurements: 
plasma and urine creatinine concentrations, urine volume 
and time. Each has an inherent inaccuracy and the over-
all analytical variance will be the sum of the individual 
variances.
Plasma creatinine concentration. The way in which 
creatinine is handled by the kidney, coupled with the fact 
that, in any one individual, the rate of production is rela-
tively constant from day-to-day, means that the plasma cre-
atinine concentration alone can be used as an index of renal 
function. But, although it is widely used, it has a number of 
disadvantages and these must be borne in mind when in-
terpreting plasma creatinine concentrations. Perhaps the 
most important becomes apparent from considering the 
familiar (U × V)/P formula for deriving the GFR. Plasma 
creatinine concentration is inversely related to GFR, not 
directly related. This means that a plot of plasma cre-
atinine concentration against GFR has the form of a 
­hyperbola (Fig. 7.4). At any concentration of creatinine, 
TABLE 7.1  Properties of substances used to assess glomerular filtration rate
Propertya
Urea
Creatinine
Inulin
99mTc-DTPA
Not protein bound
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Freely filtered by glomerulus
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Neither secreted nor absorbed in nephron
Flow-related reabsorption
Some secretion
Yes
Yes
Produced endogenously at constant rate
No
Yes
No
No
Easily measured
Yes
Yes
No
No
aThe ideal substance would have all these properties. DTPA, diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid.
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
133
halving the GFR will double the plasma creatinine con-
centration. But given the wide reference range for plasma 
creatinine concentration in the healthy population, this 
means that in an individual, the plasma creatinine con-
centration could be within the reference limits, yet the 
GFR be only one-half of normal.
This is of critical importance to clinical practice, since 
in early renal disease (when it might be supposed that 
therapeutic intervention would be most beneficial), the 
plasma creatinine concentration may be ‘normal’ – that 
is, within the reference range – in spite of the GFR be-
ing reduced. Plasma creatinine concentration is thus a 
relatively insensitive index of mild renal functional im-
pairment. At low values of GFR, however, it becomes 
extremely sensitive, although its accuracy declines be-
cause of the increased contribution of tubular secretion 
to overall renal excretion.
Other factors that must be taken into account in as-
sessing the significance of plasma creatinine concentra-
tions include muscle mass, diet (a recent meal including 
meat, particularly if stewed, may cause a transient in-
crease in plasma creatinine concentration) and the pres-
ence in the plasma of substances that interfere with the 
assay. Ketones, bilirubin, cephalosporins and spironolac-
tone have all been implicated, depending on the method 
used, but especially in Jaffé-(picric acid) based assay sys-
tems. Enzymatic assays for creatinine are said to be more 
specific than older colorimetric methods, but they are 
still prone to interference by certain drugs such as acetyl-
cysteine and phenindione.
The importance of muscle mass is exemplified by the 
changes that occur with age. In healthy individuals, GFR, 
and thus creatinine clearance, declines with increasing 
age from about the end of the 4th decade, at a rate of ap-
proximately 1 mL/min per year. However, plasma creati-
nine concentration does not normally rise with age; this 
is because of a decrease in production rate, thought to 
reflect the tendency for muscle mass to fall with age.
Although comparison of a measured plasma creatinine 
concentration with a reference range can be misleading, the 
fact that intraindividual variation is less than interindividual 
variation means that the detection of a change in creatinine 
concentration in an individual provides a more sensitive in-
dication of a change in renal function. Nevertheless, the bi-
ological and analytical variance (even using the best assays) 
results in a critical difference of about 17% (20 μmol/L at a 
plasma creatinine concentration of 120 μmol/L).
In patients with advancing renal disease, the progres-
sive loss of renal function with time can be expressed as 
a graph of reciprocal plasma creatinine concentration 
against time (since GFR is proportional to 1/[plasma cre-
atinine]). A steady loss of renal function will cause this 
plot to be rectilinear (Fig. 7.5). Such plots are useful in 
patients with irreversibly declining renal function to help 
predict when renal replacement will become necessary, 
so that, for example appropriate means for vascular access 
for haemodialysis can be provided.
Given the problems associated with the measure-
ment of plasma creatinine concentration and creatinine 
clearance, the practical application of these measure-
ments to patients with, or suspected of having, renal 
disease is not straightforward. Since the rate of cre-
atinine production is relatively constant in most indi-
viduals (the essential assumption being that lean body 
mass is constant), one approach is to measure the GFR 
(preferably by a reliable technique, see below) and the 
plasma creatinine concentration simultaneously and 
then to follow progress with serial plasma creatinine 
measurements.
FIGURE  7.5  ■ The progression of chronic kidney disease. 
Hypothetical curves to show (A) the decline in glomerular fil-
tration rate (GFR); (B) the increase in plasma creatinine con-
centration and (C) the decrease in reciprocal plasma creatinine 
concentration. The broken lines show the changes that might be 
expected if the decline in function was to accelerate for any rea-
son (see Box 7.6).
FIGURE  7.4  ■  Relationship between creatinine clearance and 
plasma creatinine concentration. As the clearance is related to 
the reciprocal of the plasma concentration, considerable loss of 
renal function can occur without the plasma creatinine concen-
tration rising above the reference range (shaded).
134	
Clinical biochemistry
Calculated creatinine clearance and estimated 
­glomerular filtration rate. Given that the creatinine 
cleared by the kidney is almost entirely derived from 
muscle, and that muscle mass is related to body mass 
and to age, it is possible to derive formulae to estimate 
the creatinine clearance, and hence the GFR, from the 
plasma creatinine concentration. More than 25 different 
formulae have been suggested to correct for age, weight, 
gender and ethnic origin. The empirically derived equa-
tion of Cockcroft and Gault is one of the earliest and the 
best known of these. However, this and all similar formu-
lae depend on measurements of plasma creatinine, and 
their accuracy can be impaired by all the factors that af-
fect this. The early formulae, including that of Cockcroft 
and Gault, were derived using Jaffé based methods for the 
measurement of creatinine. Laboratories should take into 
account the relationship between their creatinine assay 
and the original assay used to derive any equation before 
advising clinicians on interpretation. None of the correc-
tion equations performs well in the physiological range of 
GFR, which limits their usefulness, for example in moni-
toring patients with diabetes or assessing potential kidney 
donors.
Cockcroft and Gault. The Cockcroft and Gault formula 
for males is:
C
age
wt
Cr mL
cr
p
=
−
×
[
{(
)
.
}/
]
/min
1 224 140
where Ccr is creatinine clearance, Crp is plasma creatinine 
concentration in μmol/L, age is measured in years and wt 
is body weight in kilograms. For females, Ccr is 15% less 
than for males, so that the figure 1.224 in the above 
formula is replaced by 1.04.
Modifications to the formula are required before it 
can be used in children or obese adults as it assumes that 
increasing weight is related to increasing muscle rather 
than fat mass. The formulae developed for children are 
particularly useful, since there are considerable practical 
difficulties in making quantitative urine collections in this 
age group. The commonest estimation used in the UK is 
the Schwartz formula:
GFR
length Cr mL
m
p
=
×
49
1 73
2
/
/min / .
where length is measured in centimetres and plasma cre-
atinine in μmol/L.
MDRD. The UK has adopted the system originally 
devised in the USA for deriving an estimate of GFR 
(eGFR), which can be used for population screening for 
kidney disease. This is based on the abbreviated MDRD 
(Modification of Diet in Renal Diseases) study equation. It 
is a useful estimate of GFR in adults up to a value of 60 mL/
min per 1.73 m2 body surface area. The equation was de-
veloped from measurements in an independent sample of 
1070 individuals. Over 90% of the estimates were within 
30% of the measured GFR (using 125I-iothalamate), with 
only 2% having an error of more than 50%.
There are four variables (age, sex, race and creatinine 
concentration), but the equation only requires one bio-
chemical value. The equation is being validated in other 
patient groups, including patients with type 1 diabetes 
without microalbuminuria, those with mild decreases in 
renal function or a normal GFR, and non-US popula-
tions, for example Indian and Chinese.
The original MDRD equation included an additional 
two variables (albumin and urea), but there is very lit-
tle advantage in using it, as any small gain in accuracy 
is offset by the increase in variability from the extra 
measurements.
The abbreviated MDRD formula for Caucasians is:
eGFR mL
m
plasma Cr in
mol L
(
)
/min/ .
{(
[
]
/
) /
. }
.
1 73
175
88 4
2
1 154
=
×
×
−
µ
age in years
(
)
−0 203
.
The factor 88.4 is required to convert μmol/L to mg/
dL (the units for which the formula was derived). This 
equation applies to males; for females, the result is mul-
tiplied by 0.742; for African-Caribbeans, it is multiplied 
by 1.212.
The original abbreviated MDRD formula had 186 as 
the multiplier rather than 175; the change was made to 
align the formula with measurements of creatinine by 
methods whose calibration is traceable to the reference 
method (isotope dilution with mass spectrometry).
In a study of serum creatinine measurements in labo-
ratories, the method group mean bias for a specimen with 
an assigned value of 79.7 μmol/L varied from −5.25 to 
+27.4 μmol/L. In order to standardize values for eGFR, 
UKNEQAS (UK National External Quality Assessment 
Service) has calculated additional corrections (slope and 
intercept adjusters) to align individual manufacturers’ 
methods to the reference method.
It should be noted that the MDRD equation for 
eGFR has not been validated for use in children, acute 
kidney injury, pregnancy, oedematous states, muscle 
wasting diseases, amputees or malnourished individuals. 
It is less accurate in obese than in lean individuals. When 
the eGFR is >60 mL/min, many laboratories report the 
value as >60 mL/min per 1.73 m2, owing to decreasing 
precision and accuracy at higher values of GFR. Values 
above 90 mL/min should never be reported as an abso-
lute figure, because the correlation with measured GFR 
is poor.
CKD-EPI. The Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology 
Collaboration group produced a set of formulae based on 
pooled data from several studies, which correlate better 
with measured GFR than the original MDRD formula, 
especially at values >60 mL/min per 1.73 m2. However, 
GFR is overestimated in certain groups of patients, es-
pecially those with a low body mass index. Different for-
mulae are applied depending on the value of the serum 
creatinine. Further details are available on the websites of 
various renal organizations.
Definition of CKD using eGFR. A persistent reduc-
tion in eGFR (<60 mL/min) is defined as chronic kidney 
disease (CKD). However, patients with markers of kid-
ney damage, like persistent albuminuria or abnormali-
ties on imaging (such as polycystic kidneys) or on renal 
biopsy, are defined as having CKD even if their eGFR 
is normal.
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
135
The stage of CKD can be assigned based on the de-
gree of renal GFR reduction, irrespective of diagnosis, 
according to the Kidney/Disease Outcomes Quality 
Initiative (K/DOQI) classification (see Table  7.2), and 
used to guide the appropriate management.
Cystatin C. This is a low molecular weight (13.4 kDa) 
protein, a cysteine protease inhibitor that is present on 
the surface of all nucleated cells and from which it is shed 
into the plasma and excreted by glomerular filtration. Its 
plasma concentration is much less dependent than that of 
creatinine on weight and height, muscle mass, age or sex, 
and many studies have suggested that its plasma concen-
tration is a more sensitive index of mild renal impairment 
than that of creatinine. Estimates of GFR based on either 
cystatin C measurements alone or combined with cre-
atinine, are more accurate than those based on creatinine 
alone. Plasma cystatin C concentration may be increased 
in malignancy, hyperthyroidism and by treatment with 
corticosteroids (a disadvantage in kidney transplant recip-
ients), independently of the GFR. However, its greatest 
drawback is that it has to be measured by immunoassay, 
which is much more expensive than the usual colorimet-
ric or enzymatic techniques used to measure creatinine. 
Although not widely available in routine laboratories in 
the UK, measurement may have a role in the detection of 
early renal impairment in patients with extremes of mus-
cle bulk, such as body builders and small elderly women 
and in postpubertal teenage boys, for whom children’s 
reference ranges for creatinine are inappropriate.
Plasma urea concentration. Although of great his-
torical importance and still widely used as a test of renal 
function, the measurement of plasma urea concentra-
tion suffers from many disadvantages for this purpose. 
Although the plasma urea concentration can provide use-
ful information in some circumstances, particularly when 
it can be compared with the plasma creatinine concentra-
tion, the latter, in spite of the problems discussed above, 
is the more reliable test of renal function.
Urea is the end-product of the metabolism of many ni-
trogenous substances, particularly amino acids. It is freely 
filtered at the glomerulus, but its plasma concentration is 
dependent in part on its rate of formation, which can vary 
widely according to the overall rate of protein turnover 
and can also be affected by hepatic function. For example, 
plasma urea concentration frequently rises following a 
gastrointestinal bleed, owing to increased urea formation 
from the digestion of the blood in the gut, irrespective 
of any effect of the blood loss on GFR, while patients 
with combined hepatic and renal failure may have normal 
plasma urea concentrations because of decreased produc-
tion despite decreased excretion. There is significant pas-
sive reabsorption of urea from the lumen of the nephron, 
and this increases at high plasma urea concentrations (as 
in renal failure) and if the rate of flow of fluid through the 
nephron is low (as when GFR is decreased by dehydra-
tion). The familiar observation that the plasma urea con-
centration tends to rise before the creatinine in patients 
with ‘prerenal’ renal impairment (see p. 137) reflects this 
latter fact.
Plasma β2-microglobulin. This protein, a component 
of the major histocompatibility (HLA) complex, is shed 
into the plasma at a constant rate and, having a molecular 
weight of only 11 815 Da, passes freely through the glom-
eruli. As a result, its plasma concentration is normally very 
low (<2 mg/L), but it rises if renal function is impaired 
and can reach 40 mg/L. There is a direct relationship be-
tween plasma β2-microglobulin concentration and GFR, 
but its measurement has not been widely adopted for es-
timating the GFR for methodological reasons. Further, 
there are a number of conditions in which the production 
of β2-microglobulin is increased (e.g. lymphoid tumours 
and some inflammatory diseases) and these can result in 
increased plasma concentrations that do not reflect de-
creased clearance.
Isotopic 
techniques 
for 
measuring 
glomerular 
­filtration rate. A number of radiolabelled compounds 
that are excreted entirely or largely by glomerular filtra-
tion have been used in tests designed to measure the GFR. 
These include 51Cr-labelled ethylenediaminetetraacetic 
acid (EDTA), 125I-iodothalamate and 99mTc-diethylenetri-
aminepentaacetic acid (DTPA). The Cr-EDTA-derived 
GFR is the accepted isotopic gold standard and is used 
when a very accurate estimate of GFR is required, for ex-
ample in the work-up of potential kidney donors. In the 
TABLE 7.2  Stages of chronic kidney disease
 
Stage
 
Description
eGFRa (mL/min 
per 1.73 m2)
 
Actionb
1
Kidney damage with normal or ↑ 
GFR
≥90
Diagnosis and treatment, treatment of comorbid 
conditions, slowing progression, cardiovascular disease 
risk reduction
2
Kidney damage with mild ↓ GFR
60–89
Estimating progression
3a
Moderate ↓ GFR
45–59
Evaluating and treating complications
3b
30–44
4
Severe ↓ GFR
15–29
Preparation for renal replacement therapy
5
Established renal failure
<15 (or 
dialysis)
Replacement therapy (if uraemia present)
The suffix ‘p’ is used for all stages of CKD to denote the presence of proteinuria confirmed by laboratory testing.
aeGFR is the estimated GFR.
bincludes action from preceding stages. Table based on the National Kidney Foundation K/DOQI chronic kidney disease classification with 
modifications recommended by UK NICE guidelines.
136	
Clinical biochemistry
simplest type of test, a single bolus injection is given and 
accurately timed blood samples are collected over 2 h (lon-
ger may be necessary in patients with renal impairment). 
The logarithm of plasma radioactivity is plotted against 
time and extrapolated back to zero time, to allow calcu-
lation of the notional initial volume of distribution. The 
GFR is then given by:
GFR
V
t
e
=
×
{
}
0
1 2
2
(log
)
/
where Vo is the notional initial volume of distribution and 
t1/2 is the half-life for the decrease in plasma radioactivity.
Such methods compare reasonably well with the re-
sults of inulin clearance, but their accuracy is enhanced if 
classic clearance techniques are used. For this, the marker 
compound is given during a water diuresis and a series 
of measurements of plasma and urine radioactivity are 
made. The clearance formula is used to calculate individ-
ual clearances and the GFR is taken as the mean of these.
99mTc-DTPA is also used as a renal scanning agent 
(although the dose of radioactivity required is approxi-
mately ten times greater than for measurement of GFR). 
However, gamma camera scanning following the admin-
istration of this agent can be used to measure the indi-
vidual contribution of each kidney to the overall GFR.
Other tests of renal function
Tests of proximal tubular function include the measure-
ment of phosphate reabsorption (see Chapter 6) and the 
detection of aminoaciduria and glycosuria. The causes of 
glycosuria are discussed in Chapters  9 and 15. Amino 
aciduria can be due to increases in plasma amino acid 
concentration (‘overflow amino aciduria’), as occurs in 
several inherited disorders of amino acid metabolism, 
or to decreased renal tubular reabsorption of normally 
filtered amounts of amino acids (‘renal amino aciduria’). 
Renal amino aciduria can be due to isolated defects of 
amino acid transport or to generalized proximal tubular 
dysfunction, and is discussed in Chapter 9.
Tests of distal tubular function include formal tests of 
urinary concentration and dilution and of urinary acidi-
fication. These are discussed in Chapters 4 and 9. The 
assessment of urinary sodium excretion in relation to 
physiological requirements plays an important part in the 
investigation of renal function in certain circumstances, 
as discussed in the section on acute kidney injury (see 
later). In general, however, tests of renal tubular function 
are employed much less frequently than tests of glomeru-
lar function in the investigation of renal disease.
ACUTE KIDNEY INJURY (ACUTE RENAL 
FAILURE)
Introduction
Acute kidney injury (AKI) has now replaced the term 
acute renal failure. The new terminology enables health-
care professionals to consider the disease as a spectrum of 
injury. This spectrum extends from less severe forms of 
injury to more advanced injury requiring renal replace-
ment therapy (RRT). Clinically, AKI is characterized by 
a rapid reduction in kidney function resulting in a failure 
to maintain fluid, electrolyte and acid–base homoeosta-
sis. Acute kidney injury is potentially a life-threatening 
condition and, developing as it often does in patients who 
are already severely ill, it has a high mortality, despite 
the widespread availability of effective renal replacement 
therapy.
In many patients with AKI, there is oliguria (a urine 
flow rate of <15 mL/h in the adult). However, this is not 
universally present. In particular, non-oliguric AKI may 
be seen in patients with burns, liver disease and drug-­
induced renal damage. Occasionally, there is no urine 
production at all (anuria). This can occur with particularly 
severe renal disease but is more frequently due to urinary 
tract obstruction (to which it is an important clue).
It is important to appreciate that a diagnosis of AKI on 
its own is incomplete and does not imply any particular 
cause. The principal clinical features of AKI are summa-
rized in Table 7.3.
The use of the adjective ‘acute’ tends to emphasize the 
importance of the period of time over which the condition 
develops. While it is true that this time is usually only a 
few hours (in contrast to that for chronic kidney disease, 
CKD), a more fundamental difference between these two 
syndromes is that AKI is usually potentially reversible, 
whereas in CKD, there is progressive, irreversible loss of 
renal function over a period that can range from months to 
tens of years, leading eventually to established renal failure, 
a condition in which renal replacement (e.g. long-term di-
alysis or transplantation) is required for continued survival.
Classification and causes
As has been discussed above, the primary determinants 
of the GFR are the hydrostatic pressure of blood in the 
glomerular capillaries, the intrinsic physical properties 
of the glomeruli and the hydrostatic pressure of fluid in 
the lumina of the nephrons. It follows that changes in 
TABLE 7.3  Metabolic and clinical features 
of acute kidney injury
Metabolic feature
Clinical feature
Retention of nitrogenous 
waste products
(↑ plasma urea and 
creatinine)
Nausea, vomiting, hiccoughs, 
clouding of consciousness, 
gastrointestinal bleeding 
etc.
Retention of sodium and 
water
(usually with 
hyponatraemia)
Peripheral and pulmonary 
oedema, ascites, pleural 
effusion
Retention of potassium
(with hyperkalaemia)
Typical electrocardiographic 
changes (peaked T waves, 
flattened P waves, QRS 
depression, widened QRS 
complex)
Muscle weakness, paralysis, 
risk of cardiac arrest
Retention of acid 
(metabolic acidosis,
↑
↓
↓
↓
+
−
[
],
,
[
],
H
pH
HCO
CO
3
2
P
)
Kussmaul breathing, 
hypotension
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
137
any one or more of these may cause a decrease in GFR. 
Acute kidney injury has traditionally been classified into 
prerenal (due to impaired renal perfusion), intrinsic renal 
and postrenal (obstructive) causes (Box 7.3). This clas-
sification, though particularly useful in formulating an 
approach to diagnosis and management, has limitations; 
in any patient, more than one factor may be contribut-
ing to the development of renal failure. Furthermore, 
both ‘prerenal’ and ‘postrenal’ AKI can lead to the de-
velopment of intrinsic renal damage. Also, intrinsic renal 
disease can have both detrimental effects on renal perfu-
sion and lead to obstruction of urinary flow. Finally, the 
syndrome of acute kidney injury can develop in patients 
with CKD as when, for example, complete bladder out-
flow obstruction leads to retention of urine and AKI in 
a man who already has chronically impaired renal func-
tion as a result of partial obstruction due to prostatic 
hypertrophy.
Prerenal acute kidney injury
This type of injury is characterized, at least in its early 
stages, by a lack of structural renal damage, preservation 
of normal tubular function (e.g. concentrating ability, 
sodium reabsorption) and rapid reversibility provided 
that the underlying cause is managed appropriately. In 
essence, it is a consequence of reduced renal perfusion, 
secondary to either cardiovascular insufficiency (hypovo-
laemia and hypotension) or a derangement of intrarenal 
haemodynamics. Some causes are indicated in Box 7.3. In 
many hospitals, a significant proportion of cases of acute 
kidney injury follows trauma or surgery and may be ex-
acerbated by the administration of nephrotoxic drugs or 
coexistent medical conditions.
In health, renal blood flow and GFR remain unchanged 
over a wide range of renal perfusion pressures, but a fall in 
perfusion pressure below a mean of about 80 mmHg leads 
to a reduction in renal blood flow and GFR.
Homoeostatic mechanisms involved in the defence 
of ECF volume include increased sodium reabsorption 
and increased water retention. The major stimulus to 
sodium reabsorption is through angiotensin II-induced 
secretion of aldosterone. Water reabsorption is stimu-
lated by increased vasopressin secretion; stimuli to 
vasopressin secretion in this context may include hy-
povolaemia, angiotensin II and, if hypovolaemia is due 
to hypotonic fluid loss, increased plasma osmolality. In 
addition, vasoconstriction of efferent glomerular arte-
rioles by angiotensin II increases the filtered fraction 
of the plasma, thus increasing the protein content (and 
oncotic pressure) of blood in these vessels and in the 
peritubular capillaries, so enhancing proximal tubular 
reabsorption of water.
Diagnosis
The accurate diagnosis of prerenal AKI is important, 
since rapid intervention may prevent progression to in-
trinsic AKI. In prerenal AKI, the plasma urea concen-
tration is usually increased disproportionately to that of 
creatinine. As urine flow rate falls, the diffusion of urea 
from the lumen of the nephron into the interstitial fluid 
increases. An increase in urea may also be related to the 
increased catabolism that frequently is present as a result 
of the underlying disorder. In contrast, in intrinsic kidney 
injury, plasma urea and creatinine concentrations tend to 
rise in parallel.
Urinalysis may be informative and should be per-
formed in all patients with AKI. As discussed on page 130, 
abnormalities apart from the presence of hyaline casts 
are uncommon in prerenal AKI, but are invariably pres-
ent in intrinsic AKI. The fact that tubular function is 
intact in prerenal AKI underlies a number of diagnostic 
tests (see Table 7.4). In prerenal AKI, the homoeostatic 
responses to hypovolaemia described above should 
BOX 7.3	
Some causes of acute kidney  
injury
Prerenal
•	 Hypovolaemia
•	 Haemorrhage
•	 Gastrointestinal fluid loss
•	 Diuresis
•	 Burns
•	 Decreased cardiac output
•	 Cardiogenic shock
•	 Massive pulmonary embolus
•	 Cardiac tamponade
•	 Other causes of hypotension
•	 Sepsis
•	 Vasodilator drugs
•	 Interference with autoregulation of renal blood flow
•	 Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors
•	 Prostaglandin inhibitors (e.g. non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs)
Intrinsic renal
•	 Glomerulonephritis
•	 Vascular disease
•	 Severe hypertension
•	 Ischaemia
•	 Nephrotoxins
•	 Aminoglycoside antibiotics
•	 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
•	 X-ray contrast media
•	 Heavy metals
•	 Animal and plant toxins
•	 Hypercalcaemia
•	 Infiltrative disorders
•	 Sarcoidosis
•	 Lymphoma, leukaemia
Postrenal
•	 Bilateral ureteric obstruction (or unilateral if there is 
only one functioning kidney)
•	 Calculi
•	 Papillary necrosis
•	 Tumours
•	 Retroperitoneal fibrosis
•	 Surgical mishap
•	 Bladder outflow/urethral obstruction
•	 Urethral stricture
•	 Benign prostatic hypertrophy
•	 Carcinoma of prostate
•	 Neurogenic bladder
138	
Clinical biochemistry
maximize renal sodium reabsorption and water retention. 
In consequence, the urine will tend to be concentrated 
and have a low sodium content, whereas if there is tubu-
lar damage, there will be a failure of this response, and 
the urine will be dilute and contain significant quantities 
of sodium. Although in general these theoretical conclu-
sions are supported by clinical observations, ­considerable 
overlap may occur in the results obtained in patients 
with prerenal and established AKI. It must be empha-
sized that the tests are only useful if there is oliguria, 
and may be vitiated if the patient has been given a 
diuretic (which will increase sodium excretion, even 
in prerenal AKI), or mannitol or an X-ray contrast 
medium, both of which increase urine osmolality even 
in intrinsic AKI.
Although these tests are of help in management, the 
diagnosis of intrinsic AKI may only be made on the basis 
of an inexorably rising plasma creatinine concentration 
despite correction of any ‘prerenal’ factors that may have 
been identified.
Management
The management of prerenal AKI involves rapid res-
toration of euvolaemia, discontinuation of potentially 
nephrotoxic drugs and increasing tubular flow to pre-
vent tubular obstruction. Delay in achieving euvolae-
mia increases the risk of progression to intrinsic kidney 
injury. Fluid replacement must be done with a view to 
achieving adequate cardiac output but avoiding fluid 
overload. In patients with shock, it may be necessary 
to infuse vasoactive substances to achieve an adequate 
blood pressure.
Intrinsic acute kidney injury
Intrinsic AKI can be a progression from a prerenal phase, 
but many conditions causing AKI do so without a pre-
renal component. Nephrotoxins, intrinsic renal disease 
(e.g. glomerulonephritis) and systemic disease affecting 
the kidneys (e.g. septicaemia) are all important causes of 
kidney injury (see Box 7.3).
The term ‘acute tubular necrosis’ is sometimes used 
synonymously with ‘intrinsic AKI’, but should not be. 
Ischaemic injury and many nephrotoxins cause acute tu-
bular necrosis, but in other cases of renal injury, the brunt 
of the damage is borne by the glomeruli. Although the 
treatment in such patients will involve management of 
the kidney injury per se, the prognosis often depends on 
the underlying cause.
Diagnosis
The distinction between prerenal and intrinsic AKI has 
been discussed above. In addition, proteinuria is usually 
present in intrinsic injury. The urinary sediment fre-
quently contains epithelial cells, both free and in casts, 
and in kidney injury due to glomerulonephritis, haema-
turia and red cell casts are present.
The plasma biochemical disturbances are similar in all 
types of kidney injury though without intervention, they 
become more severe if prerenal AKI progresses to intrin-
sic injury. The plasma urea and creatinine concentrations 
then tend to rise in parallel.
Special investigations that may be of value (but will 
not be required in all cases) include radiology (ultra-
sound, isotopic scanning, CT and MRI scans) and renal 
histology.
Ultrasound is helpful in the exclusion of urinary tract 
obstruction. It shows the size and cortical thickness of 
the kidneys (small kidneys imply chronicity). Asymmetry 
of renal size may suggest renovascular disease. This can 
be confirmed by duplex scanning. If poor images are 
obtained, blood flow can be determined by magnetic 
resonance angiography (MRA). This technique does not 
require the use of X-ray contrast media, but in patients 
with eGFR <30 mL/min, the gadolinium which is used 
as a contrast agent for MRI scanning has been implicated 
in the development of a condition known as nephrogenic 
systemic fibrosis. There is no known cure for this con-
dition. Computed tomography (CT) scanning is also 
useful in further definition of anatomical renal tract ab-
normalities. Contrast-enhanced CT scanning can, how-
ever, exacerbate renal impairment by causing contrast 
nephropathy. It should, therefore, be used with caution 
in patients with acute kidney injury.
Renal biopsy is not required if the cause of AKI is ob-
vious (e.g. post-trauma), but will inform management if 
the development of kidney injury is unexpected and if in-
trinsic renal disease, for example glomerulonephritis, is 
suspected.
Acute tubular necrosis
Pathogenesis. While the reduction in GFR that occurs 
with renal hypoperfusion is readily explicable, the cause 
of its persistence after restoration of the circulation is a 
more complex issue, which is still not fully understood. 
Several mechanisms may be involved (Fig. 7.6). These in-
clude continued renal vasoconstriction due to the intra-
renal release of vasoactive substances, such as endothelin 
and prostaglandins, and to angiotensin II (renin secre-
tion may remain high secondary to decreased delivery 
of solute, especially sodium, to the macula densa); direct 
damage to the glomeruli resulting in decreased filtration, 
and physical obstruction of the lumina of nephrons by 
swollen tubular cells or tubular debris. Diffusion of fluid 
from the lumina of nephrons into the interstitial tissue 
through damaged tubular walls (stimulated by the differ-
ence in oncotic pressures), will tend to oppose the process 
of glomerular filtration.
There is evidence from experimental models to sup-
port all these mechanisms. In all probability, all are 
TABLE 7.4  Diagnostic tests of potential value in 
differentiating prerenal and intrinsic renal acute 
kidney injury
Test
Result
Prerenal
Intrinsic renal
Urine [Na+]
<20 mmol/L
>40 mmol/L
Urine osmolality/plasma 
osmolality
>1.5
<1.1
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
139
involved in the pathogenesis of acute tubular necrosis, 
but the relative contributions of the various mechanisms 
are likely to differ in each case.
Whatever the cause, however, injury, whether neph-
rotoxic or ischaemic, appears to be central to the devel-
opment of acute tubular necrosis, and the restoration of 
normal renal function requires not only restoration of 
glomerular filtration, but also regeneration of the tubular 
epithelium of nephrons.
Natural history. The natural history of acute tubular ne-
crosis (ATN) can be divided into three phases: the initial, 
oliguric phase; a diuretic phase, as glomerular filtration 
begins to recover, but a combination of persisting tubular 
damage and a high osmotic load causes a diuresis, and a 
recovery phase. The time course is variable between a few 
days and several months. Although patients who survive 
usually recover normal renal function, a small number 
develop renal cortical necrosis, from which functional re-
covery is not possible.
Exceptions occur and some patients do not have 
an oliguric phase. The details of management of each 
phase are different although the principles – avoidance 
of complications and the provision of renal replace-
ment therapy as required – are common to all patients 
with AKI.
The mortality of AKI has decreased considerably with 
the widespread availability of renal replacement treat-
ment, but remains in the region of 50%. It is related not 
only to the severity of the kidney injury and the efficiency 
of treatment, but also to the underlying cause and any 
comorbidities, for example multiple trauma. Acute kid-
ney injury frequently occurs in patients who are already 
severely ill. The prognosis is generally better in non-­
oliguric AKI than when oliguria is present.
Obstructive (postrenal) kidney injury
The possibility of an obstructive cause must be considered 
in any patient with AKI. The history and examination 
(e.g. previous symptoms suggestive of prostate disease, or 
a palpable bladder on clinical examination) may provide 
a clue. Ultrasonography may reveal dilatation of the ure-
ters if there is ureteric obstruction.
Obstructive AKI may be due to urethral (e.g. benign 
prostatic hypertrophy), bilateral ureteric (e.g. calculi, 
retroperitoneal fibrosis) or intrarenal (e.g. light chain 
precipitation in myeloma) obstruction. Any of these con-
ditions can also cause chronic kidney disease.
The procedures involved in the diagnosis of obstruc-
tive AKI often reveal the cause. Management is directed 
at restoring a normal flow of urine, for example by per-
cutaneous nephrostomy, or removal or ultrasonic de-
struction of calculi. Relief of obstruction often leads to a 
temporary diuresis and natriuresis, and the urine output 
should be monitored closely to guide fluid replacement 
therapy.
Acute kidney injury in the setting  
of chronic kidney disease
Acute kidney injury can occur and precipitate pre-
sentation in patients with pre-existing (chronic) kid-
ney disease. Clues to this possibility are indicated in 
Box  7.4. In practice, it is often necessary to manage 
the acute event and investigate the patient for chronic 
renal disease later.
Hepatorenal syndrome
Patients with liver disease can develop acute kidney in-
jury. The causes may be common (e.g. paracetamol (ac-
etaminophen) toxicity), or independent. Prerenal and 
intrinsic renal disease can occur. The hepatorenal syn-
drome is a unique form of AKI that can develop in pa-
tients with chronic liver failure. It is discussed in detail in 
Chapter 14. The hepatorenal syndrome can progress to 
acute tubular necrosis; this has a particularly poor prog-
nosis and recovery usually only occurs if there is some 
improvement in hepatic function.
BOX 7.4	
Factors suggesting an element of 
chronicity in acute kidney injury (i.e. 
acute on chronic kidney disease)
•	 Absence of acute illness
•	 Long duration of symptoms
•	 Nocturia
•	 Anaemia
•	 Bone disease
•	 Sexual dysfunction
•	 Neuropathy
•	 Skin disorders
•	 Small kidneys demonstrated by radiological imaging
Tubular
necrosis
Hypovolaemia
Vasoconstriction
Angiotensin II
Renal blood
     flow
Glomerular
damage
Glomerular
filtration rate 
Kf
Renin 
secretion
Tubular Na+
reabsorption
Obstruction of
tubular lumen
Back leak of
filtrate into
interstitium
Nephrotoxins
Oliguria
FIGURE 7.6  ■  Factors involved in the pathogenesis of oliguria in 
acute tubular necrosis. Kf, glomerular ultrafiltration coefficient.
140	
Clinical biochemistry
Metabolic consequences and management  
of acute kidney injury
The importance of prevention has already been empha-
sized. Many cases of AKI occur in patients at predictably 
high risk of developing the condition.
Accurate diagnosis is essential in the management of 
acute kidney injury. It is essential to consider the follow-
ing possibilities:
•	 is there a prerenal component?
•	 is there any urinary tract obstruction?
•	 is there any intrinsic renal disease?
•	 is there a chronic component?
The approaches to answering these questions have 
been discussed above.
If renal function is not rapidly restored to normal de-
spite appropriate management of any antecedent condi-
tion, the aim of treatment becomes the prevention of the 
consequences of the condition. There are two aspects to 
management: general measures and, if these alone are in-
sufficient, renal replacement therapy. Specific measures 
to treat the underlying cause should, of course, be contin-
ued. All patients require rigorous clinical and laboratory 
monitoring throughout.
General management
Fluid and electrolyte balance. The prevention of 
fluid overload or electrolyte imbalance is crucial to the 
management of AKI. In calculating fluid balance, allow-
ance must be made for endogenous water production of 
some 500 mL/24 h and insensible losses (approximately 
0.5 mL/kg body weight/h, but significantly higher if 
there is pyrexia). Endogenous production derives from 
oxidative metabolism and will be increased if (as is usual) 
the patient is catabolic.
Objective assessment of extracellular fluid (ECF) vol-
ume, preferably using flow-based measurements (or, al-
ternatively, central venous pressure), is valuable, and in 
many patients is essential. Sodium intake must be limited 
in oliguric patients and special note taken of any covert 
sodium administration if drugs are given as their sodium 
salts. In patients with non-oliguric AKI and during the 
diuretic phase of acute tubular necrosis, adequate fluid 
replacement is required and should be informed by con-
tinuous assessment of urinary volume.
Hyperkalaemia is a life-threatening complication of 
AKI and frequent monitoring of plasma potassium con-
centration is essential. Several factors contribute to the 
increase in plasma potassium concentration, including 
decreased renal excretion, acidosis and loss of intracel-
lular potassium to the ECF as a result of catabolism. 
Potassium intake should be minimized; intravenous cal-
cium chloride can be used to antagonize the effects of 
hyperkalaemia. An infusion of dextrose and insulin may 
temporarily reduce the plasma potassium concentration, 
but persistent significant hyperkalaemia is an indication 
for renal replacement treatment.
Other disturbances that may occur in AKI include hy-
perphosphataemia, hypocalcaemia, hyperuricaemia and 
hypermagnesaemia. Hypercalcaemia may develop, par-
ticularly in patients with AKI related to crush injuries, 
owing to release of calcium from damaged muscle and in-
creased synthesis of calcitriol as falling phosphate concen-
trations decrease the inhibition of renal 1α-hydroxylase.
Acid–base balance. Since the kidneys are the only or-
gans capable of excreting significant amounts of hydrogen 
ions, and the net daily acid load that has to be excreted is 
of the order of 40–80 mmol, patients with AKI are usually 
acidotic. Acid–base status may also be adversely affected 
by comorbid conditions, for example lactic acidosis sec-
ondary to sepsis.
Nutrition. Active nutritional management is a vital part 
of the management of patients with AKI, whether being 
treated conservatively or with renal replacement. The 
aim is to maintain nutritional status where it is adequate 
and to improve it where it is compromised, in order to 
limit catabolism, promote the healing of any wounds 
and enhance resistance to infection. The mainstay of 
nutritional management is to provide adequate energy 
substrates to obtain positive energy balance. Nitrogen 
requirements are variable and there are few reliable 
data to guide the amount of protein or amino acids that 
should be provided. In established renal failure, an in-
crease in plasma urea concentration not associated with 
an increase in creatinine suggests excessive provision of 
nitrogen. It is important to provide adequate vitamins 
and trace elements.
If possible, the enteral route should be used to provide 
nutrients. In patients who cannot eat, or eat enough, pro-
prietary liquid feeds may be given through a nasogastric 
tube. For patients with intestinal failure, and for those 
in whom enteral feeding is contraindicated for some 
other reason or in whom enteral feeding cannot, on its 
own, provide sufficient energy, parenteral feeding will be 
required.
The principles of nutritional management in AKI are 
no different from those in any other condition: an ad-
equate regimen must be provided; a suitable route for its 
provision must be available, and the patient’s response 
must be carefully monitored (see Chapter 11). It should 
be appreciated that patients receiving renal replacement 
in general have increased requirements for nutrients, 
since there will be loss from the bloodstream into the 
dialysate.
There is no reason not to use lipid emulsions together 
with glucose solutions as an energy source in patients 
with AKI receiving parenteral feeding, unless there is 
a problem with lipid utilization; this will be apparent 
from simple inspection of the plasma, which will appear 
lipaemic.
Other measures. Infection is a frequent cause of death 
in patients with AKI, even if it has not precipitated the 
condition. It is essential to treat any infection early and 
adequately and to take every practicable step possible to 
prevent infection developing. When prescribing drugs, 
including antibiotics, care must be taken to avoid any that 
are potentially nephrotoxic. The dosages of any drugs 
that are excreted by the kidneys should be reviewed and, 
where appropriate, dosage guided by measurement of 
plasma concentrations.
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
141
Renal replacement treatment
Major indications for renal replacement include the 
following:
•	 fluid overload (e.g. pulmonary oedema)
•	 the need to ‘create space’ to allow provision of par-
enteral nutrition or other solutions in the oliguric 
patient
•	 severe hyperkalaemia (plasma potassium >7.0 mmol/L)
•	 severe acidosis (arterial [H+] >70 nmol/L, pH <7.15 
or plasma bicarbonate <12 mmol/L).
Haemodialysis. This technique is discussed on page 149. 
It is usually performed intermittently, each treatment 
lasting approximately 4 h. Clearance rates of more than 
30 mL/min can be achieved. Intermittent haemodi-
alysis is an efficient technique, but there is a danger of 
‘disequilibrium syndrome’ due to too rapid removal of 
metabolites leading to osmotic imbalance between body 
fluid compartments with consequent rapid shifts of fluid. 
Headache, vomiting and, occasionally, fits may occur.
Because excess fluid is removed intermittently, the 
provision of continuous parenteral feeding may be more 
difficult with haemodialysis than with the filtration tech-
niques described in the following sections.
Continuous venovenous haemofiltration (CVVH). 
This technique (see p. 150) allows clearance rates of ap-
proximately 10 mL/min. In haemofiltration, large volumes 
of fluid are removed, but over a longer period of time, thus 
minimizing the risks of circulatory imbalance. There is, 
therefore, ample scope for the provision of parenteral nu-
trition when required, although other fluid replacement 
may usually be required in addition.
Continuous 
venovenous 
haemodiafiltration 
(CVVHDF). In this technique, the filter is also perfused 
by dialysis solution. This combines the advantages of 
continuous filtration (particularly the ease of removal of 
fluid) with those of dialysis (higher clearances). Correction 
of metabolic imbalances, for example hyperkalaemia, is 
more easily achieved with CVVHDF than CVVH.
Peritoneal dialysis. Peritoneal dialysis (see p. 150) is a 
simpler technique than haemodialysis or haemofiltration, 
and does not require access to the circulation. However, 
it is less efficient than haemodialysis (clearance rates ap-
proximately 20 mL/min) and so is less suitable for hyper-
catabolic patients. Considerable quantities of protein (up 
to 40 g) can be lost into the dialysate at each session and 
there is a risk of peritonitis. Nevertheless, if the require-
ments needed to set up haemodialysis or filtration are not 
immediately available, this technique is valuable in the 
management of patients with AKI.
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE
Introduction
Chronic kidney disease is a syndrome of persistent renal 
impairment involving loss of both glomerular and tubular 
function such that the kidneys’ homoeostatic functions 
are compromised. It usually has a gradual onset and, in 
many cases, progresses inexorably to a critical state (es-
tablished or end-stage renal failure) in which the patient’s 
continued survival requires the initiation of renal replace-
ment treatment, either by some form of dialysis or by re-
nal transplantation. Although there are many causes of 
CKD, the clinical features of the condition tend to be 
similar regardless of the cause, being in effect due to a 
decrease in the number of functioning nephrons. Despite 
this, it is, as discussed below, important to attempt to de-
termine the cause, although this is not always possible.
Although CKD may be discovered early, before it has 
given rise to any clinical disturbance (e.g. by the routine 
assessment of renal function in patients at risk of devel-
oping CKD), it frequently presents late, with a GFR al-
ready <20 mL/min. Some patients will also have clinical 
features of the ‘uraemic syndrome’. This term is used to 
describe the clinical features that can occur in patients 
with CKD, but is caused by the retention of many sub-
stances, of which urea itself is relatively unimportant, and 
by other (e.g. endocrine) abnormalities that arise as a re-
sult of renal dysfunction.
Aetiology and pathogenesis of chronic 
­kidney disease
Some of the more frequent causes of CKD are indicated 
in Box 7.5. As alluded to above, it is not always possible to 
determine the cause; patients presenting with advanced 
uraemia frequently have small, shrunken kidneys (unless 
diabetes, amyloid or polycystic disease is the cause of the 
condition) and specific diagnostic features may not be 
discernible even in a biopsy. It is, however, important to 
try to determine the cause, particularly in patients with 
less advanced disease. This may reveal a condition that 
is susceptible to treatment, so that progression can be 
delayed or even halted. The cause will, to some extent, 
determine the prognosis and allow planning of the even-
tual need for renal replacement and, if transplantation is 
contemplated, of the likelihood of recurrent disease in 
the grafted kidney. Finally, the identification of a familial 
cause (e.g. polycystic disease) may usefully lead to screen-
ing of other members of the family.
Successful treatment of the underlying cause of CKD 
does not always arrest the progress of the condition. It 
appears that, once started, the loss of nephrons in CKD 
itself contributes to disease progression. This has impor-
tant therapeutic implications and the possible mecha-
nisms have been extensively investigated.
BOX 7.5	
Some causes of chronic kidney 
disease (CKD)
•	 Glomerulonephritis
•	 Pyelonephritis
•	 Interstitial nephritis
•	 Diabetes mellitus
•	 Hypertension
•	 Polycystic kidney disease
•	 Nephrotoxic drugs
•	 Multisystem disease
142	
Clinical biochemistry
The progression of loss of renal function
If 80% of a rat’s renal mass is removed, the animal de-
velops proteinuria, hypertension and progressive renal 
failure; glomerular sclerosis is demonstrable in the renal 
remnant. Before hypertension and histological changes 
develop, there is a massive increase in renal blood flow, 
owing to a decrease in afferent arteriolar resistance. This 
leads to an increase in capillary hydrostatic pressure, 
increased capillary permeability and passage of macro-
molecules, including plasma proteins and lipoproteins, 
through the capillary wall. Some of the protein appears 
as proteinuria, but some is scavenged by mesangial cells, 
and it is thought that overloading of these phagocytic 
cells may cause functional derangement and cellular 
proliferation and contribute to the glomerular sclerosis. 
Increased numbers of macrophages may liberate growth 
factors, also stimulating cellular proliferation, and direct 
endothelial damage may lead to platelet activation and 
intraglomerular thrombosis, with consequent fibrosis 
and liberation of platelet-derived growth factor and other 
stimulants of cellular proliferation.
Systemic hypertension is common in chronic kidney 
disease (though less so if the underlying pathology is in 
the medulla, e.g. reflux nephropathy, than in the cortex, 
e.g. glomerulonephritis), owing to salt and water reten-
tion and inappropriate release of renin and, thus, for-
mation of angiotensin I. This hypertension itself has a 
harmful effect on renal function, by exacerbating the pro-
cesses described above and by causing arteriolar damage 
and ischaemic glomerular sclerosis.
Chronic kidney disease causes hyperphosphatae-
mia, and the phosphate retention can contribute to 
further renal damage. Dyslipidaemia is a frequent 
finding in chronic renal disease, and the accumulation 
of lipids in the glomeruli is also thought to contribute 
to the progression of renal disease and suggests an-
other possible therapeutic manoeuvre that may retard 
this process.
In addition to these factors, incidental conditions can 
contribute to the progression of renal failure in patients 
with renal disease (see Box 7.6). As the homoeostatic ca-
pacity of the kidneys decreases, so the patient becomes 
more susceptible to what might otherwise be easily toler-
ated events.
The uraemic syndrome
The clinical syndrome associated with CKD is protean 
in its manifestations. None is specific to the condition, 
but the overall clinical disturbance is characteristic. 
Disorders of the cardiovascular, neurological, skeletal, 
gastrointestinal, endocrinological, haematological and 
immunological systems are of particular clinical impor-
tance, but any system can be affected. The clinical fea-
tures are summarized in Box 7.7.
BOX 7.6	
Incidental factors which can 
contribute to the progression 
of CKD
•	 Hypertension
•	 Hypovolaemia
•	 Vomiting, diarrhoea, excessive use of diuretics etc.
•	 Urinary tract infection
•	 Congestive cardiac failure
•	 Drugs
•	 Tetracyclines
•	 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents
•	 Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors
•	 Pregnancy
•	 Exacerbation of underlying disease (e.g. systemic lupus 
erythematosus)
BOX 7.7	
Some clinical features of 
the uraemic syndrome
Cardiovascular
•	 Pericarditis
•	 Hypertension
•	 Congestive cardiac failure
Dermatological
•	 Pruritus
•	 Pigmentation
•	 Slow wound healing
Endocrinological
•	 Glucose intolerance
•	 Impaired growth
•	 Sexual dysfunction
Gastrointestinal
•	 Hiccough
•	 Nausea
•	 Vomiting
•	 Anorexia
•	 Gastritis
Haematological
•	 Anaemia
•	 Bleeding diathesis
Immunological
•	 Increased susceptibility to infection
•	 ‘Burn out’ of immunological disease (e.g. systemic 
­lupus erythematosus)
Neurological
•	 Confusion, coma
•	 Dementia
•	 Headache
•	 Peripheral neuropathy
•	 Flapping tremor
•	 Muscle weakness
Pulmonary
•	 Pulmonary oedema
Skeletal
•	 Vertebral fractures
Other
•	 Nocturia
•	 Thirst
•	 General malaise
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
143
These changes result to a considerable extent from the 
effects of the retained ‘uraemic toxins’; no single substance 
is responsible, although some, for example parathyroid 
hormone, appear to be particularly important. Box 7.8 in-
dicates some of the toxins that have been identified, but it 
should be emphasized that not only is it incomplete, but 
many uraemic toxins still await identification. In addition, 
deficiencies, for example of the hormones erythropoietin 
and calcitriol, contribute to the uraemic syndrome; while 
dialysis may relieve the clinical features of the syndrome 
by removing toxins, those related to deficiencies (e.g. 
anaemia) require treatment by specific supplementation.
Clinical features
A comprehensive discussion of the clinical manifestations 
of CKD is beyond the scope of this chapter. In the cardio-
vascular system, hypertension, congestive cardiac failure 
and accelerated atherosclerosis are all frequently encoun-
tered. The neurological involvement can include both 
the central nervous system (uraemic encephalopathy) and 
the peripheral nervous system. The skeletal features of 
CKD, which used to be called renal osteodystrophy, but 
is now called chronic kidney disease – mineral and bone 
disorder (CKD-MBD), comprise a complex amalgam of 
osteomalacia, secondary hyperparathyroidism, osteo­
sclerosis and osteopenia; they largely stem from the 
impaired production of calcitriol (1,25-dihydroxychole-
calciferol), the hormone derived from vitamin D. More 
recently, fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF-23) and 
klotho, a transmembrane protein produced by the os-
teocyte, which is required for FGF-23 receptor activa-
tion, have been identified as being important in this area, 
but their exact roles are still under investigation. Renal 
bone disease is discussed in more detail in Chapter 31. 
Gastrointestinal problems include hiccoughs, anorexia 
and gastritis, which can all cause great distress to the pa-
tient; gastrointestinal bleeding can be life-threatening.
The anaemia of CKD is usually normochromic and 
normocytic (see p. 147); fragmented (‘burr’) cells may 
be present on the blood film. A multifactorial bleeding 
diathesis is often present, with disturbances of platelet 
function and of coagulation. Depression of both the hu-
moral and cellular arms of the immune system are fre-
quent in CKD and patients have increased susceptibility 
to infection, are more likely to develop cancers and – a 
possibly beneficial effect – may experience remission of 
immunologically mediated disease.
Metabolic disturbances in CKD
Retention of nitrogenous waste products. Patients 
with CKD invariably have high plasma concentrations of 
urea and creatinine, but both can be affected by extrarenal 
factors. Thus, plasma urea concentration can be signifi-
cantly reduced, even in advanced disease, by restriction of 
dietary protein, or in patients with chronic liver disease, 
and a sudden increase may occur if the patient suffers a 
gastrointestinal haemorrhage. Patients with CKD often 
have muscle wasting, which results in decreased creati-
nine production.
Hyperuricaemia is usually present in patients with 
CKD, although the concentration does not often exceed 
600 μmol/L and attacks of acute gout solely due to the 
CKD are rare.
Potassium metabolism. Potassium balance can often be 
maintained in CKD until the GFR falls to <5 mL/min. 
This is because of an adaptive response whereby distal 
tubular potassium secretion is increased; the mechanisms 
include increased aldosterone secretion and increased so-
dium delivery to the distal nephron, but there is also a 
poorly understood direct effect on potassium excretion. 
Furthermore, colonic potassium excretion, which is not 
usually a major route of potassium loss, becomes quanti-
tatively important in patients with CKD.
Hyperkalaemia tends to occur earlier in patients with 
hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism, for example sec-
ondary to diabetes, and if there is significant acidosis. 
Hyperkalaemia is a life-threatening complication of 
CKD and can be precipitated by the injudicious ad-
ministration of potassium or a drug that interferes with 
potassium excretion, for example potassium-sparing di-
uretics, angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibi-
tors or β-adrenergic blockers.
Acid–base metabolism. In health, the kidneys excrete 
some 40–80 mmol of hydrogen ions per 24 h, this being 
the net rate of production on a normal diet. In CKD, re-
nal hydrogen ion excretion is impaired, and once the GFR 
falls to below ~30 mL/min, systemic acidosis is likely to 
develop. This is despite the fact that the pH of the urine 
can usually be reduced to the lowest level achievable in 
health. The causes of the acidosis are discussed in detail 
in Chapter 5, but in summary are primarily due to re-
duced phosphate excretion, which diminishes the buffer-
ing capacity of the urine, and reduced ammoniagenesis 
which, albeit indirectly, also decreases renal hydrogen ion 
excretion.
In addition, there is often a partial defect in the reab-
sorption of filtered bicarbonate, a consequence, in part, of 
the expanded ECF volume and, in part, of the increased 
secretion of parathyroid hormone (see below). Severe 
BOX 7.8	
Uraemic toxins
•	 Urea
•	 Creatinine
•	 Oxalate
•	 Guanidines
•	 Methylguanidine
•	 Guanidinosuccinic acid
•	 Indoxyl sulphate
•	 p-Cresol and p-cresylsulphate
•	 Hippuric acids
•	 Hippuric acid
•	 o- and p-hydroxyhippuric acid
•	 Peptides
•	 Parathyroid hormone
•	 β2-microglobulin
•	 Polyamines
•	 Spermine
•	 Putrescine etc.
144	
Clinical biochemistry
acidosis is, however, uncommon in CKD and, despite 
a continuing positive hydrogen ion balance, the blood 
hydrogen ion concentration tends to remain stable for 
weeks or even months at a time. This appears to be due 
to the extensive buffering of hydrogen ions that occurs 
in bone.
Although the usual acid–base disturbance in CKD 
is a non-respiratory acidosis, the ability of the kidneys 
to excrete excess bicarbonate is also decreased, and pa-
tients in whom there is excessive non-renal loss of acid, 
for example due to vomiting, may occasionally develop 
alkalosis.
Calcium, phosphate and magnesium metabolism 
and renal bone disease. These topics are reviewed in 
detail in Chapters 6 and 31. In essence, CKD leads to 
a progressive decrease in the synthesis of calcitriol from 
25-hydroxycholecalciferol, as a result of both inhibition 
of the enzyme by retained phosphate (an effect that be-
comes apparent as the GFR falls to <60–70 mL/min) and, 
in more advanced disease, a decrease in the amount of 
enzyme as the renal mass decreases. A lack of calcitriol 
leads to decreased absorption of calcium from the gut, ex-
acerbated by a low dietary intake of calcium, common in 
patients with CKD. There is thus a tendency to hypocal-
caemia which, in health, should be corrected by increased 
secretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH) and mobiliza-
tion of calcium from bone. In CKD, although the plasma 
PTH concentration is characteristically increased, often 
to a very high level (secondary hyperparathyroidism), 
there is resistance to its action, probably because of the 
low calcitriol concentrations. In consequence, plasma cal-
cium concentration is usually below normal.
It should be noted that the results of older assays for 
PTH may be misleading, owing to metabolism of the 
hormone and selective retention of the biologically inac-
tive C-terminal fragment in CKD. Assays that measure 
only intact PTH are more reliable indicators of parathy-
roid activity.
As discussed in detail in Chapter  6, hypercalcae-
mia can occur in CKD if parathyroid autonomy devel-
ops or after successful renal transplantation (tertiary 
hyperparathyroidism).
Plasma phosphate concentrations are usually normal, 
but can be low in early CKD. Despite a decrease in the 
number of functioning nephrons, the fractional excre-
tion of phosphate by each is increased due to the elevated 
PTH. In more advanced disease, further loss of nephrons 
leads to the characteristic phosphate retention.
Plasma magnesium concentrations tend to be in-
creased in CKD. Although toxic concentrations do not 
occur in uncomplicated cases, problems have been en-
countered in patients given magnesium salts therapeuti-
cally, for example as antacids.
Protein metabolism. Patients with CKD tend to be 
mildly catabolic, although this process can be accelerated 
by the development of intercurrent illness. Although the 
limitation of protein intake is an important aspect of the 
conservative management of CKD (see p. 148), it must 
not be so severe that it becomes a contributory factor to 
the loss of body protein.
Endocrine disturbances in CKD
There is good reason to expect endocrine disturbances in 
renal disease since the kidneys are an important site of hor-
mone production, action and clearance (Table 7.5). Quite 
apart from the effect of the kidneys themselves on the pro-
duction, excretion and activity of various hormones, im-
pairment of non-endocrine renal function can secondarily 
affect the endocrine system. For example, CKD causes 
significant alterations in the internal environment that 
may influence the secretory control of hormones, their 
transport, activation and degradation, the relative amounts 
of free and protein-bound hormones in plasma and the 
responsiveness of hormone receptors at the cellular or 
subcellular level. Thus, in addition to renal clearance, the 
extrarenal clearance of some hormones may be abnormal 
in CKD, for example impaired hepatic degradation of bio-
logically active PTH or diminished breakdown of insulin 
by skeletal muscle. Also, the function of endocrine organs 
may be influenced by treatment such as dietary restriction, 
drug therapy and renal replacement treatment.
The major mechanisms whereby chronic kidney 
disease influences endocrine function are outlined in 
Table 7.6. When kidney disease becomes advanced, the 
plasma or tissue concentrations and/or the functions of 
most hormones are altered, resulting in a number of well-
recognized endocrine abnormalities (Box 7.9).
Growth retardation
Short stature is common among children with ad-
vanced kidney disease; its pathogenesis is multifactorial 
(Box 7.10). From an endocrine point of view, growth is 
a complex process involving primarily growth hormone 
(GH), but it is also dependent upon normal adrenal, thy-
roid and sex hormone function as well as an adequate sup-
ply of nutrients. In CKD, plasma immunoreactive GH 
concentrations rise in proportion to the decline in creati-
nine clearance and probably also to protein malnutrition. 
TABLE 7.5  Functions of the kidneys involving 
hormones
Function
Hormones
Endocrine organ
Erythropoietin
Angiotensin I and II
1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol
Prostaglandins
Kinins
Endocrine target organ
Parathyroid hormone
Arginine vasopressin
Aldosterone
Calcitonin
Atrial natriuretic peptide
Excretion of hormones
Cortisol
Aldosterone
Catecholamines
Thyroid hormones
Sex hormones
Catabolism of hormones
Parathyroid hormone
Calcitonin
Arginine vasopressin
Insulin
1,25-Dihydroxycholecalciferol
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
145
This rise in GH is because of reduced clearance and con-
sequently increased plasma half-life. Growth failure in the 
presence of raised plasma GH concentrations indicates a 
resistance to the actions of GH in peripheral tissues. The 
homoeostatic mechanisms regulating GH secretion also 
appear to be abnormal in CKD, with exaggerated GH 
responses to arginine, thyrotrophin releasing hormone 
(TRH) and insulin-induced hypoglycaemia.
The skeletal growth-promoting actions of GH are 
mediated by the insulin-like growth factors (IGFs). In 
CKD, the plasma concentrations of IGFs tend to be nor-
mal, but their bioavailability is reduced. This is probably 
because of increases in the plasma concentrations of their 
respective binding proteins.
Sexual dysfunction
Impaired sexual function is a frequent and distressing 
symptom in both male and female patients with advanced 
CKD. In men, the major problem is impotence, which 
persists despite dialysis. This may have a multifactorial 
aetiology, being either directly related to the CKD or 
to coexistent conditions (Box  7.11). However, in many 
patients the organic component of impotence can be di-
rectly related to a disorder of sex hormones (Box 7.12), 
and several mechanisms may contribute to the hormonal 
abnormalities found. For example, hyperprolactinae-
mia is secondary both to hypersecretion and a reduction 
in clearance. The former is thought to be caused by a 
decrease in the sensitivity of lactotrophs to dopamine; 
chromatographic analysis of the circulating prolactin has 
confirmed that the majority is intact prolactin and not 
fragments.
In addition to problems of potency, males with CKD 
are frequently infertile, with evidence of defective sper-
matogenesis. Testicular biopsy shows maturation arrest, 
thickening of tubular basement membrane and interstitial 
fibrosis, consistent with damage to seminiferous tubules. 
These observations lend support to the theory that sexual 
dysfunction in advanced CKD is due primarily to toxic 
effects of circulating ‘uraemic toxins’ on both Leydig 
BOX 7.11	
Factors that may contribute to 
impotence in CKD
•	 Uraemic neuropathy
•	 Vascular disease
•	 Diabetes mellitus
•	 Alcoholism
•	 Drug therapy
•	 Pyschogenic impotence
•	 Sex hormone abnormalities
•	 Coincident endocrine disease
TABLE 7.6  Mechanisms by which chronic kidney disease influences endocrine function
Mechanism
Example
Damage to renal parenchyma
Reduced synthesis of hormones
 
Reduced clearance of hormones
 
Reduced action of hormones
Disturbance of fluid and electrolyte balance
Activation of homoeostatic mechanisms, e.g. renin–angiotensin system; 
PTH secretion in response to hypocalcaemia
Inappropriate secretion of hormones
Hypersecretion of hormones, e.g. prolactin
Appropriate homoeostatic feedback mechanisms
Secretion of LH in response to reduced testosterone
Impaired extrarenal catabolism
Accumulation of hormones, e.g. PTH, insulin
Reduced hormonal function
Presence of multimolecular forms with varied biological activity, e.g. 
glucagon and calcitonin
 
Accumulation of hormones with opposing actions
 
Accumulation of metabolic inhibitors
Renal loss of binding proteins
Disturbance of bound:free ratio
Target organ resistance to hormonal action
Abnormal receptor binding, e.g. 1,25-dihydoxyvitamin D
 
Abnormal postreceptor events, e.g. PTH, insulin
Reduced clearance of drugs
May interfere with endocrine function
Specific drug therapy, e.g. steroids
May interfere with endocrine function or induce endocrine disease, e.g. 
Cushing syndrome
Malnutrition
May have profound effects on endocrine function, e.g. growth and 
reproductive function
Increased susceptibility to sepsis
May have profound effects on endocrine function
BOX 7.9	
Major endocrine abnormalities 
seen in CKD
•	 Anaemia
•	 Endocrine hypertension
•	 Glucose intolerance
•	 Growth retardation
•	 Hypergastrinaemia
•	 Hyperlipidaemia
•	 Renal osteodystrophy
•	 Sex hormone dysfunction
•	 Thyroid hormone abnormalities
BOX 7.10	
Pathogenesis of growth 
­retardation in CKD
•	 Malnutrition
•	 Anaemia
•	 Uraemia
•	 Renal tubular dysfunction
•	 Renal osteodystrophy
•	 Steroid therapy
146	
Clinical biochemistry
and Sertoli cell function. The identity of these ‘toxins’ 
remains undetermined, although there is good evidence 
to suggest that both PTH and prolactin may play a role.
The course of progressive deterioration in testicular 
function is not markedly altered by either haemodialysis 
or peritoneal dialysis. The best treatment is renal trans-
plantation, which restores plasma gonadotrophin and sex 
steroid concentrations to normal and may result in effec-
tive spermatogenesis. The immunosuppressive therapy 
does not appear to have any deleterious effects apart from 
suppression of adrenal androgen secretion by predniso-
lone, although there is some evidence that men treated 
with sirolimus based regimens have a lower sperm count 
than those who are not.
Other notable problems that occur in dialysed males 
include gynaecomastia and priapism. The former does 
not appear to be related to either prolactin concentrations 
or androgen:oestrogen ratios, and has been compared to 
the type of gynaecomastia that occurs in malnourished 
patients during refeeding. The cause of priapism is un-
known, but may be related to hypovolaemia after dialysis, 
the use of heparin or treatment with androgens.
In children, delayed bone age and delayed puberty are 
found. In boys, Leydig cell function appears to be rela-
tively normal, as shown by the normal testosterone:dihyd
rotestosterone ratios, suggesting that 5α-reductase activ-
ity is normal. As might be expected, this results in normal 
LH concentrations, but FSH concentrations are elevated, 
which appears to reflect damage to the germinal cell epi-
thelium prior to the initiation of spermatogenesis. These 
observations suggest that Sertoli cell damage in renal 
impairment occurs early while Leydig cell damage either 
does not occur until late or only occurs in adult patients.
In women with CKD, there is typically hypothalamic 
anovulation with amenorrhoea along with loss of libido 
and inability to reach orgasm. These women frequently 
exhibit hyperprolactinaemia with reduced oestrogen 
concentrations and elevated plasma concentrations of 
gonadotrophins and gonadotrophin releasing hormone 
(GnRH). Even in women who menstruate, the mid­
cycle LH surge appears to be absent leading to anovula-
tory cycles and low progesterone concentrations, which 
in turn may cause dysfunctional bleeding. It is not sur-
prising, therefore, that such patients are infertile. With 
treatment, however, premenopausal women may resume 
normal menstruation with ovulatory cycles and may even 
become pregnant. As with males, renal transplantation 
produces the most satisfactory results.
Thyroid abnormalities
Patients with CKD have several clinical disturbances 
that could potentially affect thyroid function. For exam-
ple, they are chronically ill, often malnourished and dis-
play multiple hormonal and metabolic derangements. It 
is, therefore, not surprising that various abnormalities of 
thyroid function have been well documented (Box 7.13). 
These may complicate the diagnosis of coexistent thy-
roid disease (there is an increased prevalence of goitre 
and an increased incidence of primary hypothyroidism 
in CKD, particularly in women). The development of 
subclinical thyroid function test abnormalities has been 
explained by a mixture of defects (Box 7.14), which may 
also be observed in other chronic illnesses and malnutri-
tion states (see Chapter 19). The high incidence of goitre 
in uraemic patients suggests that there is a circulating 
goitrogen in CKD. This does not appear to be either 
TSH or autoimmune antibodies, but there is circum-
stantial evidence to suggest that PTH may be involved 
since the incidence of thyroid nodules and goitres is 
greatly increased at post-mortem in patients with pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism.
With peritoneal dialysis (PD), plasma total T4 con-
centrations are not as low as with haemodialysis (HD), 
but T3 concentrations are lower. The low T4 concen-
trations in PD may relate to low concentrations of thy-
roxine binding globulin (TBG), while in haemodialysis 
there may be an inhibitor of binding present. Continuous 
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis (CAPD) ­appears to cor-
rect unbound, plasma free T4 concentrations better than 
HD; TSH is normal in both groups. Following success-
ful transplantation, the plasma concentrations of thyroid 
hormones return to normal, while the TSH response to 
TRH may either be normal or decreased.
BOX 7.12	
Major sex hormone and prolactin 
abnormalities in males with CKD
•	 Low plasma total and free testosterone concentrations
•	 Low plasma total and free oestrogen concentrations
•	 Low plasma total and free adrenal androgen concen-
trations (with normal sex hormone binding globulin 
concentrations)
•	 Subnormal plasma testosterone response to human chori-
onic gonadotrophin administration
•	 Hyperprolactinaemia in 50% of patients
•	 Subnormal prolactin responses to TRH in 50% of 
patients
•	 Disturbance of the circadian rhythm of prolactin secre-
tion in 50% of patients
BOX 7.13	
Plasma concentrations of thyroid 
hormones and binding globulin 
in CKD
•	 Total T4 normal or decreased
•	 Total T3 decreased
•	 Free T4 decreased
•	 Free T3 decreased
•	 Reverse T3 normal or decreased
•	 Blunted and/or delayed TSH response to TRH
•	 Thyroxine binding globulin normal
BOX 7.14	
Mechanisms contributing 
to subclinical thyroid 
abnormalities in CKD
•	 Defective thyroid hormone synthesis
•	 Minor abnormalities in pituitary feedback mechanisms
•	 Reduced peripheral conversion of T4–T3
•	 Altered transport of thyroid hormones secondary to cir-
culating inhibitors of binding
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
147
The diagnosis of thyroid disease in patients with 
CKD is difficult. A diagnosis of primary hypothyroid-
ism can only be made with confidence if the plasma 
TSH is unequivocally elevated. In less clear-cut cases, 
measurement of free T4 may be helpful, but can be 
unreliable. The response to treatment should be moni-
tored using plasma free T4 concentrations. The di-
agnosis of hyperthyroidism in renal impairment rests 
on the demonstration of an elevated plasma free T4 
concentration in the presence of suppressed TSH, al-
though hyperthyroidism is extremely rare in patients 
with this condition.
Anaemia
In patients with established renal failure, plasma eryth-
ropoietin concentrations are usually normal or even 
elevated. However, these concentrations are generally in-
appropriately low for the degree of anaemia and so there 
exists a state of relative erythropoietin deficiency, which 
contributes to the normochromic normocytic anaemia. 
Other factors include depression of the erythroid mar-
row by ‘uraemic toxins’, bleeding and haemodilution due 
to water retention. Following renal transplantation, the 
anaemia improves and the plasma erythropoietin concen-
trations return towards normal. However, very occasion-
ally they remain elevated and erythrocytosis develops. 
This is due to some residual secretion of erythropoietin 
from the diseased kidneys.
Endocrine control of salt and water balance
Chronic kidney disease influences the activity of a num-
ber of renal and extrarenal hormones that control salt and 
water balance as well as blood pressure and volume. Renin 
release appears to be maintained by diseased kidneys un-
der many circumstances. Thus, depending upon fluid and 
electrolyte balance, the plasma renin activity (PRA) in pa-
tients with renal impairment may be low, normal or high.
Plasma renin activities and 18-hydroxycorticosterone 
concentrations increase in patients on CAPD more than 
in those treated with HD. These increased concentra-
tions have been attributed to the continuous fluid vol-
ume depletion induced by peritoneal ultrafiltration. 
Aldosterone concentrations are also elevated secondarily 
to the hyperkalaemia; they are more effectively reduced 
by HD than CAPD. Renal transplantation returns PRA 
and aldosterone towards normal. In addition, the normal 
physiological responses to sodium restriction, upright 
position, hypo- or hypervolaemia and angiotensin-­
converting-enzyme inhibitors appear to be preserved.
Plasma cortisol concentrations are at the upper limit of 
normal in CKD and respond normally during a tetraco-
sactide test or insulin-induced hypoglycaemia, although 
the prolactin and GH responses are blunted during 
the latter, consistent with a degree of anterior pituitary 
dysfunction.
Plasma catecholamine concentrations are usually el-
evated in advanced CKD owing to a combination of 
several mechanisms, including reduced clearance, ca-
tabolism and neuronal uptake, and increased sympa-
thetic efflux. After renal transplantation, normal plasma 
concentrations of noradrenaline (norepinephrine) with 
moderately elevated concentrations of adrenaline (epi-
nephrine) have been found. Arginine vasopressin (AVP) 
is normally freely filtered by glomeruli and catabolized 
by tubules, so plasma AVP concentrations are elevated in 
CKD. The hormone is not significantly cleared by dialy-
sis and remains elevated in response to the chronic fluid 
depletion. Following transplantation, both normal and 
elevated AVP concentrations have been reported. The 
plasma concentrations of natriuretic peptides (e.g. BNP, 
see Chapter 4) rise in direct relationship to the rise in 
plasma creatinine and represent a normal homoeostatic 
response to fluid overload. Once effective dialysis is es-
tablished or renal transplantation performed, the concen-
trations return towards normal.
Impairment of the kidneys’ regulatory function results 
in defects in both the excretory and conservatory mecha-
nisms for sodium and water (Fig. 7.7).
Thirst and nocturia are common features of chronic 
renal disease, reflecting the diminished capacity to con-
centrate the urine and loss of the normal diurnal variation 
in urine production. These effects are primarily due to 
the solute load causing osmotic diuresis in the remain-
ing functional nephrons. Patients tend not to complain of 
polyuria; the low GFR sets a low limit on the maximum 
urine volume of not more than about 4 L/24 h. The ca-
pacity to dilute the urine may be preserved longer than 
that to concentrate it, but in advanced disease, neither di-
lution nor concentration can take place. The urine tends 
to have a fixed osmolality (~300 mmol/kg) and the patient 
is at great risk of both over- and under-hydration if fluid 
intake is not carefully regulated.
Early in the course of CKD, normal sodium balance 
may be maintained by increased excretion through the 
remaining functional nephrons. Particularly in patients 
with primarily tubular disorders, sodium conserva-
tion may be defective, leading to sodium depletion with 
clinical evidence of decreased ECF volume. Later, the 
tendency is to sodium retention, but this may not be ap-
parent until the GFR falls below 10 mL/min and, even 
then, some patients continue to leak sodium. Since a fall 
in ECF volume can further impair renal function, careful 
attention to the maintenance of sodium balance is essen-
tial in the management of patients with CKD.
Urine flow (L/24h)
Sodium (mmol/24h)
FIGURE 7.7  ■ The renal capability to excrete sodium and water in 
healthy individuals (light shading) and in patients with severely 
impaired renal function (dark shading). (From Davison AM et al. 
(eds) 2005 Oxford Textbook of Clinical Nephrology, 3rd edn. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press p. 1705, with permission).
148	
Clinical biochemistry
Carbohydrate metabolism and lipid 
metabolism
Impaired glucose tolerance secondary to insulin resis-
tance is a feature of CKD. A number of mechanisms 
appear to contribute to the generation of this meta-
bolic abnormality (Box  7.15), which is only partially 
corrected by dialysis and may persist following renal 
transplantation. However, this may well be related to 
the effect of steroid therapy since glucocorticoids are 
well known for their ability to cause hyperglycaemia. 
Some 70% of patients with CKD exhibit abnormalities 
of both lipids and lipoproteins, thought to be secondary 
to the hyperinsulinism. Typically, there is elevation of 
plasma triglycerides, very low density lipoprotein and 
intermediate density lipoprotein, but normal total cho-
lesterol, with high density lipoprotein being decreased. 
The apoprotein and lipid content of the lipoproteins is 
also altered.
The major defects underlying these abnormalities 
appear to be low activities of tissue lipoprotein lipase, 
hepatic lipase and lecithin-cholesteryl acyltransferase. 
These abnormalities undoubtedly contribute to the in-
crease in cardiovascular morbidity and mortality observed 
in patients with CKD.
Management
General management
This entails measures to evaluate and manage comorbid 
conditions, slow progression of kidney disease, reduce 
the risk of cardiovascular disease, prevent and treat com-
plications of chronic kidney disease and to prepare for 
eventual renal replacement treatment. The measures 
specific to kidney disease are discussed further below. 
Management of comorbid conditions will not be dis-
cussed further here.
The staging of chronic kidney disease as defined by 
the chronic kidney disease K/DOQI classification (see 
Table 7.2) is used as the basis for the development of clin-
ical management plans for individual patients.
Slowing the progression of kidney disease. If the 
cause of the CKD can be identified, it should of course 
be treated appropriately. Care must be taken to avoid 
conditions that may accelerate the decline in renal 
function, for example dehydration and infection (see 
Box 7.6).
Dietary measures are important both in an attempt 
to retard the progression of disease and in the avoid-
ance of complications. Dietary management should 
ideally be supervised by a dietitian with special train-
ing in the management of renal disease. This person 
will not only be able to give advice on an appropriate 
diet, but should be able to design one that is acceptable 
to the patient and monitor compliance. The essentials 
of dietary management include maintenance of sodium, 
potassium and water balance, which usually entails re-
striction of sodium and potassium intake; reduction in 
phosphate intake, and dietary protein restriction (to 
about 0.8 g/kg per 24 h).
Experimental work suggests that judicious reduction 
in protein intake may decrease the progression of CKD, 
even when this is well established (plasma creatinine con-
centration >400 μmol/L). Dietary protein restriction may 
protect against the progression of CKD by haemo­
dynamically mediated reductions in intraglomerular 
pressure and by changes in cytokine expression and 
matrix synthesis. The haemodynamic effects of pro-
tein-induced hyperfiltration may be due to changes in 
hormones (such as glucagon and insulin-like growth 
factor-1), alterations in the renin–angiotensin system, 
and intrarenal effects, ­including tubuloglomerular feed-
back. The benefits of moderate dietary protein restric-
tion (0.6–0.8 g/kg per day) on the progression of CKD 
in humans remain controversial. Current data suggest 
that, at best, a small reduction in the rate of decline of 
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) may be observed with 
a low protein diet.
When planning nutrition in patients being treated 
with dialysis, account must be taken of the loss of protein 
and amino acids into the dialysate. This occurs in patients 
both on peritoneal dialysis and haemodialysis, although 
the protein loss tends to be larger with the former and 
may be up to 40 g/24 h.
Supplementary vitamins may need to be prescribed 
both for patients treated conservatively and, particu-
larly, those on dialysis. Careful clinical and biochemical 
monitoring of nutritional status is essential. Adequate 
energy intake must be maintained (at least 35 kcal/kg 
per 24 h) to meet energy requirements and prevent 
catabolism.
The need for careful attention to sodium and potas-
sium intake should be obvious from earlier sections. 
There are experimental data to suggest that phosphate 
restriction is also desirable to prevent the development 
of renal metabolic bone disease, for which purpose the 
maintenance of plasma phosphate concentration within 
the reference range is the ideal. Although dietary protein 
restriction usually also entails dietary phosphate restric-
tion, adequate control may be difficult to achieve. It is 
also important to avoid decreasing calcium intake, which 
may contribute to the development of bone disease. Oral 
aluminium salts can be given to bind phosphate in the gut 
and reduce its absorption; the risk of aluminium-induced 
neurological and bone toxicity that led to avoidance of 
their use may have been overstated, but if they are used, 
it is important to monitor the serum aluminium concen-
tration regularly. Calcium containing phosphate binders 
BOX 7.15	
Mechanisms contributing to 
­impaired glucose tolerance in 
chronic kidney disease
•	 Metabolic acidosis
•	 Decreased cellular sensitivity to insulin
•	 Decreased glucose utilization by peripheral tissues
•	 Increased plasma concentrations of GH and glucagon
•	 Retention of Mg2+
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
149
such as calcium carbonate are widely used, but care must 
be taken to avoid inducing hypercalcaemia and there is a 
worry that they may increase the risk of vascular calcifi-
cation. Newer, non-calcium-based phosphate binders are 
now available.
Dyslipidaemia is frequently present in patients with 
CKD. There are conflicting data concerning the effect 
of lipid lowering therapy with statins on progression of 
CKD. Some studies suggest that statins slow the rate 
of decline in renal function in patients with mild-to-­
moderate renal dysfunction, while others have found 
that they do not. All the data evaluating the effects 
of statin therapy on CKD progression were based on 
subset analyses of trials designed to evaluate the effi-
cacy of statin therapy on cardiovascular disease. Thus, 
statin therapy cannot be recommended solely for renal 
protection.
Prevention of complications. It is essential to avoid 
dehydration. Particular care with fluid balance will be 
required if a patient has abnormal losses, for example be-
cause of vomiting, diarrhoea, or too vigorous treatment 
with diuretics. Blood pressure must be monitored regu-
larly and any hypertension treated adequately. Any infec-
tions, but particularly those of the urinary tract, must be 
treated promptly, preferably with non-nephrotoxic drugs. 
Indeed, all medication must be chosen carefully to avoid 
nephrotoxicity.
The prevention of bone disease involves minimizing 
hyperphosphataemia (see above) and the administration 
of 1-hydroxylated metabolites of vitamin D, with or with-
out calcium supplements. If hypercalcaemia occurs owing 
to tertiary hyperparathyroidism and patients are unfit for 
surgery, calcimimetics (e.g. cinacalcet) can be used. These 
drugs act directly on the calcium-sensing receptor in the 
chief cells of the parathyroid glands to reduce PTH syn-
thesis and secretion.
Recombinant erythropoietin is available for the treat-
ment of anaemia. It is effective and can greatly increase 
the well-being of patients with CKD, whether treated 
conservatively or by dialysis. It is, however, expensive 
and care is needed with patient selection and with moni-
toring the response to ensure efficient use of the drug. 
Iron stores must be replete for erythropoietin to work 
effectively.
Renal replacement treatment
By definition, the patient reaching end-stage renal failure 
requires renal replacement treatment in order to survive. 
In the face of such severe loss of renal function, the gen-
eral measures outlined above will no longer be sufficient 
to maintain an internal environment compatible with the 
maintenance of vital functions. There are essentially two 
options: dialysis (peritoneal or haemodialysis; haemofil-
tration and haemodiafiltration are related techniques) 
and renal transplantation. These are not exclusive; most 
patients will need to undergo dialysis until transplanta-
tion becomes possible and, even after transplantation, 
some will require dialysis until adequate graft function 
is established or may need it again should the graft fail.
The optimum time to start a patient on dialysis will 
depend on several factors:
•	 failure of conservative measures to allow a patient 
to continue with the activities of daily life, including 
working
•	 the onset of major complications (pericarditis, neu-
ropathy, encephalopathy, persistent hyperkalaemia)
•	 other life-threatening or intolerable features of 
uraemia.
Early initiation of maintenance dialysis is now pre-
ferred to a protracted period of dietary restriction. 
According to the K/DOQI guidelines (see Table 7.2) di-
alysis should be initiated electively in those whose eGFR 
is <15 mL/min. Some patients in the UK are eligible for 
pre-emptive transplantation if dialysis is predicted to be 
required within six months (i.e. eGFR is predicted to fall 
to <15 mL/min).
Haemodialysis. The dialyser consists of two contiguous 
compartments separated by a semi-permeable membrane. 
Blood flows through one compartment and dialysis fluid 
flows in the opposite direction through the other compart-
ment. Waste products diffuse down the concentration gra-
dient from blood to dialysate; water moves according to the 
relative osmolalities of plasma and dialysate, and other sub-
stances that can pass through the membrane (e.g. sodium, 
potassium) do so in relation to their own gradients (Fig. 7.8). 
The most frequently employed dialysers consist of an array 
of hollow fibres with semi-permeable walls; blood is pumped 
through the fibres, which are surrounded by dialysate.
The composition of the dialysate is similar to that of 
interstitial fluid, but with a lower potassium concentra-
tion and a higher glucose concentration (to make the 
fluid hypertonic and thus remove water).
Most patients dialyse for 12–15 h/week, spread over 
three sessions, at home, in a satellite unit or in hospital. It 
may be possible to relax the dietary restrictions required 
during conservative management somewhat after starting 
dialysis, but while more protein (e.g. 1 g/kg per 24 h) may 
be permitted, potassium, sodium, phosphate and water in-
take will still require restriction.
Clinical assessment provides an important guide to 
the adequacy of dialysis, but is inadequate on its own. 
Measurements of pre- and post-dialysis urea and creati-
nine concentrations also have limitations. Many alterna-
tive means of assessment have been studied, of which 
‘urea kinetic modelling’ (UKM) is the most widely used. 
Measurements of plasma urea concentration are used to 
calculate the total urea clearance (K) (residual clearance 
plus clearance by the dialyser, in mL/min). This can be 
used to calculate the function ‘Kt/V’, where t is the di-
alysis time in minutes and V the volume of distribution 
of urea in mL (equal to the total body water or 65% of 
body weight). The ideal value of Kt/V is >1.0. However, 
urea is not an ideal marker of renal function; estimates of 
V may underestimate true values and the desired clear-
ance and actual clearance achieved may not be the same. 
Furthermore, it is not clear whether increasing benefit 
may result from the achievement of higher values of 
Kt/V. Thus, the use of Kt/V to guide dialysis therapy is 
not as straightforward as it might appear.
150	
Clinical biochemistry
Haemofiltration. While in haemodialysis, waste prod-
ucts are removed by diffusion, in haemofiltration they 
are removed by convection. Fluid crosses the filtra-
tion membrane as a result of the pressure difference. 
Haemofiltration membranes are generally more perme-
able than those used in dialysis. This has the potential 
advantage that larger molecules (e.g. low molecular 
weight polypeptides) can be cleared from the plasma 
than is possible with haemodialysis.
There are systems that incorporate both diffusion and 
convection, that is, haemodiafiltration. In haemofiltra-
tion and haemodiafiltration, the volume ultrafiltered is 
replaced by intravenous infusion of pre-prepared replace-
ment fluid from bags. Replacement fluid can also be pre-
pared on line by the dialysis machine, for which the water 
quality has to be ultra-pure.
Peritoneal dialysis. In this technique, the semi-­
permeable membrane is the peritoneal membrane. 
Dialysate is instilled into the peritoneal cavity through 
a permanent silastic dialysis catheter, allowed to equili-
brate and then removed. Continuous ambulatory peri-
toneal dialysis, in which the process is continuous with 
three or four fluid changes taking place over 24 h, is 
widely used.
Automated peritoneal dialysis (APD) is a term used to 
refer to all forms of PD using a machine to assist with the 
delivery and drainage of the fluid. Exchanges are typically 
carried out overnight, which leaves the patient free dur-
ing the day.
Residual renal function can contribute as much as one-
third of creatinine clearance; however, it declines with 
time so the dialysis prescription needs to be kept under 
review to ensure adequate clearance.
Renal transplantation. In addition to removing the 
requirement for repeated dialysis, successful transplan-
tation removes the restrictions on the patient’s food and 
fluid intake. The patient will have to take immunosup-
pressive therapy for life, and, although this poses some 
risks (increased susceptibility to infection and incidence 
of lymphoproliferative disorders), they can be minimized 
by careful monitoring, including therapeutic monitoring 
of plasma immunosuppressive drug concentrations.
There are many immunosuppressive regimens. 
Briefly, they include a monoclonal antibody against the 
interleukin-2 (IL-2)-receptor (e.g. basiliximab or dacli-
zumab) on induction, a calcineurin inhibitor (ciclosporin 
or tacrolimus), an antiproliferative agent (azathioprine or 
mycophenolate mofetil) and corticosteroids. Sirolimus is 
another immunosuppressive drug that is not nephrotoxic; 
calcineurin inhibitors are. Therapeutic monitoring of 
these drugs is essential (see Chapter 39). If there is graft 
dysfunction, toxic concentrations of calcineurin inhibi-
tors are an important reversible cause.
Many factors influence patient survival, but rates con-
tinue to improve, and one-year survival rates of >95% for 
patients are now common. Typically, >88% of deceased 
donor grafts and >95% of live related grafts are still func-
tioning at one year.
Following transplantation, careful monitoring is re-
quired to assess graft function, monitor the patient’s 
hydration and to assist the early diagnosis of rejection. 
Regular measurements are required of urine volume, 
plasma creatinine, sodium, potassium, bicarbonate, glu-
cose, calcium, phosphate and albumin concentrations, 
liver function tests, haemoglobin and white blood cell 
and platelet counts, as well as therapeutic monitoring of 
immunosuppressive drugs.
Semipermeable membrane
(not permeable to cells or proteins)
Blood
Blood flow
Proteins
Positive hydrostatic pressure
Colloid osmotic pressure
Dialysate flow
(ultrafiltration plus solvent drag)
Negative hydrostatic
pressure plus osmotic
pressure (from added
crystalloid)
Acetate
Dextrose
Urea
SO4
2−
HCO3
−
K+
Dialysate
Diffusion
Convection
Ca2+
FIGURE 7.8  ■ The principles 
of haemodialysis.
	
7  The kidneys, renal function and kidney disease	
151
CONCLUSION
The kidneys have an essential role in the regulation of 
the composition and volume of the body fluids and in 
the excretion of waste products of metabolism. They 
also have important endocrine functions. They can be 
affected by disease processes confined to the kidneys, 
but they are frequently affected by primarily extrarenal 
disease.
The informed use of biochemical tests plays an im-
portant part in the investigation of renal integrity and 
function, although many other types of investigation 
are also used in the management of patients with renal 
disease.
Renal impairment can be acute (when it is usu-
ally potentially reversible) or chronic (when it usually 
progresses inexorably to established (end-stage) renal 
failure). In both types, there are profound systemic 
consequences. Conservative measures are important in 
management, but renal replacement treatment, by some 
form of dialysis or haemofiltration, is often required. 
In established (end-stage) renal failure, death will en-
sue unless the patient either undergoes successful renal 
transplantation or receives long-term renal replacement 
treatment.
Note about terminology
The terms ‘acute kidney injury’ and ‘chronic kidney dis-
ease’ have now replaced ‘acute renal failure’ and ‘chronic 
renal failure’, respectively.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to acknowledge the contribution of Sui 
Phin Kon and William Marshall, who wrote the chapters 
for previous editions of the book.
Further reading
Barrett KE, Barman SM, Boitano S et al. Ganong’s review of medical 
physiology. 24th ed. New York: Lange Medical Books/McGraw-Hill; 
2012. 
A concise undergraduate textbook of physiology, which provides a good 
overview of renal physiology.
Davison AM, Cameron JS, Grünfeld J-P et  al. editors. Oxford 
textbook of clinical nephrology. 3rd ed Oxford: Oxford University 
Press; 2005. 
A comprehensive, three-volume work which, while emphasizing the 
clinical aspects of renal diseases, also includes authoritative accounts of their 
pathophysiological basis.
The Renal Association. http://www.renal.org.
The website of The Renal Association, which has further information 
about eGFR and chronic kidney disease.
152
Proteinuria
Anne Dawnay
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  152
PROTEIN CONSERVATION BY  
THE KIDNEYS  152
The glomerular capillary wall  153
The theory of molecular sieving  153
Tubular reabsorption of proteins  154
Tubular secretion of proteins  154
NORMAL URINARY PROTEIN  
CONTENT  155
Determinants of urine protein  
excretion  155
PROTEINURIA IN KIDNEY DISEASE  156
Proteinuria in staging and prognosis of 
chronic kidney disease  156
Glomerular proteinuria and nephrotic 
syndrome  156
Tubular proteinuria  160
Proteinuria of prerenal origin  162
MICROALBUMINURIA AS A MARKER  
OF RISK  164
Microalbuminuria and risk of diabetic 
complications  164
Cardiovascular risk  164
Microalbuminuria as a risk factor in other 
inflammatory processes  165
CLINICAL INVESTIGATION OF  
PROTEINURIA  165
Urine dip-sticks  165
Collection of urine  165
Urine protein measurement  165
Stepwise investigation of proteinuria  166
INTRODUCTION
For over 150  years, proteinuria has been recognized 
as one of the cardinal signs of renal disease and it con-
tinues to be used for the diagnosis and management 
of patients with nephropathy. However, the use of 
sensitive immunoassay methods to measure urine al-
bumin has demonstrated pathologically significant 
proteinuria well below the detection limit of chemical 
methods. Since the discovery, several decades ago, that 
low-level albuminuria (microalbuminuria) identifies 
diabetic patients with incipient nephropathy, further 
large-scale studies have revealed that microalbumin-
uria is also a risk factor for macro- and microvascular 
disease, in both diabetic and non-diabetic populations. 
Studies over the last ten years have confirmed that 
microalbuminuria is not only associated with cardio-
vascular disease but also with any acute inflammatory 
condition, and is a reflection of systemic vascular en-
dothelial dysfunction. Of particular importance, is the 
finding that, in some conditions, microalbuminuria is 
reversible with interventions that protect the vascular 
system. Thus modern assessment of proteinuria across 
the full pathological range has a role not just in the di-
agnosis and management of primary renal disease, but 
also as a marker of endothelial dysfunction in a variety 
of non-renal conditions.
PROTEIN CONSERVATION BY THE KIDNEYS
The kidneys receive approximately 25% of the resting 
cardiac output, which represents approximately 1.2 L/min 
of blood or 650 mL/min of plasma. The kidneys’ ca-
pacity to conserve protein can be judged from a simple 
calculation. Every 24 h, approximately 930 L of plasma 
containing about 70 g/L of protein pass through the kid-
neys, representing 65 kg of protein, of which <100 mg 
(0.00015%) appear in the urine.
The filtration process is dependent on adequate renal 
blood flow, which is preserved by an autoregulatory sys-
tem, despite variations in blood pressure (see p. 127). 
This mechanism allows vasodilatation as perfusion pres-
sure falls and vasoconstriction as pressure rises. The 
mediators of this process include prostaglandins, kinins 
and atrial peptides (vasodilators), and angiotensin II, α-
adrenergic hormones, thromboxane A2, noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine) and vasopressin (vasoconstrictors). 
In addition, renal arterioles respond within seconds to 
changes in vessel wall tension; thus, when renal per-
fusion pressure rises, vessel wall tone increases and, 
­conversely, when renal perfusion pressure falls abruptly, 
there is a compensatory decrease in vessel wall tone. This 
phenomenon is called the myogenic reflex and helps to 
maintain a constant renal blood flow across a range of 
perfusion pressures.
C H A P T E R  8
	
8  Proteinuria	
153
A minimum intraglomerular pressure, derived from 
the pumping action of the heart, is required to overcome 
the two main opposing forces to filtration: the colloi-
dal oncotic pressure and the hydrostatic pressure in the 
Bowman space. When the renal perfusion pressure falls 
below 50–60 mmHg, further vasodilatation does not 
­occur and renal blood flow declines in proportion to the 
reduction in renal perfusion pressure. These mechanisms 
maintain renal blood flow, and hence glomerular filtra-
tion, independently of the normal fluctuations of blood 
pressure. However, recent studies suggest that chronic 
hypertension impairs the renal autoregulatory mecha-
nism, which may contribute to hypertension-associated 
renal damage and proteinuria.
The glomerular capillary wall
The glomerular membrane consists of a modified capil-
lary wall comprising endothelium, an acellular basement 
membrane and an outer specialized epithelial cell layer 
(Fig. 8.1). The endothelial cells are thin and fenestrated 
with 50–100 nm pores. The basement membrane, compris-
ing the lamina rara interna, lamina densa and lamina rara 
externa, is around 300–350 nm thick and is best considered 
as a gel-like structure containing 3–5 nm long fibrils but 
no detectable pores. The numerous foot processes of the 
epithelial cells (also called podocytes) interdigitate and en-
velop the outer surface of the glomerular membrane. The 
foot processes are separated by slit ­diaphragms about 55 nm 
in width, which form the final barrier to plasma proteins.
The whole of the glomerular membrane carries a 
fixed net negative charge, which is partly owing to a gly-
cosialoprotein coat covering both endothelium and epi-
thelium. The charge increases in density from the lamina 
rara interna towards the lamina rara externa, with the 
greatest density at the slit diaphragms of the epithelium.
The glomerular capillaries act as high pressure filters, 
allowing water and low molecular weight solutes to pass 
through freely and almost completely retaining plasma 
proteins. The concentration gradient of proteins across 
the glomerular membrane produces the colloidal oncotic 
pressure that must be overcome for filtration to take 
place.
The theory of molecular sieving
The glomerular membrane selectively allows passage of 
water and low molecular weight solutes into the tubule 
and restricts passage of larger molecular weight plasma 
proteins, based on a combination of molecular size, shape 
and charge. The pore size of the fenestrae of endothelial 
cells (50–100 nm) is too great to provide a major restric-
tion to the passage of many proteins, which pass through 
to the glomerular membrane. Like the glomerular mem-
brane, most plasma proteins carry a net negative charge, 
resulting in their electrochemical retention by the kid-
neys. The capillary side of the glomerular basement 
membrane (lamina rara interna) has a charge density of 
35–45 mEq/L, so that electrochemical effects alone reduce 
the concentration of albumin to 5–10% of that in plasma. 
Thus, the lamina rara interna of the basement membrane 
is the first impediment to confront charged molecules, 
with the lamina densa providing the most effective size 
barrier to macromolecules. Some macromolecules accu-
mulate at the slit diaphragms of the epithelium where the 
net negative charge is greatest, and there is evidence that 
some molecules are pinocytosed by the podocytes.
Based on their molecular radius, shape and charge, 
different proteins penetrate the glomerular membrane 
to a variable extent, for example, albumin (radius 
3.6 nm, isoelectric point 4.7) is restricted at the lamina 
rara interna, while lactoperoxidase (radius 3.8 nm, iso-
electric point 8.0) may reach the slit pores of the epi-
thelial cells.
Despite the protein-retaining properties of the glo-
merular membrane, some protein does pass into the 
Nucleus
Epithelial cell
Foot processes
Filtration slit
Slit diaphragm
(55nm)
Lamina rara externa
Lamina rara interna
Endothelial cell
cytoplasm
Endothelial
fenestration (50-100nm)
300nm
Lamina densa
FIGURE 8.1  ■  Glomerular membrane structure.
154	
Clinical biochemistry
proximal tubular fluid. In healthy adults, the albumin 
content of glomerular filtrate is probably about 15 mg/L 
which, with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of 160 L/ 
24 h, results in 2–3 g of albumin being presented to the 
renal tubules each day, most of which is reabsorbed.
Tubular reabsorption of proteins
The amount of protein reaching the proximal tubules is 
a function of the protein’s ability to cross the glomeru-
lar membrane and its plasma concentration. After reab-
sorption, proteins are catabolized in tubular cells and the 
amino acids, bound vitamins and trace metals returned 
to the plasma pool. For example, under normal circum-
stances the kidneys are responsible for about 10% of 
­albumin catabolism, but this figure can rise to 60% when 
there is increased glomerular clearance of albumin such 
as occurs in nephrotic syndrome.
Normally, only a very small proportion of plasma pro-
teins reaches the urine. This is primarily owing to reten-
tion of large molecular weight proteins by the glomeruli, 
and almost complete proximal tubular reabsorption and 
catabolism of any filtered lower molecular weight pro-
teins that have passed through the glomerular membrane 
more easily. Thus, the renal clearance of plasma proteins 
represents a combination of these processes. The relative 
contributions of glomerular retention and tubular reab-
sorption to protein clearance by the kidney depend on 
molecular weight (Table 8.1).
The likely mechanism of proximal tubular protein 
reabsorption is endocytosis at the tubular epithelial api-
cal cell membrane mediated by two receptors (megalin 
and cubilin) and the cooperating protein amnionless. 
Mutations in one or other of these components are re-
sponsible for the tubular proteinuria of Imerslund–
Grasbeck syndrome (selective vitamin B12 malabsorption) 
and Donnai–Barrow syndrome (a multisystem disorder 
affecting many organs that normally express megalin). 
Following reabsorption, proteins are transferred to lyso-
somes for degradation while the receptors are recycled 
from endosomes to the apical cell membrane. Mutations 
in the lysosomal and endosomal components are respon-
sible for the tubular proteinuria in Dent disease and cysti-
nosis; the molecular mechanism in Lowe syndrome is yet 
to be resolved (see Chapter 9).
Megalin and/or cubilin bind albumin and low molecu-
lar weight proteins but there is some evidence that, of 
the filtered proteins reaching the proximal tubule, those 
with lower molecular weights are reabsorbed by different 
mechanisms from those with higher molecular weights. 
For example, although increased amounts of low molecu-
lar weight proteins are excreted in tubular disease, such 
large increases are not seen in the urine of patients with 
massive glomerular proteinuria, when the reabsorptive 
mechanisms for large molecular weight proteins such 
as albumin must be saturated. Conversely, experimental 
induction of massive low molecular weight proteinuria 
through saturation of reabsorption with other low mo-
lecular weight proteins does not induce a similar increase 
in urine albumin.
Low molecular weight proteins, such as α1-microglobulin 
and retinol-binding protein, that are readily filtered at 
the glomerulus and normally >99.9% reabsorbed, can be 
used as sensitive markers of proximal tubular function, 
since even subtle tubular damage is associated with in-
creased urinary excretion.
Glomerular diseases causing heavy proteinuria 
­induce the release of a multitude of inflammatory and 
fibrogenic mediators, all of which cause tubulointersti-
tial fibrosis and renal scarring that contribute to renal 
impairment. Recent studies suggest that large proteins, 
such as albumin, which pass through the diseased glo-
merular membrane, cause tubular cell injury when they 
reach the proximal tubules. Reabsorption of excessive 
amounts of these proteins leads to overloading of lyso-
somes and activation of proximal tubular cells, which 
produce matrix metalloproteins, cytokines, leukocyte 
chemoattractants and vasoactive mediators, leading 
to interstitial inflammation and scarring. The mecha-
nism of injury has been most studied for albumin and 
it appears likely that compounds attached to the pro-
tein, such as fatty acids, are major culprits. In minimal 
change glomerular disease with heavy proteinuria that 
is not associated with scarring, the albumin-fatty acid 
composition appears to be different from that in other 
glomerulopathies.
Tubular secretion of proteins
Proteins that are too large to be filtered by the normal 
glomerulus appear in urine either as a result of tubular 
secretion or from desquamation of tubular epithelial cells 
as part of the normal cellular turnover. Some large mo-
lecular weight proteins may also enter the urine during its 
postrenal passage along the urinary tract. Measurable ac-
tivities of enzymes such as N-acetyl β-d-glucosaminidase 
(150  000 Da), γ-glutamyl transferase (120  000 Da) and 
lactate dehydrogenase (144  000 Da) can be found in nor-
mal urine.
The major urine protein exclusively of renal origin is 
uromodulin (previously known as Tamm–Horsfall glyco-
protein), a heavily glycosylated protein secreted from the 
thick ascending limb of the loops of Henle. It has a molec-
ular weight of 70  000 Da but is normally present in urine as 
a large non-covalently linked polymer. Since its isoelectric 
point is 3.3, it tends to precipitate as a gel during urinary 
acidification, forming casts by trapping whatever is in the 
vicinity such as albumin, red blood cells, tubular cells or cel-
lular debris. Numerous mutations in the uromodulin gene 
have been identified in ­association with familial juvenile 
hyperuricaemic nephropathy and medullary cystic kidney 
disease type 2. These are probably different phenotypes of 
TABLE 8.1  Relative clearances of plasma 
proteins
Protein
Molecular  
weight (Da)
Clearance 
(%GFR)
IgG
150  000
0.01
Albumin
  69  000
0.02
Amylase
  48  000
3
Myoglobin
  17  800
75
Lysozyme
  14  500
80
	
8  Proteinuria	
155
the same disease and are known collectively as uromodulin 
storage disease, owing to accumulation of the misfolded 
mutated protein in cells of the thick ascending limb of the 
loops of Henle. They are rare, primary tubulointerstitial 
disorders with autosomal dominant inheritance character-
ized by chronic progressive kidney disease, hyperuricaemia 
and gout, with minimal proteinuria.
The normal biological function of uromodulin re-
mains unclear but it probably has a protective role in 
trapping potentially damaging material in the urinary 
space, allowing excretion as casts. Microscopic differen-
tiation of the type of casts present in urine can give use-
ful information about pathological processes within the 
kidney (see Chapter 7). Experimental studies suggest that 
uromodulin may have a role in protecting against stone 
formation. Its capacity to bind type-1 fimbriated E. coli 
has led to the suggestion that its excretion has evolved as 
a defence against urinary tract infections.
NORMAL URINARY PROTEIN CONTENT
A normal adult excretes about 300 mg/24 h of non-­
dialysable material, of which <140 mg/24 h is protein, but 
published reference ranges for total urinary protein excre-
tion vary considerably with the analytical method used. 
Plasma proteins represent only some 25 mg/24 h of total 
urinary protein (Table 8.2), of which about half is albumin: 
the remaining proteins are of renal origin, uromodulin be-
ing the major contributor (70 mg/24 h). For these reasons, 
and because low-level albuminuria (microalbuminuria) has 
prognostic value both for renal and non-renal diseases, 
urine albumin immunoassays should be used to assess glo-
merular proteinuria when protein excretion rates are low.
Determinants of urine protein excretion
Age, sex and diurnal variation
In neonates, albumin excretion tends to be higher than 
in older children and adults: this has been attributed to 
greater permeability of the neonatal glomerulus. Total 
urine protein tends to fall after birth and rises with in-
creasing age, reaching adult excretion rates by puberty. 
However, the urine protein/creatinine concentration ra-
tio remains constant from 3 to 15 years of age, since urine 
creatinine excretion rises with increasing body mass. In 
children aged 4–16  years, albumin excretion rate, cor-
rected for body surface area, rises with age and is slightly 
higher in females. Daytime excretion rates are higher than 
during the night and the sex difference disappears in over-
night collections. There appears to be no sex difference in 
urine albumin excretion in adults, but, when expressed as 
a ratio to creatinine, the reference range is slightly higher 
in females owing to their lower muscle mass and hence 
lower creatinine excretion.
Posture
In both adults and children, ambulatory urine protein ex-
cretion is higher than it is overnight or during recumbency, 
with two- to ten-fold differences being reported for uri-
nary albumin. Orthostatic proteinuria in otherwise healthy 
subjects has been the subject of controversy for some time. 
The discussion has been complicated by the variety and 
differing sensitivities of the protein assays used.
Proteinuria of <1 g/24 h has been described in 0.6–
9% of healthy young adults, in the absence of urinary 
red cells, white cells or casts, and can be divided into 
‘constant’ and ‘postural’ based on its persistence after 
recumbency. Renal biopsies of patients with postural 
proteinuria reveal that 8% have unequivocal evidence of 
well-defined disease and 45% have subtle alterations in 
glomerular structure. However, more recent studies, us-
ing non-invasive Doppler ultrasound to compare recum-
bent and orthostatic blood flow in the left renal veins of 
young people with orthostatic proteinuria, have revealed 
that in >50% of patients there is reduced blood flow to 
the left renal vein during standing owing to entrapment 
of the left renal vein.
The medical management of isolated or postural pro-
teinuria in an otherwise healthy patient tends to be con-
servative, with annual assessment of proteinuria and renal 
function; biopsy is reserved for the rare patient who has 
evidence of progressive renal impairment.
Exercise and diet
Exercise-induced proteinuria was discovered over a 
­century ago in soldiers after marches or drills. Five- to 
100-fold increases in the excretion of proteins such as 
albumin, transferrin and immunoglobulins have been 
observed following 26-mile marathon runs, with smaller 
increases after less strenuous activities. The pattern of 
exercise-induced proteinuria is generally glomerular, 
although mixed glomerular and tubular proteinuria has 
also been described, which persists for over 3 h after 
­exercise. The reason for exercise-induced proteinuria 
is unclear, but some degree of renal ischaemia owing 
to ­redistribution of blood during exercise has been sug-
gested as a ­possible mechanism.
A large protein meal is associated with an increased 
urine albumin excretion, which appears to be secondary 
to an associated increase in GFR.
TABLE 8.2  Plasma proteins found in 
normal urine
Protein
Mean (range) excretion mg/24 h
Prealbumin
0.03 (0.02–0.05)
Albumin
12.7 (8.9–21.9)
α1-Acid glycoprotein
0.41 (0.29–0.68)
α1-Antitrypsin
0.31 (0.19–0.56)
Caeruloplasmin
0.06 (0.05–0.06)
Haptoglobin
0.18 (up to 0.42)
Transferrin
0.22 (0.13–0.38)
Haemopexin
0.20 (0.14–0.29)
IgA
0.51 (0.37–0.61)
IgG
2.46 (1.97–3.01)
IgM
0.34
Light chains
 
  lambda (λ)
1.40
  kappa (κ)
2.30
β2-Microglobulin
0.3
Adapted from Pesce AJ, First MJ 1979 Proteinuria: an integrated 
review, 1st edn. New York: Marcel Dekker, with permission.
156	
Clinical biochemistry
The lowest and most reproducible estimates of urine 
protein excretion are obtained from an early morning 
urine specimen after overnight recumbency.
Pregnancy
During normal pregnancy, the urinary albumin excretion 
rate generally remains within the non-pregnant range, 
although there is some evidence for a small increase in 
albumin excretion during the third trimester, which may 
be related to increased glomerular permeability and/or 
GFR. Total urine protein excretion increases owing to 
decreased renal tubular protein reabsorption.
Hypertension in pregnancy is associated with signifi-
cant maternal and fetal morbidity and mortality. The reli-
able detection of significant proteinuria is most important 
in women with new-onset hypertension during pregnancy 
because it distinguishes between those pregnancies with 
pre-eclampsia and those with gestational hypertension, 
the former often requiring admission to hospital owing to 
the severity of potential complications. In the UK, NICE 
guidelines for the routine antenatal care of healthy preg-
nant women recommend blood pressure and urine pro-
tein measurement at each antenatal visit; 660  000 women 
each year will have at least 7–10 such checks.
Gestational hypertension is defined as new hyperten-
sion occurring after 20 weeks of pregnancy, but without 
significant proteinuria. In this group, routine urine pro-
tein measurement may be performed using an automated 
reagent-strip reading device (more reliable than a manual 
reading) or by a laboratory method. If a reagent strip read-
ing is 1+ or greater, the proteinuria should be quantitated 
by a laboratory measure in a spot or 24 h urine sample. 
Women admitted with pre-eclampsia (new hypertension 
presenting after 20 weeks with significant proteinuria) do 
not need to have repeated measures of urine protein since 
there is no strong evidence linking the degree of protein-
uria with adverse outcome. Significant proteinuria is de-
fined as >300 mg/24 h or >30 mg/mmol creatinine in a 
random sample. There are insufficient studies of urine 
albumin excretion to be able to define cut-offs equivalent 
to those defining significant proteinuria in gestational 
hypertension or pre-eclampsia.
PROTEINURIA IN KIDNEY DISEASE
Richard Bright, in 1836, is generally credited with noting 
the association between proteinuria and kidney disease. 
Proteinuria remains the most frequent clinical finding 
and quantitation of proteinuria is valuable for diagnosing, 
monitoring and assessing the prognosis of kidney disease. 
Normally, total urine protein excretion is <150 mg/24 h 
in adults and <140 mg/m
2/24 h in children, depending 
on the methods employed: normal concentrations are of-
ten undetectable by chemical methods. However, sensi-
tive immunoassay of specific proteins has extended the 
detection limits to urine protein concentrations within 
the reference range. Measurements of low concentra-
tions of specific proteins such as albumin, predominantly 
reflecting glomerular function, and α1-microglobulin or 
retinol-binding protein, reflecting tubular reabsorptive 
function, are now used as very sensitive and early mark-
ers of primary renal disease (e.g. glomerulonephritis) and 
secondary renal disease (e.g. in diabetes mellitus or hy-
pertension). Thus, proteinuria can now be regarded as a 
continuum that extends from the measurable amount of 
protein normally excreted in urine up to the 1000-fold 
increases found in nephrotic syndrome.
Conventionally, proteinuria has been classified into 
glomerular proteinuria; tubular proteinuria; nephro-
genic proteinuria (e.g. uromodulin, basement membrane 
and tubular proteins); proteinuria of prerenal origin (e.g. 
overflow proteinurias such as light chain disease, myo-
globinuria, haemoglobinuria, lysozyme in leukaemia and 
amylase in pancreatitis), and postrenal proteinuria ow-
ing to obstruction of the urinary tract or inflammation 
such as occurs in urinary tract infection. This is a con-
venient way of ­differentiating the principal sites of the 
­renal ­abnormality, but is an over-­simplification because, 
for example, ­glomerular disease leading to large amounts 
of plasma ­proteins being presented to the renal tubules 
leads to ­inflammatory changes within the tubules and re-
nal scarring. Nor does this classification lend itself easily 
to the multifactorial causes of proteinuria in some disor-
ders, e.g. HIV-associated glomerular and tubulointersti-
tial disease that may be modulated by co-infection with 
other viruses and drug-induced interstitial nephritis.
Proteinuria in staging and prognosis 
of chronic kidney disease
Numerous epidemiological studies have demonstrated 
the association of proteinuria with poorer prognosis in 
people in the general population and across all stages of 
chronic kidney disease (CKD): any renal disease is more 
likely to progress, there is an increased risk of developing 
acute kidney injury, and both all-cause and cardiovascu-
lar mortality are increased. These outcomes hold true, 
whether proteinuria is assessed by dipstick testing or by 
formal laboratory measurement of either total protein or 
albumin, in timed urine collections or in random samples. 
The quantitation of proteinuria (in the absence of a symp-
tomatic urinary tract infection and preferably using the 
first morning urine) is an essential component of CKD 
staging, where the suffix ‘p’ is used to denote its presence. 
The decision limit is an albumin/creatinine ratio (ACR) 
>30 mg/mmol (~300 mg/24 h) or urine ­protein/creatinine 
ratio (PCR) >50 mg/mmol (~0.5 g/24 h), although the 
continuum of risk, albeit lower, extends into the reference 
range. The presence of proteinuria in CKD is sufficient 
indication to initiate blockade of the renin–angiotensin–
aldosterone system (RAS) with angiotensin-converting-
enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) or angiotensin-II receptor 
blockers (ARB). At higher excretions (ACR >70 mg/
mmol or PCR >100 mg/mmol), RAS blockade should be 
titrated to the highest tolerable levels and referral of the 
patient to specialist care considered.
Glomerular proteinuria and nephrotic 
syndrome
In the normal adult, the renal tubules reabsorb about 2–3 g 
of filtered albumin every 24 h. Thus, even total failure of 
	
8  Proteinuria	
157
this process cannot explain albuminuria of >3.0 g/24 h; 
such losses are usually secondary to increased glomerular 
permeability associated with glomerular damage.
Nephrotic syndrome can be defined as proteinuria 
severe enough to cause hypoalbuminaemia and oe-
dema. The degree of proteinuria varies but is generally 
>3.5 g/24 h and is accompanied by a plasma albumin 
<25 g/L. However, it should be remembered that the 
amount of protein in the urine may decrease as the 
plasma protein concentration or the GFR falls. Causes 
of nephrotic syndrome are listed in Table 8.3. In addi-
tion to the nephrotic syndrome, glomerular proteinuria 
is a feature of several other syndromes of nephron injury, 
and the severity of proteinuria taken together with other 
clinical findings can allow useful diagnostic classification 
(Table 8.4).
Mechanisms underlying glomerular proteinuria
Glomerular injury can occur as a result of either primary 
or secondary kidney disease and there is no single patho-
genetic pathway that will embrace all the possible mecha-
nisms. The term glomerulonephritis is generally reserved 
for immunologically mediated diseases and excludes 
other conditions associated with glomerular damage such 
as diabetes mellitus or amyloidosis.
Glomerulonephritis can be subdivided immunologi-
cally into conditions mediated by antibodies against 
­antigens that are either extrinsic or intrinsic to the kid-
ney. Extrinsic antigens include microorganisms causing 
infections such as bacterial endocarditis or streptococ-
cal infections, and DNA, as in systemic lupus erythema-
tosus (SLE). Antibodies may also develop to an intrinsic 
­structural component, such as the glomerular basement 
membrane, leading to immune complex formation. 
Whatever the original mechanism, antigen–antibody 
complexes become trapped in the glomerulus, acti-
vating both the classical and alternative complement 
pathways and leading to the release of anaphylatoxic 
components such as C3a and C5a. Anaphylatoxins, 
­together with locally released kinins, prostaglandins 
and leukotrienes, attract polymorphonuclear neutro-
phils to the basement membrane, where they release 
­lysosomal enzymes, leading to membrane disruption 
and glomerular proteinuria.
Examination of renal biopsies, by light and electron 
microscopy, reveals a gradation of morphological changes 
with increasing glomerular injury. Loss of anionic charge 
associated with fusion of the epithelial foot processes 
can produce a massive but selective proteinuria, while 
changes in the basement membrane tend to be associated 
with increasingly non-selective proteinuria (see later).
Minimal change disease. Light microscopy of renal 
biopsies shows little or no abnormality in this condition, 
and no immunoglobulin or complement components 
are seen on immunofluorescence. Electron microscopy 
shows fusion of epithelial cell foot processes, and the 
mechanism of proteinuria probably involves loss of the 
fixed negative charge on the glomerular basement mem-
brane. Although the pathogenesis of minimal change 
disease has not been completely clarified, clinical and 
experimental observations suggest that T cell dysfunc-
tion plays a role.
TABLE 8.3  Causes of nephrotic syndrome
 
Children (%)
Adults (%)
Primary renal disease
 
 
Minimal change (steroid 
responsive) disease
80
25
Focal segmental 
glomerulosclerosis
7
9
Membranous nephropathy
1
22
Membranoproliferative 
glomerulonephritis
10
26
Glomerular disease in 
systemic conditions
 
 
Amyloidosis
–
7
Diabetic nephropathy
–
3
Systemic lupus 
erythematosus
–
8
Henoch–Schönlein purpura
2
<1
TABLE 8.4  Summary of clinical correlates of proteinuria
Degree of proteinuria
Clinical correlates
Massive proteinuria
Nephrotic syndrome
Proteinuria >3.5 g/24 h, usually no haematuria, plasma albumin concentration very low, 
plasma lipids very high, gross oedema, blood pressure normal or low, GFR normal or 
increased, urine volume normal or increased
Moderate proteinuria
Nephritic syndrome (acute nephritis), acute kidney injury
Proteinuria 1–3.5 g/24 h. Moderate to marked haematuria, plasma albumin normal 
or low, plasma lipids normal or slightly increased, oedema absent or mild, volume 
overload sometimes with increased jugular venous pressure, blood pressure raised, 
GFR reduced, urine volume reduced
Chronic kidney disease
Similar to nephritic syndrome/acute kidney injury (see above) but over months or 
years. Moderate proteinuria may reflect reduced renal mass of functioning nephrons 
rather than extent of renal disease
Asymptomatic, variable/transient
Proteinuria <1 g/24 h, no other abnormalities, probably benign (orthostatic) proteinuria.
Proteinuria >2 g/24 h, possibly early glomerulonephritis
Persistent low-level proteinuria/
microalbuminuria
Associated with early diabetic nephropathy, tubulointerstitial disease, early 
cardiovascular disease, hypertension, inflammatory conditions, ischaemia and 
arteriopathy
158	
Clinical biochemistry
In the developed world, minimal change disease, 
frequently of unknown aetiology, accounts for 90% of 
­nephrotic syndrome in 2–6-year-olds and about 20% in 
adults. In children, there is massive selective proteinuria, 
which is predominantly albumin with little or no immu-
noglobulin. This form of nephrotic syndrome usually 
­responds to a short course of prednisolone (steroid-­
responsive nephrotic syndrome) and a renal biopsy is 
unnecessary to confirm the diagnosis. The absence of 
serological evidence for complement activation gives 
­additional confirmation. In adults, the diagnosis is more 
difficult and a renal biopsy is generally needed before 
treatment is started. Minimal change disease has a good 
long-term prognosis with sustained remission and pre-
served renal function as almost all patients are responsive 
to treatment.
Membranous nephropathy. This is the most frequent 
cause of nephrotic syndrome in adults. The common 
variant is idiopathic membranous nephropathy, in which 
80% of patients have plasma antibodies to the phospho-
lipase A2 receptor. These antibodies are rarely found in 
the secondary forms associated with SLE, hepatitis B 
virus and cancer. Light microscopy shows thickening of 
the glomerular basement membrane that is more marked 
in the later stages of the disease. Immunofluorescence 
microscopy always shows IgG deposits, but when other 
immunoglobulin classes (e.g. IgA, IgM) are present, the 
condition is more likely to be lupus nephritis. Progressive 
thickening of the basement membrane, demonstrated by 
electron microscopy, is the most frequent morphological 
finding in nephrotic syndrome in adults.
Over 80% of patients present with massive protein-
uria that is only moderately or poorly selective, while the 
remaining 20% have asymptomatic proteinuria or micro-
scopic haematuria. The course of the disease is variable, 
with about one-third of patients going into spontaneous 
remission and another third progressing to established 
renal failure. Risk factors for a poor prognosis include 
severe proteinuria, hypertension, older age, male gender 
and reduced GFR. Currently, treatment is aimed at low-
ering blood pressure to <130/80 mmHg with an ACEI or 
ARB, which usually reduces proteinuria over six months. 
If proteinuria persists, immunosuppressive treatment is 
generally started; steroids alone are often ineffective but 
there remains debate over which additional agents are 
most effective: these include ciclosporin, chlorambucil 
and cyclophosphamide.
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis. This is 
characterized by mesangial proliferation and expansion 
and is not a specific disease but a pattern of injury. As with 
all glomerulonephritides, many different diseases can 
produce this pattern of immunologically mediated glo-
merular damage, including bacterial endocarditis, group 
A streptococcal infections, hepatitis C virus, monoclonal 
immunoglobulin deposition disease and SLE. The his-
tological pattern tends to be similar and immunofluo-
rescence microscopy frequently shows IgA, IgG and C3 
deposits; circulating complement concentrations are 
frequently reduced with high concentrations of immune 
complexes present in some conditions.
Patients with membranoproliferative glomerulone-
phritis have proteinuria and microscopic haematuria; 
approximately 50% of those with nephrotic syndrome 
present with an unselective proteinuria. Management 
involves identification and treatment of the underlying 
cause and the use of immunosuppressive agents.
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. Hyaline ma-
terial is deposited in the subendothelial spaces of af-
fected capillary loops of some, but not all, glomeruli, 
which is why the terms focal and segmental are used. 
Patients present with mild proteinuria, recurrent hae-
maturia or nephrotic syndrome. The aetiology is not 
known, although there is some evidence for the presence 
of a soluble permeability factor and some patients have 
SLE. Currently, adults are treated with corticosteroids 
for at least 4–6 months. Efficacy of treatment is judged 
by monitoring ­proteinuria; 20–30% will respond with 
a decrease or cessation of proteinuria. The prognosis in 
these patients is good, although they may suffer a relapse. 
Patients whose proteinuria fails to respond to steroids 
generally go on to develop CKD. Optimal management 
of this group is currently controversial, but regimens in-
clude use of lower-dose corticosteroids with the addition 
of ciclosporin for 12 months or more.
IgA nephropathy and Henoch–Schönlein purpura. 
IgA nephropathy is the commonest primary glomeru-
lar disease in the developed world; Henoch–Schönlein 
purpura appears to be a systemic form of the dis-
ease occurring primarily in children. A deficiency 
in glycosylation enzymes leads to the production of 
­galactose-deficient IgA1. This leaves novel glycan resi-
dues exposed, to which autoantibodies develop, leading 
to immune complex deposition. Nephrotic syndrome is 
uncommon in IgA nephropathy and proteinuria rarely 
exceeds 5 g/24 h. Treatment involves immunosuppres-
sion and antihypertensive therapy with an ACEI or 
ARB to reduce proteinuria. In Henoch–Schönlein pur-
pura, 50% of children have renal involvement, of whom 
20% have nephrotic range proteinuria and associated 
poorer prognosis.
Urine protein selectivity and classification 
of glomerulonephritis
The concept of ‘selectivity’ was based on the assumption 
that there may be differential filtration of large molecular 
weight proteins among patients with glomerular disease. 
Protein selectivity is based on a comparison of the relative 
clearance of IgG (150  000 Da) and transferrin (69  000 Da) 
calculated as follows:
clearanceof IgG
clearanceof transferrin
IgG
Trans
[IgG
u
p
p
=
×
[
]
[
]
] ×[
]
Trans u
where:
[IgG]u  =  urine IgG concentration
[Trans]p  =  plasma transferrin concentration
[IgG]p  =  plasma IgG concentration
[Trans]u  =  urine transferrin concentration.
	
8  Proteinuria	
159
Where the selectivity index is >0.5, the proteinuria is 
said to be ‘non-selective’, 0.3–0.5 ‘moderately selective’ 
and <0.2 ‘highly selective’.
Patients with minimal change disease usually show 
highly selective proteinuria, while patients with mem-
branous nephropathy and membranoproliferative glo-
merulonephritis do not. Patients with highly selective 
proteinuria tend to respond well to steroid therapy in 
contrast to those with non-selective proteinuria, although 
this is too variable to be useful to determine treatment.
In correlating glomerular disease severity with the 
type and magnitude of proteinuria, the assumption is 
made that all nephrons behave in a similar way. However, 
histological evidence suggests that glomerular disease can 
be focal with some glomeruli apparently being spared. 
But if only one nephron out of every 10  000 allowed 
unrestricted passage of large molecular weight plasma 
proteins, this would result in an increase in excretion of 
large molecular weight proteins from 18 to 800 mg/24 h, 
resulting in an unselective proteinuria, apparently indica-
tive of more serious disease.
In addition to glomerular filtration, renal clearances 
of plasma proteins also reflect tubular reabsorption. If 
the urine protein content were to represent the overall 
glomerular permeability, then it must be assumed that 
tubular reabsorption is entirely unselective. However, 
small changes in the relative proportion of filtered pro-
tein reabsorbed by the renal tubules can have a large 
effect on their urine concentrations. Despite these 
limitations, some recent studies have shown that in 
membranous nephropathy and focal segmental glomer-
ulosclerosis, the selectivity index or IgG excretion pre-
dicts remission better than urine total protein. Similarly, 
progression to CKD is better predicted both by selectiv-
ity index or IgG excretion, and the tubular component 
of proteinuria (e.g. α1-microglobulin or retinol-binding 
protein) than by the total 24 h urine protein excretion. 
However, protein selectivity studies and monitoring of 
tubular proteinuria are not widely used in the routine 
diagnosis and management of patients with glomerular 
disorders.
Pathophysiological consequences of 
glomerular proteinuria
Hypoalbuminaemia. The severe hypoalbuminaemia 
found in nephrotic syndrome is not simply secondary 
to urinary losses exceeding hepatic synthesis, because in 
adults the maximum hepatic synthetic capacity for albu-
min is around 14 g/24 h, which in theory should replace 
urinary losses in all but the most severely proteinuric pa-
tients. In the nephrotic state, there is a decrease in the 
circulating albumin pool and hepatic synthesis is gener-
ally normal or increased. The loss of the fixed anionic 
charge on the glomerular membrane, which appears to be 
fundamental to the glomerular proteinuria of nephrotic 
syndrome, may also extend to the endothelium of all cap-
illaries, leading to a generalized increase in capillary per-
meability to albumin.
Oedema and salt and water retention. Until recently, 
the explanation for the gross interstitial oedema associated 
with nephrotic syndrome was attributed solely to hypoal-
buminaemia, the consequent reduction in plasma colloi-
dal osmotic pressure being thought to lead to an increase 
in fluid loss from capillaries at their arteriolar ends and a 
reduction in tissue fluid reabsorption distally, as predicted 
from the operation of Starling forces. The resultant hypo-
volaemia was thought to stimulate the ­renin–aldosterone 
system and vasopressin release, leading to sodium and wa-
ter retention. However, recent work suggests the explana-
tion is more complex.
Normally, about 60% of total body albumin is in the 
interstitial space and 40% in the vascular space. Every 
hour, about 8 g of albumin cycle between these two fluid 
compartments. The gradual loss of plasma albumin from 
the circulation in nephrotic syndrome leads to a fall in 
plasma oncotic pressure (the osmotic pressure due to 
proteins), which in turn is accompanied by a decrease 
in tissue albumin and parallel fall in interstitial oncotic 
­pressure. The balancing of falling oncotic pressure on 
either side of the capillary membrane protects against a 
dramatic fall in blood volume as a result of movement 
of fluid from the hypo-oncotic vascular space into the 
interstitium. However, the capacity of this protective 
mechanism is limited, and a decrease in blood volume 
can be expected if plasma oncotic pressure (normally 
­22–28 mmHg) falls below about 10 mmHg, or if the 
protein loss is very sudden. This is probably because the 
interstitial oncotic pressure is also maintained by the gly-
cosaminoglycans matrix.
Thus, patients with nephrotic syndrome are not usu-
ally hypovolaemic and renal perfusion is generally nor-
mal. Despite this, there is intense renal sodium and 
water retention, which is not mediated by the renin–­
aldosterone system, and which exacerbates the intersti-
tial oedema. The mechanism is not well understood, but 
may involve increased sodium reabsorption by epithelial 
sodium channels in the collecting ducts and decreased 
sensitivity to natriuretic peptides. In most patients, the 
oedema is managed by treatment with oral loop diuretics, 
most often furosemide. If this fails, treatment includes 
salt restriction, intravenous furosemide, additional thia-
zide or potassium-sparing diuretics and, occasionally, in 
severe cases, intravenous albumin.
Abnormalities of other plasma proteins. Patients 
with nephrotic syndrome have changes in the concen-
trations of circulating clotting factors, which may be 
responsible for an increased risk of thrombus forma-
tion including renal vein thrombosis, inferior vena cava 
thrombosis and pulmonary emboli. Urinary loss of the 
natural anticoagulant antithrombin III is probably in-
volved, together with increased plasma concentrations of 
fibrinogen and factors V, VII, VIII and X, the reasons for 
which are unclear.
Urinary loss of vitamin D and vitamin D-binding 
globulin may lead to vitamin D deficiency with low 
plasma ionized calcium, secondary hyperparathyroid-
ism and renal osteodystrophy. Some national guide-
lines recommend vitamin D supplementation, especially 
in children with nephrotic syndrome. Hypochromic 
­microcytic anaemia, resistant to iron supplements, can 
occur as a result of urinary loss of transferrin. Patients 
160	
Clinical biochemistry
with nephrotic syndrome may also lose immunoglob-
ulins and complement components, with attendant 
increased risk of infections such as pneumococcal pneu-
monia and peritonitis.
Hyperlipidaemia. Many patients with nephrotic syn-
drome have massive increases in plasma cholesterol and 
triglyceride concentrations, which correlate inversely 
with the plasma concentration of albumin. Plasma very 
low density lipoprotein (VLDL) and low density lipo-
protein (LDL) concentrations are increased, partly ow-
ing to reduced clearance and partly to increased hepatic 
synthesis, while high density lipoprotein (HDL) is re-
duced because of increased urinary loss. Very low density 
lipoprotein and LDL are apoB-containing lipoproteins, 
which are potentially atherogenic and have been linked 
to the pathogenetic processes that result in progressive 
glomerular and interstitial renal disease and increased 
cardiovascular risk. The activities of lecithin-cholesterol 
acyltransferase (LCAT) and the lipoprotein lipases are re-
duced in patients with nephrotic syndrome, yet increased 
urinary losses of these enzymes have not been demon-
strated and the underlying mechanism for their reduced 
activity is not clear. Reduced LCAT activity may also 
reduce HDL production and hence, impair the patient’s 
ability to mobilize lipid from endothelium and peripheral 
tissues.
Hepatic synthesis of VLDL and LDL seems to be 
stimulated by the reduction in plasma oncotic pressure, 
since treatment with albumin or dextran infusions re-
duces hepatic lipoprotein synthesis. These abnormalities 
are summarized in Table 8.5. Nephrotic hyperlipidaemia 
is accompanied by an increased risk of cardiovascular 
complications and is usually treated aggressively with 
statins. The impact of this intervention on cardiovascular 
morbidity and mortality in patients with nephrotic syn-
drome has still to be demonstrated.
Tubular proteinuria
Unlike glomerular proteinuria, where protein excretion 
can reach 20 g/24 h and consists mainly of albumin, tu-
bular proteinuria is generally <1–2 g/24 h. In tubular 
proteinuria, although albumin remains a significant com-
ponent, there is a relatively much greater increase in pro-
teins of <60  000 Da (Table 8.6).
Low molecular weight proteins are filtered rapidly by the 
glomerulus, and proteins of <15  000 Da enter the Bowman 
space almost as easily as water and dissolved minerals. Under 
normal circumstances, the majority of filtered proteins and 
other solutes are reabsorbed by the proximal tubule, but in 
renal tubular disease, the reabsorption of protein together 
with water, ions, glucose and amino acids is impaired. The 
changing proportions of low and high molecular weight pro-
teins in glomerular and tubular disease, shown in Table 8.6, 
can be explained by considering the renal handling of albu-
min (69  000 Da) and β2-microglobulin (11  815 Da).
Despite the large differences in plasma concentra-
tion of albumin (40  000 mg/L) and β2-microglobulin 
(2 mg/L), about 15 and 2 mg/L, respectively, appear in 
glomerular filtrate owing to differences in glomerular 
sieving. Assuming 160 L of filtrate are produced each day, 
2400 mg of albumin and 320 mg of β2-microglobulin are 
filtered daily and would be excreted in the absence of tu-
bular reabsorption. The maximum normal daily excretion 
of albumin is about 20 mg and of β2-microglobulin about 
0.3 mg. Thus, in tubular disease, the increase in excretion 
of low molecular weight proteins is far greater than that 
found for larger proteins such as albumin.
Renal disorders associated with tubular 
proteinuria
In primary tubular proteinuria and interstitial nephri-
tis, the renal interstitium and tubules are principally af-
fected, rather than the glomeruli or renal blood vessels. 
TABLE 8.5  Summary of lipoprotein and apolipoprotein abnormalities in nephrotic syndrome
 
Lipoprotein fraction
 
Plasma concentration
 
Cholesterol content
Triglyceride 
content
VLDL
↑
a
↑
↑
LDL
↑
a
↑
Normal
HDL
Normal/↓
b
↓
Normal
Apolipoprotein
 
 
  AI
Normal/↓
b
Cholesterol content and triglyceride content do not apply 
to apolipoproteins
  AII
Normal/↓
b
  Total A
Normal/↓
b
 
 
  B-48 and B-100
↑
 
 
aIncreased in more severe nephrotic states: inversely related to plasma albumin concentration.
bDepends on severity of nephrotic syndrome: lower concentrations occur in severe cases.
TABLE 8.6  Typical urinary protein excretions in glomerular and tubular disease (see text for details)
Protein
Normal
Glomerular disease
Tubular disease
Total protein (mg/mmol)
<15
>250
<200
Albumin (mg/mmol)
<3
>50
<50
α1-Microglobulin (mg/mmol)
<1
Normal/slightly ↑
↑ ↑
β2-Microglobulin (μg/mmol)
<30
Normal/slightly ↑
↑ ↑
	
8  Proteinuria	
161
However, recent studies have demonstrated that primary 
glomerular proteinuria leads to large amounts of plasma 
proteins being presented to the proximal renal tubules, 
absorption of which causes inflammation and secondary 
tubular damage. Thus, in addition to direct tubular toxic 
effects of conditions mediated by autoimmune or infec-
tive mechanisms, drugs, toxins, metabolic disorders or 
heavy metals, any pathology leading to glomerular pro-
teinuria will also be associated with some degree of tubu-
lar dysfunction (Box 8.1).
Measurement of urine total protein or albumin is of 
limited value in differentiating between glomerular and 
tubular proteinuria, other than that the latter tends to be 
associated with proteinuria of <1–2 g/24 h. Estimation of 
proteins that more specifically reflect tubular reabsorp-
tion is of more help in identifying primarily tubular disor-
ders. In addition to tubular proteinuria, acute and chronic 
tubulointerstitial disease can lead to other tubular dys-
function with loss of water, sodium, potassium, calcium, 
glucose, phosphate, urate and amino acids. Bicarbonate 
wasting can lead to renal tubular acidosis (type 2). 
Tubular proteinuria, together with defective reabsorption 
described above, may form part of the Fanconi syndrome, 
which can be inherited or acquired (see Chapter 9).
Drug and heavy metal induced tubular damage. 
In general, the renal tubules are particularly susceptible 
to drug induced damage because the renal concentrat-
ing mechanism leads to high drug concentrations within 
the tubules. Aminoglycoside antibiotics bind to phos-
pholipids and can disrupt cellular membranes. Analgesic 
drugs such as phenacetin or its metabolite acetamino-
phen (paracetamol) damage tubular cells because they are 
concentrated within the renal medulla, bind to cellular 
proteins and deplete stores of glutathione. Non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) inhibit the synthesis 
of renal vasodilatory prostaglandins, which can lead to 
unopposed vasoconstriction and ischaemia.
Arsenic, chromium, cadmium, copper, bismuth, mer-
cury and lead have all been described as causing renal 
injury. Heavy metals react with membrane-bound sulphy-
dryl groups, altering membrane permeability and causing 
cellular damage. Inhalation of mercury vapour appears to 
cause glomerular proteinuria, while ingestion of mercury 
salts can produce combined glomerular and tubular pro-
teinuria. Acute lead intoxication in children can cause tubu-
lar proteinuria, although patients with clinically apparent 
lead poisoning sometimes have normal protein excretion. 
Cadmium is taken up by renal tubules as a metallothionein 
complex that is more toxic than cadmium alone. Increased 
excretion of β2-microglobulin was first described in cad-
mium workers, and markers of tubular proteinuria are now 
used to monitor occupationally exposed subjects.
Methods of assessing tubular damage
Renal tubular function can be assessed in a number of 
ways, such as by tests of reabsorption of glucose, phos-
phate, bicarbonate and amino acids. Discussion here 
will be limited to the use of urine proteins as markers 
of tubular damage by measurement of either high mo-
lecular weight proteins, such as enzymes or brush bor-
der antigens released by the damaged tubules, or of low 
molecular weight proteins filtered at the glomerulus and 
normally reabsorbed by the proximal renal tubule.
High molecular weight protein markers of renal 
tubular damage. Several enzymes not normally filtered 
by the glomeruli are released by damaged tubular cells 
and can be detected in the urine. They include lactate 
dehydrogenase, γ-glutamyl transferase and alkaline phos-
phatase. Their use as markers of tubular damage has been 
limited because of their instability in urine and the pres-
ence of urinary enzyme inhibitors.
The enzyme most widely employed for monitoring tu-
bular damage is N-acetyl β-d-glucosaminidase (NAG), a 
lysosomal enzyme of 150  000 Da, which is found in high 
concentrations in the cells of the proximal tubule. Two 
isoenzymes of NAG are found in urine, one acidic and 
one basic: the acidic form is found in normal urine and 
both are excreted in patients with renal disease. Its lack 
of specificity limits its utility but NAG may be of value in 
monitoring inherited tubulopathies and in assessing tu-
bular damage during cancer chemotherapy or treatment 
BOX 8.1	
Causes of tubulointerstitial  
nephritis
•	 Drugs
•	 Analgesics
•	 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
•	 Cytotoxic agents, e.g. cis-platinum
•	 Ciclosporin
•	 Heavy metals
•	 Lead
•	 Cadmium
•	 Mercury
•	 Bismuth
•	 Copper (Wilson disease)
•	 Urinary tract obstruction
a
•	 Metabolic disease
•	 Vitamin D deficiency
•	 Hyperuricaemia
•	 Hypercalcaemia
•	 Tyrosinaemia
•	 Hereditary fructose intolerance
•	 Galactosaemia
•	 Cystinosis
•	 Sickle cell anaemia
a
•	 Renal tubular acidosis
•	 Lowe syndrome (oculocerebrorenal syndrome)
•	 Infection
•	 Urinary tract infection with anatomical abnormality
•	 Systemic infections (streptococcal infections, leptospi-
rosis, toxoplasmosis, infectious mononucleosis, brucel-
losis, syphilis)
•	 Neoplastic disease
•	 Multiple myeloma
a
•	 Light chain disease
•	 Leukaemias and lymphomas
•	 Immunological diseases
•	 Systemic lupus erythematosus
a
•	 Sjögren syndrome
a
•	 Transplant rejection
a
•	 Amyloidosis
a
aMay have coexisting glomerulonephritis with proteinuria >1–2 g/24 h.
162	
Clinical biochemistry
with antiretrovirals. Conditions associated with increased 
NAG excretion are given in Box 8.2.
Low molecular weight protein markers of renal 
­tubular disease. Ideally, a low molecular weight urine 
protein that can be used to monitor tubular damage 
should have the following characteristics:
•	 it should have a constant plasma concentration
•	 be freely filtered by the glomerulus
•	 its tubular reabsorption should be near saturation 
so that small reductions in tubular function result in 
significant urinary excretion
•	 its tubular reabsorption should be unaffected by co-
existing glomerular proteinuria
•	 it should be stable in urine
•	 it should be easily measurable.
Since the plasma concentration of low molecular 
weight proteins filtered by the glomeruli rises as the 
GFR falls, the tubules of those nephrons still functioning 
are presented with an increased low molecular weight 
protein load that causes overflow into the urine and con-
founds the interpretation of results. The characteristics 
of some proteins used as tubular markers are given in 
Table 8.7.
Lysozyme (muramidase) was the first low molecular 
weight marker of tubular function. Urine lysozyme excre-
tion is increased in patients with Fanconi syndrome, but 
is often within normal limits in patients with nephrotic 
syndrome. Plasma lysozyme concentration is increased in 
inflammatory conditions and in some leukaemias, which 
limits its value as a tubular marker.
Increased excretion of β2-microglobulin was first 
identified in patients with cadmium poisoning and with 
Wilson disease. This protein is associated with the heavy 
chain of human leukocyte antigen surface protein on cells 
and is released during normal cellular turnover. Increased 
plasma concentrations are found in patients with liver 
disease and some malignancies such as myeloma and 
B cell lymphomas. However, β2-microglobulin is un-
stable in acidic urine (pH <5.5) owing to degradation 
by neutrophil elastase. This necessitates strict control of 
urine pH after collection, although little can be done to 
prevent in vivo degradation in the bladder before voiding 
other than oral administration of bicarbonate to alkalin-
ize the urine.
Retinol-binding 
protein 
(21  000 Da) 
forms 
an 
85  000 Da complex with vitamin A and prealbumin in 
plasma and hence only a small proportion is free to be 
filtered by the glomeruli. Plasma concentration falls 
in inflammatory disease and in vitamin A deficiency. 
Plasma α1-microglobulin (31  000 Da) concentrations 
are increased in neoplastic diseases, but are reduced in 
liver disease in parallel with plasma albumin. Unlike 
β2-microglobulin, retinol-binding protein and α1-
microglobulin are ­relatively stable in urine and are the 
most commonly measured markers of tubular proteinuria.
Proteinuria of prerenal origin
Proteinuria of prerenal origin has been defined as the 
occurrence in the urine of abnormal amounts of protein 
filtered by the glomeruli in the absence of any glomeru-
lar or tubular abnormality. The term is usually applied 
to ‘overflow’ proteinuria such as Bence Jones pro-
teinuria, haemoglobinuria and myoglobinuria, where 
plasma concentrations of these proteins are increased. 
This definition has limitations because the very pres-
ence of abnormally high concentrations of protein at 
the glomerulus and in the tubular lumen can cause glo-
merular and tubular abnormalities. Furthermore, it is 
becoming apparent that non-renal conditions are asso-
ciated with proteinuria that disappears when the condi-
tion resolves.
Myoglobinuria and haemoglobinuria
Myoglobin is found predominantly in skeletal and cardiac 
muscle cells. Any disease that causes rapid destruction of 
striated muscle (rhabdomyolysis) results in the release of 
myoglobin and other muscle proteins into the circula-
tion. Having a molecular weight of 17  000 Da, myoglobin 
is filtered rapidly by the glomerulus; it has a renal thresh-
old of about 15 mg/L.
Box 8.3 illustrates the diversity of causes of rhabdomy-
olysis, although a common factor appears to be the dam-
aging effects on muscle cells of a failure to meet increased 
energy demands. Rhabdomyolysis is associated with 
acute kidney injury, but a causal relationship is not clear. 
Although myoglobin casts are found in rhabdomyolysis, 
infusion of pure myoglobin does not in general cause kid-
ney damage, suggesting that there are other factors that 
BOX 8.2	
Conditions associated with 
increased urinary N-Acetyl β-d-
glucosaminidase excretion
•	 Nephrotic syndrome
•	 Glomerulonephritis
•	 Tubulointerstitial nephritis
•	 Heavy metal poisoning
•	 Renal transplant rejection
•	 Diabetes mellitus (with and without nephropathy)
•	 Hypertensive renal disease
•	 Surgery
•	 Ischaemia
•	 Hyperthyroidism
•	 Cancer chemotherapy
aNote: unstable at urine pH <5.5. Requires in vivo urine alkalinization 
to avoid erroneous results.
TABLE 8.7  Proteins used as markers of tubular 
damage
Protein
Molecular 
weight 
(Da)
Mean 
normal 
urinary 
excretion 
(μg/mmol 
creatinine)
Isoelectric 
point
Retinol-binding 
protein
21  000
8
4.7
α1-Microglobulin
31  000
400
3.6
β2-Microglobulin
a
11  815
10
5.8
	
8  Proteinuria	
163
lead to the kidney injury. Purine derivatives released from 
damaged muscle cells are rapidly converted to uric acid, 
leading to very high plasma urate concentrations and 
intrarenal deposition. Acidosis as a result of the initiat-
ing cause of rhabdomyolysis, for example hypovolaemic 
shock, or from the release of organic acids from muscle 
cells, may potentiate the degradation of myoglobin to 
globin and ferrihaemate within the tubules. Ferrihaemate 
is toxic to tubular epithelial cells. Desquamation adds to 
the tubular obstruction.
Intravascular haemolysis releases free haemoglobin, 
which binds to circulating proteins such as haptoglo-
bin. Since haemoglobin itself is 68  000 Da and its plasma 
protein-complexed form is even larger, haemoglobinuria 
does not occur until haemolysis is severe and plasma 
haemoglobin concentration exceeds 1 g/L. Pure haemo-
globin is not nephrotoxic, and acidosis and dehydration 
are important factors determining the nephrotoxicity of 
severe intravascular haemolytic episodes. Haemoglobin 
casts are found, and ferrihaemate released from degraded 
haemoglobin may also cause tubular epithelial cell 
damage.
Both myoglobin and haemoglobin possess per-
oxidase activity, which gives positive results for blood 
with reagent sticks. Measurement of urine myoglobin 
and haemoglobin is rarely necessary because other 
biochemical features give better clues to the diagnosis 
(Table 8.8).
Paraproteinaemias and Bence Jones proteinuria
Bence Jones proteinuria, the presence in the urine of im-
munoglobulin light chains, is a frequent finding in pa-
tients with multiple myeloma and may occur with other 
B cell malignancies (Table 8.9). This topic is considered 
in detail in Chapter 30.
There is an association between the presence of 
Bence Jones protein and the development of renal dys-
function in patients with multiple myeloma. Free light 
chains (molecular weight 22–24  000 Da) are normally 
cleared from the circulation by glomerular filtration fol-
lowed by reabsorption and catabolism in the proximal 
tubules. Given the normal production rate of 500 mg/
day and a reabsorptive capacity of 10–30 g/day, the pro-
duction rate must increase substantially to cause over-
flow into the urine in the absence of renal dysfunction. 
Some light chains are toxic to the proximal tubules (a 
property that appears to relate to the amino acid se-
quence in the variable domain but is incompletely un-
derstood) and probably contribute to the development 
of Fanconi syndrome, renal tubular acidosis and renal 
TABLE 8.8  Biochemical features associated  
with myoglobinuria and haemoglobinuria
Plasma
Myoglobinuria
Haemoglobinuria
Creatine kinase
↑ ↑ ↑
Normal
Visible haemolysis
None
Present
Calcium
↓
Normal
Haptoglobin
Normal
↓
Urate
↑ ↑ ↑
Normal
Creatinine
↑
a
Normal
aPlasma creatinine concentration disproportionately increased 
compared to GFR.
TABLE 8.9  Relative frequencies of light chain proteinuria in monoclonal paraproteinaemias
Type
Relative  
frequency (%)
Light chain  
proteinuria (%)
Renal  
impairment (%)
Multiple myeloma
IgG
55
60–65
50
IgA
20–25
70
60
IgD
1–4
90–100
90
IgE
<1
100
Rare
Waldenstrom macroglobulinaemia
IgM
14
90
Rare
Light chain disease
10–20
100
90
Heavy chain disease
<1
–
Rare
Benign monoclonal paraproteinaemia
–
<5
0
Adapted from Sweny P, Farrington K, Moorhead J F 1989 The kidney and its disorders. Oxford: Blackwell Scientific, with permission.
BOX 8.3	
Causes of rhabdomyolysis 
and myoglobinuria
•	 Severe exercise
•	 Injury
•	 Trauma
•	 Electric shock
•	 Crush injury
•	 Surgery
•	 Ischaemia
•	 Metabolic
•	 Severe hypokalaemia
•	 Severe hypophosphataemia
•	 Glycogen phosphorylase deficiency (McArdle disease)
•	 Phosphofructokinase deficiency
•	 Carnitine palmitoyl acyltransferase deficiency
•	 Malignant hyperpyrexia
•	 Infections
•	 Viral (influenza, coxsackie)
•	 Bacterial (typhoid, Shigella spp., haemolytic streptococcus)
•	 Toxins
•	 Carbon monoxide (leading to hypoxia)
•	 Snake venoms
•	 Drugs (steroids, statins, barbiturates, alcohol)
•	 Dermatomyositis and polymyositis
164	
Clinical biochemistry
failure in patients with multiple myeloma. Patients with 
light chain proteinuria show increased excretion of ly-
sozyme, retinol-binding protein, β2-microglobulin and 
albumin (with β2-microglobulin excretion being higher 
in λ light chain proteinuria), suggesting that these pro-
teins compete for common reabsorptive mechanisms. 
Light chains can complex with uromodulin, producing 
typical myeloma casts, especially when patients are de-
hydrated and/or acidotic. Partial degradation of light 
chains can cause polymerization and the formation of 
damaging amyloid deposits in the glomerular and tu-
bular basement membranes. The specific detection and 
quantitation of urine paraproteins and Bence Jones pro-
tein requires electrophoresis, immunofixation and urine 
total protein analysis although specific immunoassays 
for urine free light chains are now available.
MICROALBUMINURIA AS A MARKER OF RISK
The term ‘microalbuminuria’ was coined to describe an 
increase in urine albumin that is detectable by sensitive 
immunoassays but is below the detection limit of chemi-
cal urine protein methods and dye-binding stick tests. 
Microalbuminuria is defined as an albumin excretion rate 
of 20–200 μg/min (30–300 mg/24 h or 3–30 mg/mmol 
creatinine). Diabetic patients with microalbuminuria 
are at increased risk of developing dipstick positive pro-
teinuria and CKD. Early identification allows aggressive 
treatment to improve glycaemic control, blood pressure 
and plasma lipids and has been shown to improve out-
come. More recently, large scale studies have shown that 
screening for microalbuminuria in non-diabetic as well 
as diabetic populations identifies patients at increased 
cardiovascular risk. Furthermore, microalbuminuria has 
been found to be a predictor of outcome in critically ill 
patients following insults such as major surgery, trauma 
or sepsis. The link between microalbuminuria and out-
come in such apparently diverse groups of patients ap-
pears to be that microalbuminuria reflects the systemic 
microvascular endothelial dysfunction that, in various 
forms, is common to all these conditions.
Microalbuminuria and risk of diabetic 
complications
Diabetes mellitus is the commonest cause of established 
renal failure. It can affect the kidneys in a number of 
ways leading to glomerular disease, obstruction, tu-
bular disease and a predisposition to infection, but it 
is diabetic glomerular disease that is the most impor-
tant, involving about one third of patients. In the early 
stages of diabetic renal disease, there is hyperfiltration 
with an increased GFR, which may be associated with 
microalbuminuria. With adequate treatment, the GFR 
falls towards normal and microalbuminuria disappears. 
However, microalbuminuria returns during periods of 
poor glycaemic control and becomes persistent with es-
tablished disease, usually after 5–20  years of diabetes. 
The risk of developing diabetic nephropathy can be re-
duced by improving glycaemic control and by treating 
hypertension aggressively. Once albuminuria reaches 
>0.5 g/24 h or more, improved glycaemic control ap-
pears to have little effect on further progression.
Type 1 diabetes usually presents acutely and micro-
albuminuria rarely occurs within five years of diagno-
sis, so annual monitoring of urine albumin is generally 
recommended only after five years’ disease duration. In 
contrast, type 2 diabetes will often have been present 
for many years prior to diagnosis, hence annual moni-
toring of urine albumin is recommended from the time 
of diagnosis. To reduce micro- and macrovascular risk, 
patients with persistent microalbuminuria (i.e. confirmed 
by two repeat measurements over 3–4  months) should 
be treated with an ACEI (or ARB), titrated to the maxi-
mum tolerable dose, to reduce intraglomerular pressure. 
Blood pressure should be maintained at <130/80 mmHg 
by the use of additional antihypertensives if necessary. 
These measures, together with aggressive management 
of cardiovascular risk factors, aim to reduce the rate of 
progression of kidney disease and prevent cardiovascular 
events. However, it should be noted that a diminishing 
urine albumin excretion rate associated with treatment 
does not invariably translate into prevention of progres-
sion of renal disease as assessed by GFR.
Cardiovascular risk
Microalbuminuria is a marker for generalized vascular 
endothelial dysfunction. In the USA and the European 
Community, microalbuminuria is found in 6–10% of the 
general population. Numerous clinical studies in non-
diabetic populations have found an association between 
microalbuminuria and cardiovascular risk factors, target 
organ damage and the presence of cardiovascular dis-
ease. Although microalbuminuria interacts with other 
cardiovascular risk factors, it is an independent predic-
tor of cardiovascular disease. In large population studies, 
the presence of microalbuminuria has been shown to be 
associated with raised plasma C-reactive protein (CRP) 
concentrations (measured using high sensitivity assays), 
which is consistent with the view that microalbuminuria 
reflects systemic endothelial dysfunction mediated by 
inflammatory processes. Large cross-sectional prospec-
tive studies have shown an association between urine 
albumin excretion and both blood pressure and cardio-
vascular risk that extends from within the urine albumin 
reference range through microalbuminuria and to clini-
cal proteinuria. In patients with primary hypertension, 
the prevalence of microalbuminuria is typically 4–6%. 
In subjects with mild hypertension and no cardiovascular 
complications, urine albumin excretion is determined by 
the haemodynamic load, whereas in subjects with more 
severe hypertension and associated target organ damage, 
the urinary albumin leak is probably the consequence of 
glomerular damage.
Treatment with an ACEI or ARB reduces urine al-
bumin excretion and may prove to be a more targeted 
approach to reducing cardiovascular risk. Micro­
albuminuria can be considered not only as a risk fac-
tor for progressive renal damage, but as providing 
an integrated assessment of long-term damage to the 
cardiovascular system, and is therefore increasingly 
being used in cardiovascular risk assessment clinics. 
	
8  Proteinuria	
165
What remains to be shown is whether targeted treat-
ment of micro­albuminuria in the non-diabetic popu-
lation reduces cardiovascular morbidity and mortality. 
However, there is general consensus that detection and 
quantitation of microalbuminuria is useful for the as-
sessment of overall cardiovascular risk in hypertension, 
since it appears to be a cost-effective way of identifying 
patients at higher risk for whom additional preventive 
and therapeutic measures are advisable.
Microalbuminuria as a risk factor in other 
inflammatory processes
The emerging association between inflammation, vas-
cular endothelial dysfunction and microalbuminuria 
has led to a large number of studies exploring the po-
tential clinical value of this relationship. Interaction of 
activated leukocytes and the vascular endothelium is at 
the heart of the inflammatory process, and is normally 
under tight homoeostatic control, preventing the lo-
cal inflammatory response from becoming a systemic, 
life-threatening process. Yet this homoeostasis can fail 
in patients with severe injuries, infection or multiple pa-
thologies, resulting in systemic inflammatory response 
syndrome (SIRS). This is the underlying pathogenetic 
mechanism for the development of multiple organ fail-
ure, which is the major cause of death in the critically ill 
(see Chapter 20). Attempts to modulate the severe in-
flammatory response have been unsuccessful, partly be-
cause of the multiplicity of inflammatory pathways, such 
that blocking a single pathway is unlikely to be effec-
tive, and because such interventions must be given early 
in the evolution of SIRS to have any hope of success. 
Increased urine albumin excretion occurs within min-
utes of any acute inflammatory stimulus such as trauma, 
surgery, ischaemia reperfusion injury or infection, and 
normally returns to baseline within 6–8 h, depending on 
the nature and magnitude of the inflammatory insult. 
However, in patients who develop SIRS, microalbumin-
uria is sustained, reflecting systemic vascular endothelial 
dysfunction. Thus, serial monitoring of urine albumin 
during major inflammatory episodes has the potential 
to identify, within a few hours of onset, patients who 
require close monitoring in an intensive care unit, 
and who might be candidates for immune-modulating 
therapy. On the other hand, a return of urine albumin 
excretion to normal provides a marker of restoration 
of homoeostatic control of inflammation, which can 
be used as an indicator of successful recovery from the 
acute inflammatory insult.
CLINICAL INVESTIGATION OF PROTEINURIA
Urine dip-sticks
For many years, proteinuria has been identified by 
screening random urine specimens using a semiquantita-
tive chemical stick test. These methods are based on the 
colour change of indicators such as bromophenol blue, 
which is buffered to pH 3.0 with citrate, and changes 
from yellow to blue when bound to albumin. Such stick 
tests for protein (that predominantly detect albumin) 
have a detection limit in the range 200–250 mg/L and 
are subject to errors, including false positives owing to 
alkaline pH from infection with urea-splitting organ-
isms or contamination with antiseptics, and false nega-
tives owing to very dilute urine and visual reading errors. 
With the growing awareness in diabetic medicine of the 
pathological significance of proteinuria at concentrations 
that are undetectable by conventional chemical sticks, 
specific semiquantitative immunoassay sticks for urine al-
bumin have been developed that can detect albuminuria 
at ~30 mg/L.
Collection of urine
Measurement of urine protein or albumin as a concentra-
tion in milligrams or grams per litre makes no allowance 
for variations in urine flow rate. Formal correction can 
be made by collecting timed urine samples and express-
ing results in protein mass per unit time. However, this 
is both inconvenient for the patient and prone to urine 
collection errors because of misunderstanding of when 
the collection should start and finish. Numerous studies 
have demonstrated that expression of urine total protein 
or urine albumin as a ratio to creatinine concentration in 
an early morning sample is at least as reproducible as a 
timed urine, even if collected under ideal conditions, and 
is more convenient for the patient. There are now few 
indications for collecting timed urine specimens.
Urine protein measurement
Throughout this chapter, it has been emphasized that 
pathologically significant proteinuria extends from the 
upper reference limit for urine protein, which is in mil-
ligrams per litre, to tens of grams per litre, in nephrotic 
syndrome. Chemical methods used for measuring urine 
total protein, which are both accurate and precise, are 
generally adequate for monitoring patients with pro-
teinuria >1 g/L. However, there is a clear problem with 
using such techniques for quantitation of proteinuria in 
the mg/L range. First, external quality assessment pro-
grammes have highlighted the poor performance of urine 
total protein methods, particularly at low concentrations. 
This is partly related to the variable chromogenicity for 
the differing urine proteins of the different dyes used in 
total protein methods, resulting in different total urine 
protein reference ranges. Second, at low total protein 
concentrations, the relative contribution of proteins se-
creted into the urine by the kidneys, such as uromodulin, 
becomes more significant, thus masking within the total 
protein estimation small, but pathologically significant 
increases in urine albumin and other diagnostically im-
portant proteins (Fig. 8.2).
In the US National Kidney Foundation Guidelines, 
urine albumin is recommended as a sensitive marker for 
chronic kidney disease secondary to diabetes, glomerular 
disease and hypertension, and α1 and β2-microglobulins 
as sensitive markers of tubulointerstitial disease. For this 
reason, many laboratories now provide urine albumin as 
their first line test for assessing ‘proteinuria’, covering 
the range from normal values, through microalbuminuria 
166	
Clinical biochemistry
to the albuminuric nephrotic range. However, at higher 
concentrations, the requirement for repeated dilutions 
of the sample for accurate measurement of albumin adds 
considerably to the cost. Above 0.5–1 g/L, some guide-
lines suggest that measurement of either urine albumin 
or total protein is acceptable for monitoring. In more 
specialized circumstances, such as screening for urinary 
light chains or monitoring of tubular dysfunction, spe-
cific protein immunoassays are the most reliable.
Stepwise investigation of proteinuria
Where proteinuria is confirmed, a stepwise approach to 
establishing the cause of proteinuria can be applied, as 
summarized in Figure 8.3. Particular regard should be 
given to evidence of oedema, diabetes mellitus, polycystic 
disease, hypertension, heart failure and other cardiovas-
cular risk factors. A full clinical and laboratory assess-
ment at this stage will identify the cause of proteinuria 
in the majority of patients. For example, proteinuria may 
be caused by protein leakage from inflamed epithelium 
during urinary tract infections. In other patients, pro-
teinuria, especially microalbuminuria, may be associated 
with non-renal conditions, some of which are transient 
and disappear with the resolution of the associated con-
dition (Box 8.4).
A third group of patients will demonstrate persistent 
asymptomatic proteinuria either in isolation or accompa-
nied by other urinary abnormalities. Red cells can enter 
urine or filtrate at any point along the urinary tract, lead-
ing to haematuria. Proteinuria with haematuria or tubu-
lar cell, granular or leukocyte casts is likely to originate 
from the nephron. When red cell casts are also found, the 
nephron can be implicated with more confidence and, in 
general, this indicates more severe renal disease.
Assessment of proteinuria
Significant proteinuria
PCR ≥50 mg/mmol      ACR ≥30 mg/mmol
Normoalbuminuria
PCR <15 mg/mmol
ACR <2.5 mg/mmol
ACR <3.5 mg/mmol
Confirmation of proteinuria, full clinical examination, serum creatinine
and eGFR, albumin, cholesterol, triglycerides, HbA1c or fasting
glucose, anti-nuclear factor, C3, C4, urine microbiology and microscopy
Confirmation of microalbuminuria, full clinical examination, 
urine microbiology, serum creatinine and eGFR, 
cholesterol, triglycerides, HbA1c or fasting glucose
Evidence of
renal
impairment:
follow-up
Increased CV
risk factors:
treat
aggressively
Diabetes: aggressive
treatment including
reducing CV risk
factors
No other
abnormality:
reassure patient
6 month follow-up
Normal results
One or more
abnormal results
Diagnostic
Non-diagnostic
PCR 100–299 mg/mmol
PCR <100 mg/mmol
ACR <70 mg/mmol
Non-orthostatic
Orthostatic
Consider renal biopsy
Radiology investigations
Assessment of
glomerular and
tubular proteins
and tubular function
Biopsy
Diagnosis
Diagnosis
Diagnosis
PCR <50 mg/mmol
ACR <30 mg/mmol
Reassure patient
6 month follow-up
Microalbuminuria
ACR 2.5–29 mg/mmol
ACR 3.5–29 mg/mmol
PCR >300 mg/mmol
PCR >50 mg/mmol
ACR >30 mg/mmol
FIGURE 8.3  ■  Stepwise investigation of patients with proteinuria. Reference ranges and clinical decision points reflect current guide-
lines. PCR, urine protein creatinine ratio; ACR, urine albumin ratio; CV, cardiovascular.
10000
1000
100
10
10
100
1000
10000
Urine albumin by immunoassay (mg /L)
Urine total protein by SSA (mg / L)
FIGURE 8.2  ■  Comparison of urine total protein measured by sul-
phosalicylic acid precipitation (SSA) with urine albumin mea-
sured by specific immunoassay. When proteinuria is in the g/L 
range, there is reasonably good agreement between methods, 
but at total protein concentrations within the reference range 
(<150 mg/L), pathological albuminuria (i.e. >20 mg/L) can be 
found. (Courtesy of Dr Robert Beetham).
	
8  Proteinuria	
167
Studies have shown that ~70% of patients with asymp-
tomatic non-orthostatic proteinuria have abnormal renal 
biopsies, while of those with orthostatic asymptomatic 
proteinuria, a much smaller proportion have abnormal 
biopsies. As a result, biopsy is now rarely performed in 
this latter group. The significance of the histological 
abnormalities is uncertain and the prognosis for both 
groups is excellent.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I would like to thank Peter Gosling, who wrote this chap-
ter for previous editions of the book.
Further reading
Although guidelines are available in print form, the latest ver-
sions incorporating updates and corrections are usually avail-
able only electronically (web addresses Accessed October 2013). 
Their titles are self-explanatory.
Chronic Kidney Disease Prognosis Consortium. Associated estimated 
glomerular filtration rate and albuminuria with all-cause and 
cardiovascular mortality in general population cohorts: a collaborative 
meta-analysis. Lancet 2010;375:2073–81. 
A meta-analysis of the current evidence linking albuminuria and dip-
stick proteinuria with mortality and CKD.
Gerstein HC, Mann JF, Yi Q et al. Albuminuria and risk of cardiovascular 
events, death, and heart failure in diabetic and nondiabetic individuals. 
J Am Med Assoc 2001;286:421–6. 
This was one of the largest prospective studies of microalbuminuria 
against outcome for a median of 4.5 years in 9000 diabetic and non-diabetic 
subjects. The results showed that any degree of albuminuria is a risk factor 
for cardiovascular events in diabetic and non-diabetic subjects, with the risk 
starting to increase well below the microalbuminuria cut-off. Screening 
for albuminuria identifies people at high risk for cardiovascular events. 
Numerous subsequent publications have served to confirm these findings.
James MT, Hemmelgarn BR, Wiebe N et al. for the Alberta Kidney 
Disease Network. Glomerular filtration rate, proteinuria and the 
incidence and consequences of acute kidney injury: a cohort study. 
Lancet 2010;376:2096–103. 
The power of databases – A study of over 900  000 non-hospitalized 
patients that demonstrates the association of proteinuria as well as CKD 
with the risk of acute kidney injury.
Kidney Disease Improving Global Outcomes. http://www.kdigo.org/
home/guidelines.
National Collaborating Centre for Chronic Conditions. Chronic 
kidney disease: national clinical guideline for early identification and 
management in adults in primary and secondary care. London: Royal 
College of Physicians; September 2008.
National Collaborating Centre for Chronic Conditions. Type 2 
diabetes: national clinical guideline for management in primary and 
secondary care (update). London: Royal College of Physicians; 2008.
Newman DJ, Mattock MB, Dawnay ABS et al. Systematic review on 
urine albumin testing for early detection of diabetic complications. 
Health Technol Assess 2005;9:30. 
A useful review stating that regression of microalbuminuria to 
normoalbuminuria in adults is just as common as progression of 
microalbuminuria to clinical proteinuria; in children, regression is three-
fold more frequent than progression.
NICE. http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/live/12069/42116/42116.pdf.
NICE. http://www.nice.org.uk/nicemedia/live/11983/40803/40803.pdf.
NICE clinical guideline CG62: Antenatal care: routine care of the healthy 
pregnant woman (reviewed 2011), http://guidance.nice.org.uk/CG62.
NICE clinical guideline CG107: the management of hypertensive 
disorders during pregnancy; 2010. http://guidance.nice.org.uk/
CG107.
NICE clinical guideline CG73: chronic kidney disease; 2008. http://
guidance.nice.org.uk/CG73.
Rampoldi L, Scolari F, Amoroso A et al. The rediscovery of uromodulin 
(Tamm–Horsfall glycoprotein): from tubulointerstitial nephropathy 
to chronic kidney disease. Kidney Int 2011;80:338–47. 
A useful recent review of current knowledge about uromodulin.
Renal Association. Clinical practice guideline on detection, monitoring 
and care of people with CKD. 5th ed; 2011. http://www.renal.org/
Clinical/GuidelinesSection/Detection-Monitoring-and-Care-of-
Patients-with-CKD.aspx.
Tojo A, Kinugasa S. Mechanisms of glomerular albumin filtration and 
tubular reabsorption. (Open access article) International. J Nephrol 
2012;2012:481–520. 
A good overview and freely available.
BOX 8.4  	 Non-renal inflammatory conditions 
associated with microalbuminuria
•	 Trauma
•	 Burn injury
•	 Surgery
•	 Inflammatory conditions
•	 Acute pancreatitis
•	 Inflammatory bowel disease
•	 Septicaemia
•	 Systemic inflammatory response syndrome
•	 Cardiovascular disease (see text for details)
•	 Myocardial infarction
•	 Congestive cardiac failure
•	 Intermittent claudication (especially post-exercise)
•	 Poisoning
•	 Paracetamol (acetaminophen) overdosage
168
C H A P T E R  9
Renal tubular disorders 
and renal stone disease
David Makanjuola  •  Marta Lapsley
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  168
RENAL TUBULAR DISORDERS  168
Introduction  168
Physiology  168
Isolated abnormalities of  tubular function  169
Generalized tubular defects (Fanconi 
syndrome)  174
RENAL CALCULI  174
Introduction  174
Pathogenesis of renal stones  175
Investigation of stone formers  178
Treatment  178
CONCLUSION  179
APPENDIX  179
INTRODUCTION
Most patients with renal disease have some element of 
renal tubular involvement, but the other manifestations 
of the disease tend to be clinically more obvious and 
important. However, in a small number of patients, the 
clinical picture results primarily from a disorder of re-
nal tubular function. These disorders can be inherited 
or acquired, and can affect tubular handling of a limited 
number of specific substances or encompass more gen-
eralized defects.
Renal tubular defects are conveniently considered 
with renal stone formation, since calculi sometimes form 
as a result of one of these conditions.
RENAL TUBULAR DISORDERS
Introduction
Hereditary renal tubular disease includes certain devel-
opmental disorders of the tubules, for example polycystic 
renal disease and medullary cystic disease. While these 
can result in disorders of renal function, including renal 
tubular function, they will not be considered in detail 
here. Renal tubular physiology will be discussed briefly, 
followed by a discussion of some well-recognized func-
tional disorders of the renal tubules.
Physiology
Renal function is discussed in detail in Chapter 7, but in 
essence the process involves filtration at the glomeruli, 
followed by modification of this glomerular filtrate by 
both tubular reabsorption and tubular secretion. Since 
170 L of filtrate are formed each 24 h, but only about 
one-hundredth this amount of urine is produced, reab-
sorption is quantitatively the more significant (Table 9.1). 
This is largely an active, energy-requiring process and 
explains why the kidneys account for some 6–8% of the 
resting oxygen consumption of the body, while represent-
ing <1% of body mass.
Some of the mechanisms by which active transport 
in the renal tubules occurs are shown in Figure 9.1. The 
control of renal tubular handling of certain substances is 
covered in detail in other chapters, for example sodium 
and water in Chapter 4. Only the renal tubular handling 
of substances that are important in disorders of renal tu-
bular function will be considered further here.
Glucose is absorbed with sodium ions in the early part 
of the proximal tubules, in a secondary active transport 
process. Glucose and sodium bind to a common carrier 
protein (SGLT 2, see later) in the luminal membrane 
and sodium moves down its electrochemical gradient, 
carrying glucose into the cell. Na
+,K
+-ATPase in the 
non-­luminal (basolateral) membrane of the tubular cells 
pumps the sodium ions out into the interstitial fluid, 
while glucose is transported in the same direction by the 
glucose transporter GLUT 2.
Amino acids are also reabsorbed in the early part of 
the proximal renal tubules, again by a secondary active 
transport system linked to sodium reabsorption. There 
appear to be separate cotransporter proteins for certain 
groups of amino acids, although some of these probably 
have overlapping specificities. The process is driven by 
the Na
+,K
+-ATPase in the basolateral membrane pump-
ing sodium out of the cell, with amino acids leaving by 
passive or facilitated diffusion.
	
9  Renal tubular disorders and renal stone disease	
169
Phosphate reabsorption in the renal tubules is influ-
enced by the dietary intake of phosphate, certain hormones 
and a variety of other factors, and these are described in 
Chapter 6. In summary, about 90% of the inorganic phos-
phate in the plasma is freely filtered at the glomeruli, and 
then about 75% is reabsorbed in the proximal tubules. 
A small, variable amount is also absorbed in the distal tu-
bules, but overall reabsorption is incomplete and up to 
40 mmol/24 h appears in normal adult urine. The rate-
limiting step in reabsorption appears to be a secondary ac-
tive transport system linked to sodium reabsorption, with 
a phosphate/sodium cotransporter located in the luminal 
membrane of the tubular cells.
As described in Chapter  5, the renal tubular secre-
tion of hydrogen ions is linked to the net effective re-
absorption of bicarbonate (see Figs 5.2 and 5.3). Around 
4000 mmol of bicarbonate is filtered every 24 h, but nor-
mal urine contains virtually no bicarbonate so the tubules 
must secrete 4000 mmol of hydrogen ions to achieve this. 
Although this mechanism prevents the loss of alkali into 
the urine, it does not result in the net excretion of acid. 
The tubules must also secrete the hydrogen ions pro-
duced each day by normal metabolism (see Chapter 5), a 
further 40–80 mmol/24 h.
There are two distinct mechanisms by which hydro-
gen ions are secreted into the tubular lumen (Fig. 9.1). 
A secondary active transport system linked to sodium op-
erates in the epithelial cells of the early tubular segments, 
so that the Na
+,K
+-ATPase on the basolateral membrane 
produces an electrochemical gradient for sodium to enter 
the cell from the luminal surface, but in contrast to glu-
cose and amino acids, a hydrogen ion is simultaneously 
secreted into the lumen. Although a very high hydrogen 
ion gradient cannot be achieved, this mechanism is re-
sponsible for the bulk of hydrogen ion secretion, so that 
most bicarbonate reabsorption occurs in the proximal 
tubules. The sodium–bicarbonate cotransporter, located 
on the basolateral membrane of these tubular cells, medi-
ates the transport of the generated bicarbonate into the 
systemic circulation. There may be other hydrogen ion 
secretory mechanisms in the proximal tubules, but they 
do not appear to be quantitatively important.
In the late tubular segments (the late distal tubules and 
the collecting ducts), a completely different mechanism 
for hydrogen ion secretion exists. This is relatively inde-
pendent of tubular sodium content and occurs through 
primary active transport. The intercalated cells (I cells) in 
this part of the nephron have a hydrogen ion-­transporting 
ATPase on their luminal surfaces and, although this ac-
counts for <5% of the total hydrogen ions secreted, it is 
important because it can generate a hydrogen ion gradient 
of almost 1000 to 1. It is this that is responsible for the fi-
nal acidification of urine and dictates the minimum achiev-
able urinary pH of about 4.5 (or maximum hydrogen ion 
concentration of ~32 μmol/L). A chloride–­bicarbonate ex-
changer at the basolateral membrane of the intercalated 
tubular cells is responsible for transporting the bicarbonate 
generated during this process to the systemic circulation.
Isolated abnormalities of tubular function
Glycosuria
Glucose is freely filtered at the glomeruli, but is normally 
then reabsorbed in the proximal tubules so that it is un-
detectable in urine. If plasma glucose concentrations rise 
to greater than ~10 mmol/L or if the glomerular filtration 
Lumen
Tight
junction
Interstitial
fluid
Primary active transport
Na+
Na+
Na+
K+
Na+
Glucose
ADP
ATP
ATP
ATPase
ATPase
ATPase
+
Pi
ADP
+
Pi
ATP
ADP
+
Pi
K+
H+
H+
Secondary active transport
Tubular
cell
FIGURE 9.1  ■  Active transport mechanisms in the renal tubule.
TABLE 9.1  Renal  tubular handling of various plasma constituents
Plasma constituent
Plasma conc.  
(mmol/L)
Filtered
Reabsorbed/  
24 h (mmol)
Secreted
Excreted in  
the urine
Sodium
140
23 800
23 700
–
100
Potassium
4.0
680
650
30
60
Bicarbonate
24
4080
4080
–
0
Urea
4.0
680
320
–
360
Creatinine
0.09
15.3
–
1.0
16.3
Urate
0.3
51
50
4
5
Glucose
4.5
765
765
–
0
Figures are illustrative only, assuming 170 L filtrate is formed and reduced to 1.7 L of urine in an adult on a normal diet. Note, while 
­reabsorption is quantitatively more significant, some substances are secreted into the tubules.
170	
Clinical biochemistry
rate increases (as in pregnancy), then the capacity of the 
proximal tubules to reabsorb filtered glucose is exceeded 
and glycosuria occurs.
Generalized defects in renal tubular function may also 
result in glycosuria (see later), but a small group of peo-
ple appear to have an isolated defect of tubular glucose 
reabsorption.
Hereditary renal glycosuria. Patients with this condi-
tion excrete a variable amount of glucose in their urine at 
normal plasma glucose concentrations. Other aspects of 
carbohydrate metabolism are not affected: glucose toler-
ance and plasma insulin concentrations are normal. The 
condition is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner, 
and two major phenotypes have been identified (types 
A and B), based on the exact changes in the kinetics of 
glucose reabsorption. Hereditary renal glycosuria is rare, 
and is generally recognized to be a benign condition with 
no clinical sequelae.
The reabsorption of glucose in the proximal renal 
tubules is similar to the absorption of glucose in the in-
testine. There is a Na
+,d-glucose cotransporter on the 
luminal cell wall to transport glucose into the cell, with a 
facilitated glucose transporter (GLUT 2) on the basolat-
eral membrane to enable the glucose to exit. The intes-
tinal form of the Na
+,d-glucose cotransporter (SGLT 1) 
and its gene have been well characterized, but, while the 
corresponding renal cotransporter (SGLT 2) is known to 
differ from SGLT 1, its identity in humans is less well 
established. Nevertheless, it is assumed that mutations in 
the gene for SGLT 2 cause hereditary renal glycosuria 
by interfering with the uptake of glucose in the proximal 
tubules.
There is a corresponding condition affecting SGLT 1 
in the gut. This cotransporter is involved in both glucose 
and galactose absorption, and the classic presentation is 
with life-threatening diarrhoea in early infancy due to 
glucose and galactose malabsorption (familial glucose–
galactose malabsorption). There is often an associated 
mild renal glycosuria, although in hereditary renal gly-
cosuria there is no corresponding effect on the gut.
Mutations affecting GLUT 2, which facilitates trans-
port of glucose, galactose and fructose across the basolat-
eral membrane, are another rare cause of renal glycosuria 
(Fanconi–Bickel syndrome).
Amino acidurias
Amino acids are normally freely filtered at the glomeruli 
and then almost entirely reabsorbed in the proximal con-
voluted tubules. There is a maximal capacity to each re-
absorptive mechanism and, in most patients with amino 
aciduria, some extrarenal disorder leads to accumulation 
of amino acid(s) in the plasma, that exceeds the reabsorp-
tive capacity of the tubules, with consequent ‘overflow’ 
amino aciduria. However, as with glycosuria, generalized 
defects in renal tubular function can result in amino acid-
uria, and there are also some isolated defects in the reab-
sorption of particular groups of amino acids.
Cystinuria. Cystinuria is the classic example of an amino 
aciduria due to a defect in renal tubular function, in that 
the amino aciduria occurs at normal or even low plasma 
concentrations of the amino acids involved.
In most patients with cystinuria, there is renal loss 
not only of cystine, but also of the dibasic amino acids 
ornithine, arginine and lysine. There is also an associated 
failure of intestinal absorption of the same amino acids. 
Inspection of their molecular structures (Fig. 9.2) shows 
that each has two amino groups separated by 5–7 bonds, 
which suggests that malfunction of a single membrane 
carrier protein might explain the disorder. However, the 
true explanation is not this simple, since the clearance of 
cystine may exceed the creatinine clearance, suggesting 
secretion of cystine into the tubules and, furthermore, 
since dibasic amino aciduria (e.g. lysinuric protein intol-
erance) or cystinuria can each occasionally occur alone.
The only known clinical manifestation of cystinuria 
is recurrent urinary tract stone formation, the name 
‘cystine’ coming from the original (erroneous) assump-
tion that the source of these stones was the bladder. 
Cystine stones form readily in acidic urine. They are 
yellow-brown in colour and are radio-opaque because 
of their sulphur content, although they are less radio-
dense than calcium-containing stones. There may also 
be some calcium deposition if there is infection second-
ary to the calculi. They tend to occur as staghorn or 
multiple recurrent stones and often require some form 
of surgical intervention or lithotripsy (fragmentation of 
stones by external shock waves). Patients with cystinuria 
also have a higher incidence of calcium oxalate stones 
than the general population. All stone formers should, 
FIGURE 
9.2  ■  Chemical 
struc-
tures of the dibasic amino acids 
involved in cystinuria.
	
9  Renal tubular disorders and renal stone disease	
171
therefore, be screened for cystinuria, preferably by for-
mal amino acid measurement in the urine, as qualita-
tive screening tests are not sufficiently sensitive. The 
intestinal defect appears to cause no clinical problems.
Cystinuria occurs with equal frequency in both sexes, 
although males tend to be more severely affected. It may 
present at any time from the first year of life up to the ninth 
decade, with a peak incidence in the second and third de-
cades. The prevalence of cystinuria varies between racial 
groups and according to whether the figures are taken from 
neonatal amino acid screening programmes or from known 
cystinuric stone formers (immaturity of the renal tubules in 
the first few months of life may lead to some heterozygous 
infants having urinary cystine outputs in the homozygous 
cystinuria range, leading to misclassification). However, the 
worldwide prevalence is estimated to be 1 in 7000, making 
it a relatively common inherited metabolic disorder.
The mode of inheritance is autosomal recessive, al-
though in some families it appears to be incompletely 
recessive, with heterozygotes excreting more urinary cys-
tine, ornithine, arginine and lysine than normal, although 
less than in the homozygous state. In the past, this has led 
to attempts to classify cystinuria into type I (homozygous 
for the fully recessive form) and types II and III (variants 
of the incompletely recessive form), based on combina-
tions of the relative amounts of the amino acids excreted 
in the urine and/or the intestinal uptake of cystine and 
dibasic amino acids. The discovery of the genes involved 
in the recessive and the incompletely recessive forms of 
cystinuria has made this classification clearer, although 
the situation is not yet completely resolved.
The gene involved in type I cystinuria codes for a pro-
tein known as rBAT (a loose acronym for ‘related to the 
b
0,+ amino acid transporter’, with the term b
0,+ signifying 
broad specificity for neutral (0) and dibasic (+) amino ac-
ids). rBAT is a membrane glycoprotein that is one of the 
activating components of a heteromultimeric transporter 
for cystine and dibasic amino acids. The gene for rBAT 
(SLC3A1) is located at 2p16.3-p21, and, to date, more 
than 120 different mutations have been identified in it in 
patients with type I cystinuria.
A second cystinuria locus, accounting for non-type I 
forms of cystinuria, has been identified by linkage analy-
sis at chromosome 19q13.1–13.2. This gene (SLC7A9) 
encodes a protein that acts as the amino acid transporting 
subunit of the membrane complex. More than 95 gene 
mutations have been identified. Most, but not all cases of 
cystinuria can be explained by mutations in SLC3A1 and 
SLC7A9.
Healthy individuals excrete <10 μmol cystine/mmol 
of creatinine (<130 μmol/24 h). Patients with homozy-
gous cystinuria usually excrete >1700 μmol/24 h and may 
excrete up to 5000 μmol/24 h. Heterozygotes may have 
an entirely normal amino acid excretion pattern in the 
urine or may excrete up to 1700 μmol cystine/24 h, in 
which case they may produce stones.
Medical treatment of cystinuria begins with main-
tenance of a high fluid intake throughout both day and 
night and alkalinization of the urine, both being aimed 
at decreasing the chance of precipitation of cystine in 
the renal tract. The solubility of cystine is pH dependent 
with a solubility limit of ~700 μmol/L at pH 7, rising to 
~1500 μmol/L at pH 7.5. Regular monitoring is required 
to ensure that cystine remains well below its solubil-
ity limit throughout the day and, critically, the night. If 
these measures fail, then it may be possible to convert 
the cystine to a more soluble compound, most com-
monly by the use of d-penicillamine. This can form the 
mixed disulphide cysteine-penicillamine (Fig. 9.3), which 
is significantly more soluble than cystine. The aim is to 
keep the daily excretion of free cystine below 2000 μmol. 
Unfortunately, d-penicillamine frequently causes an al-
lergic reaction and can also cause nephrotic syndrome 
and pancytopenia, so careful monitoring is essential. 
Second generation chelating agents include tiopronin 
(α-mercaptopropionylglycine) and captopril, although 
studies on the efficacy of the latter have been incon-
clusive. Small stones may dissolve with careful medical 
management, although frequent surgical intervention is 
required for some patients.
Occasionally, in spite of both medical and surgical 
treatment for stone formation, cystinuria causes suffi-
cient renal damage to result in established renal failure. 
In this case, renal transplantation may be effective, since 
the donor kidney should not be affected by the amino 
acid transport defect and the patient should, therefore, 
remain disease free.
Hartnup disorder. A second example of an amino ac-
iduria due to a true defect in renal tubular function, 
rather than an ‘overflow’ effect, is found in Hartnup 
disorder. This is named after the family in which it 
was first described and is again a defect of both re-
nal and intestinal amino acid transport. The constant 
feature is a failure to reabsorb the neutral amino acids 
(Box 9.1) in the renal tubules, with their consequent 
appearance in the urine. The failure of reabsorption is 
not absolute, as renal clearances of the affected amino 
acids are generally lower than the creatinine clearance. 
Most affected individuals also have increased amounts 
of ­indoles (e.g. indican) in the urine, which originate 
from the bacterial breakdown of unabsorbed trypto-
phan in the gut. Rarely, the renal or intestinal lesions 
may occur alone.
FIGURE  9.3  ■  Chemical struc-
tures of cysteine, cystine and 
cysteine-penicillamine.
172	
Clinical biochemistry
The original description of Hartnup disease included 
a pellagra-like skin rash, transient cerebellar ataxia and 
constant renal amino aciduria. Some affected individu-
als have also shown psychotic behaviour, while others 
have learning disabilities. The pellagra-like rash and its 
response to nicotinamide suggest that the clinical features 
of the disease may be due to failure to absorb tryptophan 
in the intestine and reabsorb it in the renal tubules, lead-
ing to a deficiency of nicotinamide. However, investiga-
tion of siblings of individuals with Hartnup disease and 
the results of neonatal urine amino acid screening pro-
grammes both suggest that the typical amino aciduria 
(Hartnup disorder) may exist without the features of 
Hartnup disease. It would appear that Hartnup disorder 
is an autosomal recessive inherited condition, but that 
this is not expressed clinically without the presence of 
certain other genetic or environmental influences, such 
as poor nutrition. The causative gene, SLC6A19, is lo-
cated on chromosome 5p15.33 and codes for a sodium-
dependent neutral amino acid transporter.
Familial renal iminoglycinuria. A further example of a 
specific abnormality in renal tubular reabsorption causing 
a distinct pattern of amino/imino aciduria occurs in fa-
milial renal iminoglycinuria. The primary genetic defect 
is a mutation in either the SLC36A2 gene, which codes 
for a high affinity glycine, proline and ­hydroxyproline 
transporter, or the SLC36A1 gene, which codes for a low 
affinity transporter. However, the phenotype is variable 
as it may be modified by mutations in at least three other 
genes. Some reabsorption of these amino acids can still 
occur via the transport system that is not affected in any 
individual patient.
The condition, which is benign, is autosomal recessive, 
although some heterozygotes are ‘incomplete’ and have 
hyperglycinuria. In some but not all homozygotes, im-
paired intestinal transport of proline can be demonstrated.
Neonatal screening for amino acidurias suggests that 
familial renal iminoglycinuria occurs in 1 in 15 000 live 
births in a Caucasian population. However, it should be 
appreciated that in healthy neonates, the renal tubular re-
absorption of proline, hydroxyproline and glycine is less 
efficient than in adults; imino aciduria normally disap-
pears by three months and hyperglycinuria by six months 
of age.
Dent disease
Also known as X-linked nephrolithiasis, Dent disease 
is most often caused by a mutation in the gene coding 
for a voltage gated chloride channel (CLC-5) expressed 
predominantly in the proximal renal tubules. However, 
a significant number of patients have a mutation in the 
gene usually associated with the oculocerebrorenal syn-
drome of Lowe, OCRL. Both defects are thought to cause 
failure of the endosomal acidification that is required to 
allow recycling of the proximal tubular membrane recep-
tor, megalin, which mediates protein reabsorption. The 
syndrome is characterized by hypercalciuria, nephrocal-
cinosis, recurrent calcium-containing renal stones, low 
molecular weight proteinuria and chronic kidney disease 
eventually leading to established renal failure. Glycosuria, 
phosphaturia, amino aciduria and rickets may also occur 
in affected males. Carrier females rarely present clinically, 
but often have increased urinary excretion of low mo-
lecular weight proteins. Mutations of the gene encoding 
another voltage gated chloride channel (CLC-Kb) are re-
sponsible for some cases of Bartter syndrome (see p. 57).
Phosphate transport defects
Specific disorders of renal tubular phosphate handling 
can be inherited or acquired. There is reduced proxi-
mal tubular reabsorption of phosphate (in particular, the 
TmP/GFR is reduced, as explained in Chapter 6) and 
hypophosphataemia. The normal response to this would 
be an increase in the 1α-hydroxylation of vitamin D, 
and if this is adequate, the end result would be hyper-
calciuria (with an increased risk of renal stones), but no 
bone disease. If the vitamin D response is inadequate, 
then the result may be bone disease with hypercalciuria 
(e.g. as in hereditary hypophosphataemic rickets with 
hypercalciuria) or bone disease alone (e.g. X-linked hy-
pophosphataemic rickets and oncogenic hypophospha-
taemic osteomalacia). Inherited and acquired forms of 
hypophosphataemic bone disease are discussed further 
in Chapter 31.
The phosphate loss, and other changes in more gener-
alized forms of renal tubular disorder, may also be severe 
enough to cause bone disease (see p. 174).
Renal tubular acidosis
The renal tubular acidoses (RTAs) are a group of hyper-
chloraemic metabolic acidoses that occur secondarily to 
an abnormality in urinary acidification. The plasma bi-
carbonate concentration is low, the plasma chloride raised 
and the anion gap normal, in contrast to the acidosis seen 
with reduction in the glomerular filtration rate in which 
the plasma bicarbonate is low, chloride normal and anion 
gap increased.
BOX 9.1	
The neutral amino acids that 
appear in the urine in excess in 
Hartnup disorder
Excretion of the neutral sulphur containing amino acid 
methionine may also be increased.
Monoamino-monocarboxylic amino acids
•	 Alanine
•	 Serine
•	 Threonine
•	 Valine
•	 Leucine
•	 Isoleucine
•	 Phenylalanine
•	 Tyrosine
•	 Tryptophan
•	 Histidine
Monoamino-dicarboxylic amides
•	 Asparagine
•	 Glutamine
	
9  Renal tubular disorders and renal stone disease	
173
Renal tubular acidoses are classified according to the 
presumed site of the failure of hydrogen ion secretion. 
In proximal (type 2) RTA, there is a failure in bicarbon-
ate reabsorption, while in distal RTA, there is a failure in 
net acid excretion. If failure of hydrogen ion secretion is 
the sole defect in the distal nephron, it is known as classic 
distal (type 1) RTA, whereas if the defect is more general-
ized, causing hyperkalaemia as well as acidosis, it is known 
as generalized distal (type 4) RTA. These conditions are 
described in Chapter 5, but the underlying mechanisms 
are briefly summarized again here, and details of diag-
nostic tests are given in Appendix 9.1. Type 3 RTA is a 
mixture of types 1 and 2 and is very rare. The term was 
originally used to describe a transient condition occur-
ring in infants with immature tubules. However, it is now 
usually applied to a rare inherited deficiency of carbonic 
dehydratase type II, in which infants also have cerebral 
calcification, mental retardation and osteopetrosis (see 
Chapter 31).
Proximal (type 2) renal tubular acidosis. Isolated 
proximal RTA may be autosomal recessive or dominant. 
A mutation in the sodium–bicarbonate cotransporter 
gene (SLC4A4) is responsible for the recessive form; 
the molecular basis for the dominant form is yet to be 
elucidated. The net effect is that bicarbonate reabsorp-
tion is impaired, leading to metabolic acidosis and bi-
carbonaturia, with a decrease in the plasma bicarbonate 
concentration until the filtered load of bicarbonate falls 
to a point at which hydrogen ion secretion is sufficient 
to allow reabsorption of all filtered bicarbonate. Thus, a 
new steady state is established, in which there is a meta-
bolic acidosis with a low plasma bicarbonate concentra-
tion (15–20 mmol/L) but no bicarbonaturia.
Administration of bicarbonate to such patients will 
establish a steady state closer to normal, but quite large 
doses of bicarbonate are required (e.g. 5–15 mmol/kg body 
weight/24 h), since as the plasma bicarbonate rises, so does 
the magnitude of renal bicarbonate loss. Hydrogen ion se-
cretion in the distal tubules is normal and the urine can be 
acidified in response to an acid load.
Proximal RTA may occur as an isolated defect, but is 
more usually part of a generalized defect of proximal tu-
bular function, the Fanconi syndrome (see p. 174).
Distal (type 1) renal tubular acidosis. Decreased ac-
tivity of the apical H
+-ATPase (proton pump) is probably 
the commonest defect in distal RTA and may be the end 
result of a number of different pathological processes. The 
most common of these is Sjögren syndrome, which should 
be excluded in any patient presenting in adulthood. Other 
dysproteinaemic and autoimmune conditions may also 
cause acquired distal RTA, as may chronic hypercalciuria 
with nephrocalcinosis or treatment with drugs such as am-
photericin, lithium and analgesics. Inherited forms (which 
may be autosomal dominant or recessive) include muta-
tions in the genes encoding the H
+-ATPase pump and the 
chloride–bicarbonate exchanger. There is a complex rela-
tionship between distal RTA, nephrocalcinosis and kidney 
stone formation. In some patients, hypercalciuria appears 
to be the primary abnormality, causing interstitial and 
tubular damage with calcium deposition and ­secondary 
RTA. In others, RTA is the primary condition causing 
increased calcium phosphate resorption from bone in an 
attempt to buffer the retained acid; the subsequent hyper-
calciuria is proportional to the severity of the acidosis.
While other distal tubular functions remain unim-
paired, hydrogen ion secretion is reduced so that urinary 
pH cannot be lowered below 5.5. A resultant increase in 
the exchange of potassium for sodium ions in the distal 
tubules causes significant renal potassium loss and the 
condition is usually accompanied by hypokalaemia.
Diagnosis depends on the demonstration of an inap-
propriately high urinary pH (>5.5) during either sponta-
neous acidosis or an acid loading test (see Appendix 9.1). 
Treatment involves potassium supplementation together 
with bicarbonate. Unlike proximal RTA, the dose of bi-
carbonate required is small (e.g. a little over 1 mmol/kg 
body weight/24 h in adults), since there is only a minor 
degree of bicarbonaturia and this does not increase as the 
plasma bicarbonate concentration rises.
Patients with incomplete distal RTA have low urinary 
citrate excretion and urine pH persistently >5.5 but are 
able to maintain their plasma bicarbonate concentrations 
within the reference range, possibly by increasing proxi-
mal tubular ammonium production. They may also have 
hypercalciuria and are at risk of developing osteoporosis, 
nephrocalcinosis and calcium phosphate kidney stones. 
Hypercalciuria may be reversed and the risk of developing 
osteoporosis and kidney stones reduced by alkali therapy, 
which decreases calcium phosphate resorption from bone.
Distal renal tubular acidosis with hyperkalaemia 
(type 4). In type 4 RTA, there is a generalized impairment 
of distal tubular function associated with aldosterone de-
ficiency or resistance, with decreased tubular secretion 
of both hydrogen and potassium ions. A relatively severe 
hyperkalaemia is usually the primary abnormality and 
the accompanying hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis 
is often mild with a plasma bicarbonate concentration 
>16 mmol/L.
The condition may arise because of a lack of miner-
alocorticoid activity (e.g. in adrenal failure), disease of 
the kidney resulting in impaired production of renin 
(hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism, e.g. in diabetic ne-
phropathy) or resistance to the action of mineralocorti-
coids on the distal tubules (e.g. in patients treated with 
spironolactone). Treatment of the condition depends on 
the underlying cause.
Hereditary renal hypouricaemia
This is a rare disorder of the renal tubular handling of 
urate, in which there is a net decrease in reabsorption 
of urate, resulting in hypouricaemia and an increased 
renal urate clearance. Plasma urate concentrations are 
<150 μmol/L in men and <126 μmol/L in women. The 
condition is generally harmless, although some patients 
also have hypercalciuria, and about 25% have a tendency 
to stone formation. It is transmitted in an autosomal re-
cessive manner and heterozygotes tend to have interme-
diate plasma urate concentrations. Mutations have been 
demonstrated in the gene for a urate–anion exchanger, 
which is found on the luminal membrane of proximal 
174	
Clinical biochemistry
tubular cells and which accounts for the majority of urate 
reabsorption in normal kidneys.
Generalized tubular defects  
(Fanconi syndrome)
Generalized renal tubular defects tend to occur together in 
a distinct syndrome known as the renal Fanconi syndrome 
(which should not be confused with Fanconi anaemia, a 
form of congenital aplastic anaemia or Fanconi–Bickel 
syndrome, a rare disorder of carbohydrate metabolism). 
There is a failure in net proximal tubular reabsorption 
of glucose, amino acids, phosphate and bicarbonate, with 
consequent glycosuria, amino aciduria, phosphaturia 
and acidosis, together with the development of vitamin 
D-resistant metabolic bone disease. There may also be 
increased urinary losses of water and other substances, 
for example sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium, 
urate and low molecular weight proteins. The exact 
mechanism by which the Fanconi syndrome occurs is not 
clear and there may be distal, as well as proximal, tubular 
dysfunction.
Causes of the renal Fanconi syndrome may broadly 
be divided into inherited and acquired and are listed in 
Box 9.2. The most common cause of inherited Fanconi 
syndrome in children is cystinosis, an autosomal re-
cessive disorder of cystine transport across lysosomal 
membranes. The gene responsible (CTNS) is located on 
chromosome 17p13 and encodes a lysosomal membrane 
protein, cystinosin. There is accumulation of cystine in 
the lysosomes of most tissues, including the kidneys, 
and in the infantile form of the disease, the Fanconi syn-
drome progresses to cause glomerular damage and renal 
failure during childhood. Cystinosis is usually treated 
with cysteamine, which is concentrated inside the lyso-
somes and reacts with cystine to form both cysteine and a 
cysteine–cysteamine complex. These are able to cross the 
lysosomal membrane via different transporters. When 
administered regularly, cysteamine decreases the cystine 
load in lysosomes, conserves renal function and improves 
growth. The adequacy of treatment can be assessed by 
measuring the cystine content of white blood cells. If re-
nal function becomes significantly impaired, transplanta-
tion is particularly useful, since the transplanted kidney 
does not have the genetic defect.
There is also an adult onset form of cystinosis in which 
there is no Fanconi syndrome or glomerular impairment, 
and an intermediate form that presents during adoles-
cence and does eventually lead to renal failure.
Other inherited metabolic diseases that are associated 
with the Fanconi syndrome are listed in Box 9.2. There 
is also an idiopathic inherited form, but this is a diagno-
sis of exclusion. It is interesting that in inherited meta-
bolic diseases for which there is a specific treatment (e.g. 
avoidance of lactose and galactose in galactosaemia), the 
Fanconi syndrome resolves on treatment, presumably be-
cause of the fall in the concentration of a toxic metabolite.
While the inherited diseases associated with the 
Fanconi syndrome tend to present in childhood, the 
acquired forms tend to occur in adults. These may also 
be reversible if exposure to the causative agent can be 
stopped.
The clinical features of the Fanconi syndrome tend to 
be rather non-specific and include polyuria, polydipsia, 
dehydration, hypokalaemia and acidosis, with impaired 
growth and rickets in children and osteomalacia in adults.
Treatment is primarily directed at the underlying 
cause, but inappropriate renal losses need to be replaced 
(e.g. with fluids, bicarbonate and potassium) and the 
bone disease treated with phosphate replacement and 
vitamin D.
RENAL CALCULI
Introduction
Stone formation in the urinary tract (urolithiasis) has 
been described since ancient times, but in the past, lower 
urinary tract stones, particularly those arising in the blad-
der, appear to have been more frequent, engendering a 
surgical enthusiasm for ‘cutting for stone’. In industrial-
ized, relatively affluent populations, renal stone forma-
tion (nephrolithiasis) has increased in frequency, while 
bladder stone formation has almost disappeared as the 
prevalence of malnutrition and infection have decreased.
However, while the frequency of nephrolithiasis is ac-
knowledged to be increasing in the developed world, pre-
cise incidence and prevalence figures have not been well 
established. Nevertheless, it would appear that as many as 
5% of the population (possibly even more) will have a clin-
ical stone event at some time during their lives. In previous 
decades, stone formation was more frequent in men than 
in women, but in recent years the incidence has become 
almost equal. The ten-year risk of further stone recurrence 
can be as high as 70% after a first episode, so investiga-
tion and treatment, which can reduce this figure to 25%, 
is worthwhile.
The clinical effects of stone formation tend to be simi-
lar whatever the type, but it is apparent that there are a 
number of distinct metabolic derangements that can each 
BOX 9.2	
Some causes of renal Fanconi 
syndrome
Inherited
•	 Idiopathic
•	 Oculocerebrorenal (Lowe) syndrome
•	 Associated with inherited metabolic disease:
•	 Cystinosis
•	 Fructose intolerance
•	 Galactosaemia
•	 Glycogen storage disease type I
•	 Tyrosinaemia
•	 Wilson disease
Acquired
•	 Exogenous toxins
•	 Heavy metals: lead, cadmium, mercury, copper
•	 Drugs (e.g. tetracycline that has been stored for too 
long, gentamicin, ifosfamide, tenofovir)
•	 Paraproteinaemia
•	 Amyloidosis
	
9  Renal tubular disorders and renal stone disease	
175
give rise to stones of a characteristic composition. The 
main types of renal stones are listed in Table 9.2 in ap-
proximate order of frequency of occurrence, and aetio-
logical factors in the formation of each are described in 
detail below.
The classic clinical manifestation of nephrolithia-
sis is renal or ureteric colic. The pain is characteris-
tically severe, requiring opiates for analgesia, and is 
usually accompanied by haematuria. Some stones may 
be discovered incidentally when abdominal X-rays 
are taken for an unrelated reason, and passage of tiny 
stones may cause only minimal discomfort. In general, 
permanent intrinsic renal damage rarely occurs after 
an acute event unless there is superadded infection in 
an obstructed kidney. However, there is an increased 
incidence of chronic kidney disease in patients with 
a history of kidney stones and current UK guidelines 
recommend screening such patients annually with mea-
surement of plasma creatinine and calculation of eGFR 
(see Chapter 7).
Pathogenesis of renal stones
The role of the kidneys in water conservation means that 
it is often necessary to excrete concentrated urine. Since 
some constituents of urine are relatively insoluble in wa-
ter, to the extent that supersaturated solutions form, it is 
not surprising that these constituents sometimes crystal-
lize out to form renal calculi.
Certain factors predispose to this process: chronic 
dehydration, as may occur in hot climates, is one factor. 
Increased urinary excretion of certain constituents (e.g. 
calcium, urate or oxalate) increases the likelihood of su-
persaturation occurring, and alteration of urinary pH may 
adversely affect the solubility of some solutes. For exam-
ple, urate stones are more likely to form in acidic urine, 
whereas alkaline conditions, as may occur with a urinary 
tract infection, make calcium phosphate precipitation 
more likely. There is evidence that specific microorgan-
isms may precipitate early crystallization. Anatomical 
abnormalities of the kidneys, such as medullary sponge 
kidney or pelvi-ureteric junction obstruction, increase 
the risk of stone formation, at least in part because of uri-
nary stasis. There is a 2–3 fold risk of stone formation in 
people with a family history of urolithiasis. Patients who 
are overweight, especially if they have insulin resistance, 
have an increased risk of developing both calcium oxalate 
and uric acid stones, partly because of excretion of excess 
dietary constituents in the urine and partly because of the 
production of persistently acidic urine.
These factors are opposed by the presence in urine of 
inhibitors of crystallization (e.g. magnesium, pyrophos-
phate, citrate and certain glycoproteins), so that crystal 
formation in urine is usually slower than in simple salt 
solutions.
Each of the types of stone listed in Table 9.2 will now 
be considered in more detail.
Calcium stones
Calcium-containing stones form the majority of re-
nal calculi and may consist of calcium oxalate, calcium 
phosphate or a mixture of the two. Hyperoxaluria, with 
or without hypercalciuria, is likely to be involved in the 
formation of pure calcium oxalate stones, whereas pure 
calcium phosphate stones suggest either hypercalciuria or 
persistently alkaline urine.
Hypercalciuria. Hypercalciuria is present in around 30% 
of patients with calcium-containing stones, although the 
exact prevalence depends on the population studied and 
the upper limit accepted for the reference range (of the 
order of 7.5 mmol/24 h for men and 6.25 mmol/24 h for 
women or 0.1 mmol/kg body weight/24 h).
A minority of hypercalciuric stone formers also have 
hypercalcaemia, and it is then important to establish a 
cause for this; it is most likely to be due to primary hyper-
parathyroidism. The treatment is that of the underlying 
cause.
Normocalcaemic hypercalciuria may be divided 
broadly into four groups: skeletal resorption, dietary, ab-
sorptive and renal leak hypercalciuria. Skeletal resorption 
and hence urinary excretion of calcium may be seen in 
patients following prolonged immobilization, Paget dis-
ease of bone or excessive glucocorticoid activity includ-
ing chronic steroid therapy. Pure dietary hypercalciuria is 
rare, but high consumption of dairy products, combined 
calcium and vitamin D supplements or salt all tend to in-
crease urinary calcium excretion.
Increased intestinal absorption of calcium accounts for 
around 50% of subjects with normocalcaemic hypercal-
ciuria. The mechanism is not well understood, but there 
is some evidence for increased end-organ sensitivity to 
vitamin D, resulting in absorption of a greater fraction of 
dietary calcium than in normal subjects. Plasma parathy-
roid hormone (PTH) concentrations may be decreased.
Renal leak hypercalciuria may be seen in renal tubu-
lar acidosis, medullary sponge kidney, chronic loop di-
uretic therapy and proximal tubular syndromes such as 
Dent disease, but is more often idiopathic, accounting 
for 25% of hypercalciuric subjects. Some patients may 
have an unrecognized bone resorption defect; indeed, it 
is not always possible to determine whether the primary 
disorder is of renal or bone origin. Patients may be dif-
ferentiated from those with absorptive hypercalciuria by 
a calcium load test: calcium excretion is high after load-
ing in both groups but remains >0.23 mmol/mmol creati-
nine after fasting in patients with a renal leak of calcium 
(see Appendix 6.1). Plasma PTH is often mildly raised 
in response to the chronic calcium loss, although any in-
crease is more commonly due to vitamin D deficiency. 
Treatment with thiazide-like diuretics reduces both 
TABLE 9.2  The main types of renal stone, in 
­approximate order of frequency of occurrence
Type of stone
Frequency (%)
Predominantly calcium oxalate
60
Uric acid
17
Magnesium ammonium phosphate 
and calcium phosphate (struvite)
12
Predominantly calcium phosphate
10
Cystine
  1
176	
Clinical biochemistry
calcium excretion and plasma PTH concentrations, and 
reduces the risk of osteoporosis.
Treatment of patients with hypercalciuria and/or cal-
cium containing stones includes increasing fluid intake to 
achieve daily urine volumes of 2–3 L, correcting dietary 
factors such as excessive salt, protein, sugar and calorie 
intake, and avoiding combined calcium and vitamin D 
supplements. A low sodium diet enhances both sodium 
and calcium reabsorption in the proximal tubules and so 
decreases urinary excretion (calcium is reabsorbed pas-
sively along the concentration gradient produced by 
active sodium and water reabsorption). Restricting ani-
mal protein reduces the dietary acid load and therefore 
the loss of calcium from bone. Restricting sucrose and 
fructose consumption appears to reduce urinary calcium 
excretion and may help with weight loss, which reduces 
the risk of stone recurrence. Formal calcium restriction 
is no longer recommended owing to the risk of osteo-
porosis as well as to a paradoxical rise in stone risk from 
the increased absorption of free oxalate in the intestine 
(calcium oxalate is poorly absorbed). Subjects should be 
advised to consume a ‘normal’ amount of calcium per 
day of around 1000 mg. However, calcium supplements, 
especially if taken between meals, should be avoided as 
they are associated with an increased risk of stone for-
mation. Thiazide-like diuretics, such as chlortalidone 
or indapamide, specifically reduce renal calcium excre-
tion and are particularly successful in patients with renal 
leak hypercalciuria. Those with absorptive hypercalciuria 
may become refractory to treatment and require an oc-
casional ‘thiazide holiday’. Response to treatment should 
be monitored by measuring urinary calcium excretion. 
Biochemical side-effects, including hypokalaemia, hyper-
uricaemia, hypercalcaemia and hyperglycaemia, are rela-
tively common and should be sought routinely. Potassium 
citrate supplements should be added, especially if the 
urinary citrate excretion is below the mid range and the 
urine pH is regularly <6.5, or if there is hypokalaemia. 
Excessive treatment with potassium citrate, resulting in 
the production of alkaline urine, increases the risk of cal-
cium phosphate stone formation and should be avoided. 
Patients with distal renal tubular acidosis may show a 
sufficient fall in urinary calcium excretion in response to 
potassium citrate alone to avoid treatment with thiazide 
diuretics. This group includes patients with a partial form 
of the disorder in which plasma pH is normal under basal 
conditions, but the urine cannot be acidified when tested 
formally.
Hyperoxaluria. Now that oxalate can be measured reli-
ably in the urine, it has become apparent that hyper-
oxaluria contributes as much, if not more, to calcium 
oxalate stone formation as hypercalciuria. A relatively 
small increase in urinary oxalate excretion above normal 
can have a marked effect on the risk of stone recurrence. 
In most instances, hyperoxaluria results from excessive 
dietary intake or increased intestinal absorption of oxa-
late; the two rare primary hyperoxalurias are described 
below.
The upper reference limit for urinary oxalate ­excretion 
is of the order of 400–500 μmol/24 h. A dietary ­excess 
of oxalate-containing foods can increase excretion to 
700 μmol/24 h or even greater, particularly if the dietary 
calcium content is low.
Increased intestinal absorption of oxalate may occur in 
short bowel syndrome and malabsorption, whatever the 
cause (enteric hyperoxaluria). Unabsorbed fatty acids in 
the gut lumen combine with calcium, reducing the avail-
able calcium for calcium oxalate formation. This leaves 
larger than usual amounts of oxalate in the free form, 
which can be easily absorbed. In addition, exposure of the 
colonic mucosa to substances such as fatty acids and bile 
salts, which have detergent properties, may increase its 
permeability to oxalate and further increase the amount 
absorbed.
Primary hyperoxaluria is a rare inherited metabolic 
disease that must be considered if nephrolithiasis occurs 
during childhood (although a few affected individuals do 
not present until adult life). There is increased synthesis 
of oxalate, with a consequent increase in its urinary excre-
tion, together with that of some other organic acids. The 
pattern of accompanying organic aciduria has allowed 
classification into two types. In type 1 primary hyperoxal-
uria, excessive amounts of glyoxylic and glycolic acids are 
excreted, whereas in the rarer type 2, excretion of these 
acids is normal but that of l-glyceric acid is increased. 
The biochemical defect in type 1 is a deficiency of the 
peroxisomal enzyme alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase. 
In type 2, the defect is in a cytosolic enzyme, d-glycerate 
dehydrogenase/glyoxylate reductase. The inheritance of 
both types is autosomal recessive. In type 1, the 24 h ex-
cretion of oxalate is of the order of 1.5–3 mmol; it may 
be lower in type 2, which may have a less severe clini-
cal course. Besides renal stone formation, there is also a 
tubulointerstitial nephropathy that progresses to chronic 
kidney disease. Plasma oxalate concentrations begin to 
rise as renal clearance decreases, eventually leading to 
widespread tissue deposition of oxalate (e.g. in myocar-
dium, retinae and synovial membranes). However, the 
condition appears to exhibit marked clinical and bio-
chemical heterogeneity.
Other causes of hyperoxaluria include ingestion of 
ethylene glycol, which is rapidly converted to glycolate 
and can lead to calcium oxalate crystals forming in the re-
nal tubules, excessive ingestion of vitamin C, which may 
lead to increased oxalate formation in some individuals, 
and chronic Aspergillus infection. Pyridoxine is a cofac-
tor for the alanine:glyoxylate aminotransferase enzyme, 
and deficiency results in mild hyperoxaluria that responds 
to physiological replacement doses. A syndrome of ‘mild 
metabolic hyperoxaluria’ has also been described in adults 
that responds to pharmacological doses of pyridoxine.
Treatment of calcium oxalate stone formers includes 
increased fluid intake, dietary restriction of oxalate 
(Box 9.3) and oral potassium citrate if urine citrate excre-
tion is below mid range or the pH is consistently <6.5. 
If there is no hypercalciuria, oral calcium supplements 
can be taken at mealtimes to decrease intestinal oxalate 
absorption. The starting dose is 500 mg equivalent of 
calcium per day, which may be increased to 10 g/day in 
patients with severe malabsorption and should be titrated 
against urine calcium and oxalate excretion. Pyridoxine 
reduces urinary oxalate excretion in some individuals: 
the starting dose should be 10 mg/day, increasing to a 
	
9  Renal tubular disorders and renal stone disease	
177
maximum of 500 mg. Cholestyramine can be used as a 
last resort to bind intestinal oxalate, but it is often poorly 
tolerated.
Other factors in calcium stone formation. Although 
uric acid can itself form renal stones (see below), hyperuri-
cosuria may also contribute to calcium stone formation. 
This may be through heterogeneous nucleation following 
uric acid crystallization or through other mechanisms, 
and this remains a controversial area. Dietary restriction 
of proteins and purines and/or the use of allopurinol may 
correct hyperuricosuria and reduce the risk of recurrence.
Citrate is a recognized inhibitor of calcium stone for-
mation, and some stone formers have low urinary citrate 
concentrations as the only biochemical abnormality. This 
is particularly so in patients with distal renal tubular aci-
dosis, who are already at increased risk of calcium phos-
phate stone formation because of failure to acidify the 
urine adequately. Potassium citrate supplementation is 
effective but should be used cautiously in patients with re-
nal impairment or hyperkalaemia. Sodium citrate should 
be avoided as it can increase urinary calcium excretion.
Magnesium is also a recognized stone inhibitor. 
Although magnesium supplementation has not been 
shown to reduce stone risk, it may be worth trying if defi-
nite hypomagnesuria is present.
Normal urine also contains a variety of protein-based 
inhibitors of stone formation, and it may well be that defi-
ciencies or defects in these will be found to be the cause of 
some types of stone in the future. For example, a genetic 
variant of uromodulin (Tamm–Horsfall glycoprotein) has 
been found that has stone-promoting properties, whereas 
the normal type is thought to inhibit stone formation.
Infection-related stones
Infection-related (triple phosphate) stones are composed 
predominantly of magnesium ammonium phosphate 
(struvite), with variable amounts of calcium phosphate as 
carbonate–apatite. They form in the presence of high uri-
nary concentrations of ammonia, bicarbonate and carbon-
ate, which essentially means that they only form when the 
urine is infected with urea-splitting bacteria (e.g. Proteus, 
Klebsiella and Pseudomonas spp.). For this reason, and in 
contrast to other types of stones, they occur more fre-
quently in women and in other people with a predisposi-
tion to urinary tract infection, such as in those with an 
indwelling catheter or a spinal injury. They may also oc-
cur occasionally in other stone formers. The clinical pre-
sentation is often insidious as they tend to form staghorn 
calculi that may cause silent deterioration of renal func-
tion. Treatment includes correcting any underlying cause 
if possible, and rapid access to antibiotics appropriate to 
the known sensitivity of previously cultured organisms. 
Patients can keep a supply of antibiotics at home or even 
take continuous prophylaxis. Complete sterilization of the 
urine is possible only if stones are eradicated.
Uric acid stones
Hyperuricaemia and gout are discussed in Chapter 32. In 
healthy people, the amount of uric acid excreted in the 
urine depends on, among other things, the purine con-
tent of the diet. This makes the definition of a reference 
range rather difficult, particularly since even at ‘normal’ 
excretion rates of 3.6–4.8 mmol/24 h, the urine is super-
saturated with uric acid and yet most people do not form 
uric acid stones. Stones may form in patients with hyper-
uricaemia from any cause, as well as in those with renal 
hypouricaemia due to an isolated genetic defect or as part 
of a Fanconi syndrome.
Most patients with uric acid stones have normal 
plasma urate concentrations and urinary urate excretion, 
but produce concentrated urine with consistently low pH 
(<5.5). Patients with an ileostomy are at particularly high 
risk owing to bicarbonate and water loss from the stoma. 
The solubility of urate decreases sharply below its iso-
electric point (pI) of 5.75. This offers a useful therapeutic 
intervention, in that if alkali is used to maintain the urine 
pH at 6.5–7.0, stones can be redissolved and further for-
mation prevented even if there is a degree of hyperuricos-
uria. More pronounced alkalinization of the urine should 
be avoided, as it increases the risk of calcium phosphate 
deposition. Well-motivated subjects may titrate their 
dose of alkali (usually potassium citrate) by testing their 
own urine with pH paper. Patients with severe hyperuri-
cosuria may need allopurinol to prevent stone formation 
and should be advised to restrict dietary purine intake.
Cystine stones
These have already been discussed in the section on cys-
tinuria, above.
Miscellaneous rarities
Renal stones submitted for analysis occasionally may not 
fall into one of the categories discussed above. Some may 
be entirely unrelated to the renal tract (factitious disor-
ders), whereas others may be from the renal tract but 
not be true stones (e.g. blood clots, sloughed papillae, 
encrusted sutures). However, there are a few other inher-
ited metabolic diseases that do result in the formation of 
stones of unusual composition.
In hereditary xanthinuria, there is a deficiency in xan-
thine oxidase, with the consequent replacement of uric 
acid in the urine by xanthine and hypoxanthine. In about 
two-thirds of affected people this remains an asymptom-
atic metabolic abnormality, usually detected because of 
BOX 9.3	
Foods rich in available oxalate
•	 Tea (especially black)
•	 Ovaltine
•	 Drinks rich in vitamin C (converted to oxalate)
•	 Spinach
•	 Rhubarb
•	 Nuts
•	 Strawberries
•	 Raspberries
•	 Chocolate
•	 Pulses
•	 Beetroot
178	
Clinical biochemistry
very low plasma urate concentrations, but in the remain-
ing one-third xanthine stones form in the renal tract. 
There may also be associated myopathy or arthritis.
An even rarer subtype of xanthinuria has been de-
scribed, in which there is deficiency of xanthine oxidase 
together with sulphite oxidase, but here the main clinical 
concern is the neurological involvement.
Xanthine stones have also been described in patients 
with normal plasma urate concentrations who clearly do 
not have xanthine oxidase deficiency. The cause of these 
is unknown.
Another rare inherited disorder of purine metabolism 
associated with renal stone formation is adenine phospho-
ribosyl transferase (APRT) deficiency. This enzyme is in-
volved in the salvage pathway for the purine base adenine, 
and deficiency results in increased urinary excretion of 
2,8-dihydroxyadenine. This leads to stone formation in 
most homozygotes, although up to 15% remain clinically 
stone free. It is worth noting that many of the chemical 
tests used for uric acid also give a positive reaction with 
2,8-dihydroxyadenine. In children, the finding of uric 
acid stones using chemical testing should, therefore, be 
further investigated using a more specific technique.
Very rarely, stones may be composed entirely of gly-
coprotein matrix or extraneous compounds such as tri-
amterene, silicate or indinavir, all of which are excreted 
by the kidney.
Investigation of stone formers
All stone formers should have at least a minimum basic 
screen including serum creatinine, potassium, bicarbon-
ate, urate and calcium with a 24  h urine collection for 
measurement of volume, calcium and oxalate. Evaluation 
should be at least six weeks after surgery or lithotripsy to 
avoid contamination of urine. Patients who have recur-
rent stones, a strong family history or who present before 
the age of 25 should have more extensive investigation as 
outlined in Box 9.4. The use of acid-containing bottles 
for urine collection is controversial because of patient 
safety concerns, but there is a risk of calcium oxalate and 
phosphate precipitation before analysis if the sample is 
not adequately acidified. Crystals are very difficult to re-
dissolve, even if the urine collection is acidified on re-
ceipt in the laboratory. Accurate urate estimation requires 
a non-acidified collection.
There is a marked biological variation in calcium and 
oxalate excretion, partly owing to diet, so at least two esti-
mations separated by a week should be requested before any 
treatment is started. Testing a spot urine for albumin will 
detect most patients with proximal tubular disorders, and 
can be confirmed by low molecular weight protein estima-
tion. Urinary albumin will also be raised if there is intrinsic 
kidney damage or if the patient has active stone disease.
Analysis of available stones can be highly informative, 
although not all practitioners in the field would agree. 
External quality assurance surveys in the UK dem-
onstrate that stone analysis is not generally well done, 
especially if the method used is qualitative. Infrared 
spectroscopy is the gold standard, but if this is not avail-
able, quantitative chemical techniques are adequate. 
Knowledge of a stone’s constituent(s) obviously directs 
further biochemical investigation and monitoring. It is 
also important to continue to analyse the stones if there 
is recurrence – there may be changes in the constituents 
that necessitate a change in management.
Treatment
Treatment of specific stone types has been covered in the 
relevant sections. All patients will also benefit from gen-
eral advice about diet, including those with no identifiable 
risk factors. Adequate fluid intake is the most important, 
aiming to achieve daily urine volumes of at least two but 
preferably three litres. Periods of dehydration, such as 
during sporting activities, should be avoided. Most pa-
tients can be taught to increase fluid intake to maintain a 
pale, straw-coloured urine. Reduction of salt, refined car-
bohydrate and animal protein intake has been shown to 
have a much greater effect on stone risk than calcium re-
striction. In fact, the population quartile with the lowest 
calcium intake has a higher risk of stone formation than 
the quartile with the highest intake, owing to reciprocal 
hyperoxaluria. Calcium restriction is therefore no longer 
recommended. Reducing the intake of oxalate (Box 9.3) 
will contribute to lowering of the calcium oxalate prod-
uct in the urine. However, in otherwise healthy people, 
over 80% of urinary oxalate is produced endogenously. 
Tea is particularly rich in oxalate, especially if taken with-
out milk (calcium precipitates the oxalate), and should be 
avoided. Citrate excretion by the kidney may be enhanced 
by oral potassium citrate supplements, orange juice or 
bicarbonate-rich mineral water. Urinary tract infections 
BOX 9.4	
Biochemical investigations in stone 
formers
Plasma
•	 Sodium and potassium
•	 Creatinine
•	 Bicarbonate
•	 Calcium and albumin
•	 Phosphate
•	 Urate
•	 PTH (if hypercalcaemic)
Spot urine
•	 pH (must be very fresh)
•	 Microbiology (if infection suspected)
•	 Amino acids
•	 Albumin
24 h urine*
•	 Volume – [>2.5 L]
•	 Calcium (preferably acidified) – [<6 mmol/24 h females, 
<7 mmol/24 h males]
•	 Oxalate (preferably acidified) – [<400 μmol/24 h]
•	 Urate (non-acidified) – [<4 mmol/24 h]
•	 Citrate – [>3 mmol/24 h]
•	 Sodium – [<150 mmol/24 h]
•	 Urea – [<400 mmol/24 h]
•	 Magnesium – [>3 mmol/24 h]
•	 Creatinine – to check adequacy of collection
*Treatment target values for 24 h urine.
	
9  Renal tubular disorders and renal stone disease	
179
should be treated promptly and adequately: laboratory 
confirmation of bacterial eradication is recommended. 
Long-term prophylaxis with antibiotics may be required.
CONCLUSION
Primary disorders of the renal tubules are not common, 
but biochemical investigations are important in both di-
agnosing and monitoring them.
The pathogenesis of renal stone formation is still not 
fully understood, but enough is known for a logical ap-
proach to be taken in the biochemical investigation of 
stone formers. This is something that probably has not 
been uniformly well done in the past.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank Stephen K. Bangert who co- 
authored this chapter for previous editions of the book.
Further reading
Faerber GJ. Pediatric urolithiasis. Curr Opin Urol 2001;11:385–9. 
Detailed review of clinical research in children.
Johri N, Cooper B, Robertson W et al. An update and practical guide 
to renal stone management. Nephron Clin Pract 2010;116:c159–71. 
A useful recent review with extensive references.
Pak CYC. Nephrolithiasis. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am 
2002;31(4). 
The whole volume for this month is devoted to reviews on kidney stones, 
including childhood stones.
Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WS et  al. editors. The metabolic and 
molecular bases of inherited disease. 8th ed New York: McGraw-
Hill; 2001. 
As always, the ultimate reference work for the inherited metabolic 
diseases. There is also a regularly updated online version available.
Unwin RJ, Capasso G. The renal tubular acidoses. J R Soc Med 
2001;94:221–5. 
An easy to understand review of the physiology, pathology, diagnosis and 
management of the renal tubular acidoses.
APPENDIX 9.1 DIAGNOSIS OF RENAL  
TUBULAR ACIDOSIS
A variety of provocative tests of urinary acidification have 
been used in the investigation of RTAs, but whether these can 
firmly diagnose the type of defect remains to be established.
In general, hyperchloraemic metabolic acidosis that 
is not explained by bicarbonate loss from the intestinal 
tract should raise the suspicion of a urinary acidification 
defect. The plasma potassium may give a clue as to the 
type (high in type 4, low in types 1 and 2). The presence 
of other features of the renal Fanconi syndrome suggests 
type 2 RTA. The amount of bicarbonate required to cor-
rect the acidosis also gives an indication of the type of 
RTA (type 1 responding most readily and type 2 least 
readily). However, it may be necessary to confirm the di-
agnosis by using one of the following two tests:
Urinary acidification test
This can be used to confirm the diagnosis of distal RTA. 
The test is not necessary if the pH of a urine specimen 
collected after an overnight fast is <5.5 or if it is >5.5 in a 
patient confirmed to be acidotic in the resting state. If this 
is not the case, the patient is given ammonium chloride 
at a dose of 100 mg/kg body weight. Special formulations 
are available to minimize gastrointestinal side-effects. 
Urinary pH is then measured on fresh urine samples at 
hourly intervals for 8 h.
In normal subjects, urinary pH should fall to <5.5 in at 
least one sample. In distal renal tubular acidosis this does 
not occur and urinary pH usually remains >6.5.
Ammonium chloride should not be used in patients 
with liver disease, in whom calcium chloride may be 
used as an alternative acidifying agent (1 mmol/kg body 
weight). Ammonium chloride is unpleasant to take and 
alternative tests have been sought, for example the 
fludrocortisone–furosemide test. The principle of this 
latter test is to increase sodium delivery to the distal 
renal tubules at a time that sodium reabsorption and, 
therefore, hydrogen ion excretion is maximally stimu-
lated by a mineralocorticoid. One mg of fludrocorti-
sone is given orally an hour before furosemide 40 mg, 
also orally. Urine samples are collected every 30 min 
for up to 6 h or until a urine pH <5.5 is achieved. 
However, both false positives and false negatives can 
occur and ammonium chloride loading remains the de-
finitive test.
Fractional excretion of bicarbonate
This test can be used to confirm the diagnosis of proximal 
RTA, as long as the patient’s plasma bicarbonate is main-
tained above 20 mmol/L.
Plasma and urine samples are obtained and creatinine 
and bicarbonate concentrations measured in each. The 
fractional excretion of bicarbonate is then calculated:
urine[bicarbonate] plasma[bicarbonate]
urine[creatinine] pl
/
/
asma[creatinine]
×1 0
0 %
In patients with proximal RTA, the fractional excre-
tion is >10–15%, whereas in most patients with distal 
RTA it is <10%.
180
C H A P T E R  1 0
Clinical biochemistry 
of nutrition
Ruth M. Ayling
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  180
NUTRITIONAL REQUIREMENTS  180
The ‘correct’ intake  180
Energy  181
Protein  183
Micronutrients  184
Vitamins  184
Fibre  192
ASSESSMENT OF NUTRITIONAL STATUS  192
General  192
Laboratory-based assessment of individual 
nutrients  195
CONCLUSION  199
INTRODUCTION
Food is essential for human life. At the extremes, too 
little leads to starvation and too much leads to obesity, 
each with its associated effects on morbidity and mor-
tality. Between these extremes, different people across 
the world follow apparently very different diets with no 
obvious resulting differences in their day-to-day health. 
It is apparent that in the long term the composition of 
the diet has an effect on the incidence of certain diseases, 
for example ischaemic heart disease and certain types of 
cancer, but often these associations are difficult to tease 
out because of the many confounding factors involved. 
However, this does not prevent very firm opinions being 
formulated and held about what is and what is not ‘good 
nutrition’, based on a variety of influences from basic sci-
ence to religion.
Biochemistry clearly has a role in establishing the way 
in which the body uses various nutrients and has been 
important in defining certain deficiency states. Clinical 
biochemistry is still important in diagnosing deficien-
cies of certain specific nutrients, but whether there is 
a good biochemical marker of overall nutritional status 
is less clear. This chapter begins with a consideration 
of the various nutrients, including the effects of their 
deficiency or excess, and then discusses nutritional as-
sessment. The following chapter discusses nutritional 
disorders and their management, both from the point of 
view of nutrition as an aetiological factor in disease, and 
disorders that are not primarily nutritional but where di-
etary modification or nutritional support may be impor-
tant in treatment.
NUTRITIONAL REQUIREMENTS
The ‘correct’ intake
Part of the explanation of the fact that apparently very dif-
ferent diets can sustain life equally well is the concept that 
individual foodstuffs actually comprise different combi-
nations of certain basic nutrients, and that it is the supply 
of these basic nutrients that is important rather than their 
origin. However, even when individual nutrients are consid-
ered, the definition of the ‘correct’ intake is problematical 
since this may be taken, for example, to be any of the fol-
lowing: the intake that avoids clinical signs of deficiency; the 
intake that maintains a given circulating concentration or 
tissue content of the nutrient; the intake that cures symp-
toms or signs of clinical deficiency; the intake that maintains 
a balance between intake and consumption or loss from the 
body over a defined period, or any one of a variety of other 
definitions. Even if a suitable measure can be determined for 
a specific nutrient, there are further problems in setting the 
absolute figure, since within a population, requirements will 
vary between individuals (owing, for example to differences 
in age, ­gender size and body composition) and even in an 
individual, requirements may vary in the short term (owing, 
for example to pregnancy, illness or environmental stress).
It is thus difficult to accurately estimate average re-
quirements for a nutrient, and most attempts to make 
recommendations about intakes have depended on set-
ting levels where most of the population will not be defi-
cient, although it is also possible to define intakes below 
which most of a population will develop deficiency, and in 
some cases intakes that are high enough to be toxic.
	
10  Clinical biochemistry of nutrition	
181
These points are covered in more detail in some of 
the texts listed under Further reading, below, and no at-
tempt will be made here to define ideal intakes in abso-
lute terms. Some of the terms used to describe nutrient 
requirements are defined in Table 10.1.
Energy
The body uses energy in the maintenance of metabolic 
processes, in physical activity and in growth. In the rest-
ing individual, energy-requiring processes include the 
active pumping of ions across cell membranes, thermo-
regulation, cell division and basal function of all of the 
body’s systems. Resting energy expenditure appears to 
alter with energy intake to some extent. Physical activity, 
particularly if vigorous, can increase energy expenditure 
markedly, although such activity is not usually sustained 
for long enough to make the increase substantial when 
measured over a 24 h period. The laying down of new 
tissues represents an investment of energy, so it is not sur-
prising that energy requirements, expressed in terms of 
body weight, are highest in infants and young children, 
with a gradual decline from the third decade into old age.
Thus, the energy requirement of an individual var-
ies with body size and composition, gender, age, nutri-
tional status and climate. In women, energy expenditure 
is increased during pregnancy and lactation, and in any 
individual, illness or response to trauma (e.g. systemic in-
fection, burns) may cause a considerable increase.
Energy expenditure and energy intake do not always 
rise and fall in parallel. A sustained deficiency in energy 
intake generally leads to consumption of body stores of 
energy, including protein as well as glycogen and fat. 
Excessive energy intake (if sustained) results in obesity. 
Both of these conditions are considered further in the 
next chapter.
Dietary energy is mainly obtained from a combina-
tion of fat and carbohydrate. In a Western diet, each may 
account for 40–50% of total energy intake, although in 
developing countries the proportion from carbohydrate 
tends to be higher and that from fat, lower. Although 
dietary protein is generally thought of as a source of 
materials (amino acids) for endogenous protein pro-
duction, it may also be used for energy production, for 
example if protein intake is adequate but non-protein 
energy intake is low. Ethanol also has to be considered 
as a significant energy source in certain populations; for 
example, in the UK, it forms 7% of average energy in-
take. (Interestingly, at higher ethanol intakes – 25–35% 
of dietary energy – ethanol appears not to be completely 
utilized as a source of energy, although the reason for this 
is not clear.)
Carbohydrate
Dietary carbohydrate provides 4.1 kcal/g and most is 
­derived from sugars and starch. The sugars are mainly the 
monosaccharides glucose, fructose and galactose, and the 
disaccharides sucrose, lactose and maltose. Dietary sugars 
can be divided into those which are present in intact cells, 
such as in whole fruit (intrinsic sugars), and those which 
are free and readily absorbed as a result of having been 
added to food, usually as sucrose (extrinsic sugars). Milk 
sugars are usually considered as intrinsic. A high intake of 
extrinsic sugars is associated with an increased prevalence 
of dental caries. Sugar derivatives, such as the sugar alco-
hols sorbitol and xylitol, can be partially digested and can 
provide 2.4 kcal/g.
In the UK, it is recommended that in the adult, 
­40–50% of energy intake should be provided by carbo-
hydrate, but non-milk extrinsic sugars should not exceed 
11% of energy intake. There is considerable debate about 
whether a high intake of non-milk extrinsic sugars may 
have harmful effects in addition to the increased risk of 
dental caries. If such an intake results in an increased en-
ergy intake, then obesity is likely to be a problem, but in 
any case, ingestion of large amounts of extrinsic sugars 
can lead to raised plasma glucose, insulin and lipid con-
centrations, all of which are potentially harmful.
Large amounts of starch are not harmful: indeed, in 
developing countries, starch may form 75–80% of the 
total energy intake. Starches are α-glucan polysaccha-
rides, of which there are two major forms, amylose and 
amylopectin (see Fig. 10.1). They are partially resistant to 
TABLE 10.1  Definitions of terms used in describing nutrient requirements
Abbreviation
Term
Definition
DRV
Dietary reference value
General term that includes all those listed and some more pragmatic 
approaches
RDI
Recommended daily intake
Average intakes that should meet the needs of almost all members 
of a population. In the UK, these are based on the Department of 
Health and Social Security publications: Recommended intakes 
of nutrients for the UK and Recommended daily amounts of food 
energy and nutrients for groups of people in the UK
RDA
Recommended daily amount
EAR
Estimated average requirement
Mean requirement for a population: about half will need more and 
half less
RNI
Reference nutrient intake
Intakes two standard deviations above (RNI) and below (LRNI) the 
EAR for a population. Assuming individual requirements are 
normally distributed, these limits should define requirements for 
95% of the population
LRNI
Lower reference nutrient intake
Adapted from Department of Health 1991.
182	
Clinical biochemistry
hydrolysis during digestion and are thus not totally avail-
able as an energy source. Certain other carbohydrates, 
that are not energy sources, but form part of ‘dietary fi-
bre’, are considered later.
A deficiency in dietary carbohydrate will either lead 
to energy deficiency or result in potentially harmful 
amounts of other energy sources being required in the 
diet if energy intake is to be maintained. However, cer-
tain tissues have an obligatory requirement for glucose as 
an energy substrate (e.g. brain and nervous system (in the 
short term), red blood cells) and, while this need can be 
met by gluconeogenesis, some carbohydrate is necessary 
in the diet if ketosis is to be avoided.
Fat
The term ‘fat’ includes a range of substances, including 
triacylglycerols (triglycerides), phospholipids and sterols 
(e.g. cholesterol). Triacylglycerols are the most common 
storage fats and are thus the most important fatty energy 
source in foods. They are a relatively ‘concentrated’ en-
ergy source, with a higher energy content per unit weight 
(9.3 kcal/g) than carbohydrate (4.1 kcal/g). Although all 
triacylglycerols can act in this way, there may be im-
portant long-term health differences between them, de-
pendent on the structure of the fatty acid residues they 
contain. The main differences are in the length of the 
carbon chain, the presence (and number) of any unsatu-
rated bonds and, if such bonds are present, the positional 
and geometric isomers present. Some examples of these 
differences are illustrated in Figure 10.2. The effects of 
excessive intake of triglycerides are discussed further in 
Chapter 11, and the differences in absorption and metab-
olism between long chain and medium chain triglycerides 
in Chapter 12.
Dietary fat deficiency does not generally seem to be a 
problem, as most fats necessary to the body can be endog-
enously synthesized when a high proportion of total en-
ergy intake is supplied by carbohydrate. However, there 
are certain fatty acids that appear to be essential, at least 
in small amounts. These are linoleic acid (C18:2, ω-6) (for 
nomenclature, see Fig. 10.2) and α-linolenic acid (C18:3, 
ω-3). They are important components of phospholipids, 
in which they help to maintain the function of cellular 
and subcellular membranes. They are also involved in 
the regulation of cholesterol transport, breakdown and 
excretion. They are the precursors of arachidonic (C20:4, 
ω-6), eicosapentaenoic (C20:5, ω-3) and docosahexaenoic 
(C22:6, ω-3) acids and are thus also important in the syn-
thesis of prostaglandins, thromboxanes and leukotrienes. 
These three longer chain fatty acids are not strictly essen-
tial fatty acids (EFAs), but may become conditionally so 
in EFA deficiency. Adequate dietary supply of the longer 
chain fatty acids is probably also important during rapid 
Part of an amylose molecule
O
O
O
O
O
O
H
OH
H
H
H
H
CH2OH
OH
H
OH
H
H
H
H
CH2OH
OH
H
OH
H
H
H
H
OH
H
OH
H
H
H
H
CH2OH
OH
O
O
CH2
O
Part of an amylopectin molecule
CH2OH
CH2OH
CH2OH
α – 1, 4 bond
α – 1, 6 bond
H
H
H
H
H
O
H
O
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
H
H
H
O
OH
OH
H
H
H
H
CH2OH
H
H
H
H
O
O
OH
OH
H
CH2OH
H
H
H
H
H
O
O
O
OH
OH
H
H
CH2OH
CH2OH
H
H
H
H
H
O
O
O
O
O
OH
OH
OH
OH
H
H
H
H
H
FIGURE 10.1  ■  Molecular structure of starches. Amylose is a straight chain glucose polymer with a molecular weight of 100  000 Da 
or more and amylopectin is a branched chain glucose polymer with a molecular weight of over 1 million Da.
	
10  Clinical biochemistry of nutrition	
183
brain growth in infancy, particularly in fast-growing pre-
mature infants.
The clinical effects of EFA deficiency include derma-
titis, alopecia and fatty liver, but these are only seen when 
EFAs provide less than 1–2% of total dietary energy in-
take. In patients receiving long-term fat-free parenteral 
nutrition, cutaneous application of small amounts of ap-
propriate oils has alleviated biochemical EFA deficiency.
Protein
Proteins have a key structural and functional role in vir-
tually all bodily processes, and a supply of appropriate 
amino acids is necessary during normal turnover, with 
additional amounts if extra protein is being formed, for 
example during growth, pregnancy or lactation. This 
supply generally comes from dietary protein, of ei-
ther animal or vegetable origin, but the actual amount 
of protein required depends on its amino acid content. 
Human protein contains 20 amino acids (Box 10.1), of 
which nine are recognized to be essential (or ‘indispens-
able’) in adults – the remaining 11 can be synthesized en-
dogenously if the food protein is deficient in these but 
contains sufficient essential amino acids. Some amino 
acids, for example cysteine and glutamine, whilst not 
normally essential, may become so in conditions such as 
severe illness, trauma or burns, when requirements ex-
ceed the body’s ability to synthesize them. In children, 
due to the increased demands of growth, the threshold 
for an amino acid to become conditionally essential is 
lower. Only l-amino acids are incorporated into human 
proteins.
Some proteins, particularly those derived from ani-
mal sources such as eggs, milk, fish and meat, contain 
all the essential amino acids in sufficient amounts for 
protein synthesis and are said to be complete, or of 
high quality. Foods lacking one or more amino acids 
are termed incomplete proteins; these are often from 
plant sources such as pulses. In diets in which plant 
foods are the main source of protein, combining differ-
ent types of food in appropriate quantities is required in 
order to obtain all the essential amino acids. However, 
the amino acid profile of dietary proteins does not 
completely predict the amounts of these amino acids 
that will be available for protein synthesis after diges-
tion and absorption: some of them may be biologically 
­unavailable. Lysine is particularly important in this re-
gard, as its supply in many dietary proteins is relatively 
low in comparison to nutritional requirements. It be-
comes unavailable if its ε-amino group reacts with an-
other molecule, because ε-amino bonds are not cleaved 
by digestive enzymes. Such bonds may form with other 
amino acids (e.g. the carboxyl side chains of glutamic or 
aspartic acids) or with reducing sugars (during cooking 
or storage of foods).
Deficiency of protein generally occurs as part of more 
generalized malnutrition and is discussed later. Excessive 
protein intake in renal disease accelerates deterioration 
in renal function (see Chapter 7) and it is possible that it 
may have effects in healthy people, for example on renal 
function and on bone mineral density.
SATURATED FATTY ACIDS
CH3 (CH2)14 COOH
Palmitic (hexadecanoic) acid (C16:0)
CH3 (CH2)16 COOH
Stearic (octadecanoic) acid (C18:0)
MONOUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS
CH3 (CH2)5 CH=CH(CH2)7 COOH
Palmitoleic (∆9 hexadecenoic) acid (C16:1)
CH3 (CH2)7 CH=CH(CH2)7 COOH
Oleic (∆9 octadecenoic) acid (C18:1)
POLYUNSATURATED FATTY ACIDS
ω-6
CH3 (CH2)4 CH=CHCH2 CH=CH(CH2)7 COOH
Linoleic (∆9,12 octadecadienoic) acid (C18:2)
CH3 CH2 CH=CHCH2CH=CHCH2 CH=CH(CH2)7 COOH
α linoleic (∆9,12,15 octadecatrienoic) acid (C18:3)
CH3 (CH2)4 CH=CHCH2 CH=CHCH2 CH=CHCH2 CH=CH(CH2)3COOH
Arachidonic (∆5,8,11,14 eicosatetraenoic) acid (C20:4)
ω-6
ω-3
FIGURE 10.2  ■  Molecular structure of some fatty acids. The sys-
tematic name (in brackets) indicates the number of carbon atoms 
in the chain (e.g. octadeca-  =  18) and the presence and number 
of any double bonds (e.g. -anoic  =  0, -enoic  =  1, -dienoic  =  2, -tri-
enoic  =  3 etc.). This is sometimes abbreviated to (Cx:y), x and 
y indicating the numbers of carbon atoms and double bonds 
respectively. The numbers following the Δ symbol in the sys-
tematic names indicate the positions of the double bonds, for 
example, Δ
9 indicates a double bond between carbons 9 and 10, 
counting the carboxylic acid carbon as 1. An alternative system 
counts from the methyl carbon to the first double bond (e.g. ω-3). 
Most double bonds in naturally occurring unsaturated fatty 
acids are in the cis configuration, although industrial processing 
of vegetable oils to produce saturated fatty acids (hydrogena-
tion) can also cause isomerization to the trans position.
BOX 10.1	
Essential and non-essential  
α-amino acids found in human 
proteins
Designations can change under certain circumstances, for 
example phenylalanine and methionine are necessary for the 
synthesis of tyrosine and cysteine, respectively; if either phe-
nylalanine or methionine is in short supply, then each of the 
other two can become ‘conditionally’ essential. Other amino 
acids (e.g. ornithine, citrulline, taurine) occur in the body, 
but are not found in proteins.
Essential amino acids
Non-essential amino  
acids
Histidine
Isoleucine
Leucine
Lysine
Methionine
Phenylalanine
Threonine
Tryptophan
Valine
Alanine
Arginine
Asparagine
Aspartic acid
Cysteine
Glutamic acid
Glutamine
Glycine
Proline
a
Serine
Tyrosine
aProline is actually an imino acid but by convention, is included here.
184	
Clinical biochemistry
Micronutrients
Vitamins and certain trace elements are essential com-
ponents of the diet required in very small amounts. 
Deficiency of individual micronutrients classically results 
in typical symptoms and signs according to the vitamin or 
trace element involved; recognition and treatment of de-
ficiency of a single micronutrient deficiency is relatively 
easy. However, milder forms of deficiency, particularly of 
multiple micronutrients concurrently, may be difficult to 
recognize clinically.
Micronutrient status is likely to be affected by acute 
illness, owing to a combination of reduced intake and in-
creased demand. Such increased demand may be due to 
catabolism resulting from the illness, subsequent anabo-
lism and from disease-specific increased losses, for exam-
ple loss from fistulae, diarrhoea and dialysis. As laboratory 
concentration of micronutrients may be perturbed in the 
acute phase, deficiencies in this group of patients can be 
particularly difficult to assess.
It is increasingly being recognized that subclinical 
deficiencies of micronutrients may have detrimental ef-
fects, some of which are described in the following pages. 
As the assessment of micronutrients can be important in 
patients receiving supplementation, consideration is also 
given to aspects of micronutrient toxicity.
Vitamin D is considered with bone metabolism in 
Chapter  31. Cobalt as a constituent of vitamin B12 is 
discussed, together with this vitamin, folate and iron, in 
Chapter 27. Iodine is essential in the formation of thyroid 
hormones (see Chapter 19).
Vitamins
Fat-soluble vitamins
Vitamins are traditionally classified into those that are fat 
soluble (A, D, E and K) and the remainder, which are 
water soluble. This is probably still a useful distinction, as 
it predicts when deficiency is likely (e.g. fat-soluble vita-
mins in steatorrhoea), and is retained here.
The fat-soluble vitamins A, E and K are structurally 
different, but are all non-polar, water-insoluble lipids. 
Absorption of each of them requires micelle formation in 
the gut lumen, for which bile salts are necessary.
Vitamin A. Dietary vitamin A occurs in a variety of forms 
which can be broadly divided into preformed vitamin A 
(retinol) and carotenoids, which are cleaved in the body 
to give vitamin A (see Fig. 10.3). In the UK, up to 75% 
of dietary vitamin A is preformed, derived from foods 
such as fortified cereals, margarine and dairy products, 
fish-liver oil and multivitamin preparations. Carotenoids 
are found in plants; the most important in the UK diet 
is β-carotene, which is found in carrots, dark green leafy 
vegetables, pumpkins and mangoes.
Retinol is transported in the bloodstream bound to 
retinol-binding protein (RBP), which in turn forms a com-
plex with thyroid-binding pre-albumin. Protein-energy 
malnutrition can result in reduced synthesis of RBP and 
thus impaired retinol transport from the liver, producing 
a functional vitamin A deficiency, even in the presence 
of adequate liver reserves. β-Carotene undergoes oxida-
tive fission in the intestine to give retinal (see Fig. 10.3), 
and hence retinol. The cleavage of provitamin A carot-
enoids appears to be inhibited when vitamin A stores are 
high, hence, toxicity from ingestion of plant sources is 
rare. Ingestion of excess preformed vitamin A leads to its 
absorption and hepatic storage.
The best understood of the actions of vitamin A is 
probably its role in vision. The 11-cis form of retinal is a 
component of the visual pigment rhodopsin, which is 
found in the rods of the retina. Light causes the retinal 
to change to the all-trans form (see Fig. 10.3) and this 
triggers a series of conformational and other changes, the 
β -carotene
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
H3C
CHO
CH3
11-cis-retinal
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CHO
all-trans-retinal
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2OH
all-trans-retinol
FIGURE 10.3  ■  Structure of vitamin A and some related compounds.
	
10  Clinical biochemistry of nutrition	
185
end result being that an electrical signal is transmitted to 
the cortex of the brain and is perceived as light. A similar 
mechanism operates in the cones of the retina.
Vitamin A is also necessary for growth and for normal 
development and differentiation of tissues. These actions 
are mediated by retinoic acid, which is present in foods in 
only small amounts but can be manufactured in the body 
from retinol. It modulates gene expression by activa-
tion of nuclear receptors, of which there are two groups: 
retinoic acid receptors (RAR) bind all-trans-­retinoic acid 
(and some other retinoids); retinoid X receptors (RXR) 
bind 9-cis-retinoic acid. The latter interact with other re-
ceptors (e.g. those for vitamin D and thyroid hormones), 
and in the absence of retinoic acid can also act as repres-
sors of gene expression. Other metabolic roles of vita-
min A include carrying mannosyl units in the synthesis 
of hydrophobic glycoproteins and the retinoylation of 
proteins, for example the regulatory subunits of cAMP 
protein kinases.
Vitamin A deficiency is common in some developing 
countries, particularly in children, and is the single most 
common preventable cause of blindness in the world. An 
early symptom is night blindness, because of inadequate 
amounts of 11-cis-retinal in the retina. However, defi-
ciency also has important effects in mucus-secreting epi-
thelia and so there are other consequences for the eyes. 
Keratinizing squamous metaplasia in the conjunctiva 
causes conjunctival xerosis and this may be followed by 
the appearance of white plaques of desquamated thick-
ened epithelium, known as Bitot’s spots. Similar meta-
plasia in the cornea can lead to ulceration, which may 
progress to scarring and consequent blindness. Changes 
in other mucus-secreting epithelia, for example in the re-
spiratory and gastrointestinal tracts, probably account in 
part for the lowered resistance to infections reported in 
vitamin A deficiency. In such areas of the world, public 
health programmes aimed at administering large doses 
of vitamin A have been successful in reducing morbidity 
and mortality associated with its deficiency, particularly 
in young children.
Acute ingestion of large amounts of preformed vi-
tamin A can result in raised intracranial pressure, with 
headaches, nausea, vomiting and visual disturbances. 
Chronic overdosage is associated with bone damage in-
cluding increased bone resorption, spontaneous fracture 
and sometimes raised plasma calcium concentration and 
alkaline phosphatase activity. Liver damage, hair loss and 
skin changes have also been reported.
Retinol is teratogenic (or, at least, the synthetic reti-
noids used in the treatment of certain dermatological 
conditions are) and so, in the UK, pregnant women are 
advised against self-medication with vitamin A and against 
consumption of liver and products made from it. A high 
intake of β-carotene results in an orange-yellow appear-
ance of the plasma, body fat and skin, but is not usually 
regarded as harmful in the short term. However, there 
may be an increased incidence of malignancy in people 
taking β-carotene supplements, particularly among heavy 
smokers.
Vitamin E. There are eight very similar compounds 
that have vitamin E activity, four tocopherols and four 
tocotrienols. The most active is the natural isomer of 
­α-tocopherol, which accounts for about 90% of the 
­vitamin E present in human tissues. Its structure is shown 
in Figure 10.4. It appears to be the major lipid-soluble 
antioxidant in cell membranes, acting to prevent the per-
oxidation of unsaturated fatty acids by free oxygen radi-
cals. α-Tocopherol, but not its related tocopherols and 
tocotrienols, also has actions that are independent of its 
antioxidant properties. It modulates the transcription of 
certain genes, inhibits platelet aggregation and vascular 
smooth muscle proliferation and has an effect on cell sig-
nalling in the immune system.
The nutritional requirement for vitamin E is approxi-
mately proportional to the intake of polyunsaturated fatty 
acids. However, since foods rich in these (e.g. vegetable 
oils) also tend to contain large amounts of vitamin E, de-
ficiency states are rare.
Vitamin E is not easily transported across the placenta 
and the first vitamin E deficiency state to be firmly estab-
lished was in premature infants, who developed haemolytic 
anaemia, thrombocytosis and oedema. In children and 
adults who are unable to absorb or utilize vitamin E ad-
equately (e.g. in cystic fibrosis or abetalipoproteinaemia), 
a progressive spinocerebellar degeneration may develop. 
The full syndrome consists of ataxia of the limbs, loss of 
position and vibration senses, absent deep tendon reflexes 
and pigmentary degeneration of the retina. Treatment 
with vitamin E supplements can prevent these neurologi-
cal features or, if they are already present, arrest or even 
reverse them. For α-tocopherol to be made available to 
the tissues from very low density lipoprotein, it must first 
bind to hepatic α-tocopherol transfer protein. Individuals 
with a deficiency of this transfer protein develop a very 
similar clinical syndrome (ataxia with vitamin E deficiency, 
AVED).
There is some evidence that increased tissue concen-
trations of antioxidants, in particular vitamin E, may pro-
tect against conditions such as cancer and ischaemic heart 
disease, but this remains controversial.
Vitamin E supplements have also been taken to im-
prove general well-being and sexual performance, but the 
only firm conclusion that can be drawn is that quite high 
H3C
HO
CH3
CH2
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
O
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
CH
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH
α–Tocopherol
(Vitamin E)
FIGURE 10.4  ■  Structure of α-tocopherol. It is an alcohol of empirical formula C29H50O2, with a long alkyl tail, which confers fat solubility. 
The hydroxyl group gives it its characteristic antioxidant property.
186	
Clinical biochemistry
intakes of vitamin E are non-toxic, although very high 
intakes may antagonize vitamin K and potentiate antico-
agulant therapy.
Vitamin K. The structures of the two forms of vitamin K 
and two vitamin K antagonists are shown in Figure 10.5. 
Vitamin K is involved in the post-translational modifica-
tion of the blood coagulation factors II (prothrombin), 
VII, IX and X. A vitamin K-dependent enzyme system 
catalyses the carboxylation of the first ten amino-terminal 
glutamate residues in prothrombin to γ-carboxyglutamate 
(Gla). This carboxylation facilitates the binding of cal-
cium, which is necessary for prothrombin to bind to 
platelet phospholipid, which is in turn necessary for 
the conversion of prothrombin to thrombin in the final 
common pathway of the clotting cascade. A similar pro-
cess of γ-carboxylation occurs in factors VII, IX and X 
to form sites with a high affinity for calcium, and this is 
also known to occur in some clotting inhibitors (protein 
C and protein S). It also occurs in some proteins outside 
the clotting system, for example in osteocalcin and the 
matrix Gla protein in bone, in nephrocalcin in the renal 
cortex and in the product of the growth arrest specific 
gene (GAS6), which regulates differentiation and devel-
opment in nervous tissue and apoptosis in other tissues.
The main dietary form of vitamin K is phytomena­
dione (K1), with leafy green vegetables being the richest 
source, although other vegetable sources are important 
in most diets. Menaquinones (K2) produced by the in-
testinal bacteria may also be important, since while cir-
culating vitamin K is mainly phytomenadione, hepatic 
reserves are mainly menaquinones.
Vitamin K deficiency in its severest form leads to a 
bleeding syndrome, but dietary deficiency is rare after 
the first few months of life, unless there is an underly-
ing disease affecting the absorption or utilization of 
the ­vitamin. However, vitamin K is undetectable in the 
blood of new-born babies, their hepatic reserves are low 
compared with adults and human breast milk contains 
barely adequate amounts. Thus, deficiency may ­present 
in infants as vitamin K deficiency bleeding (VKDB), 
within the first 24 h from the time of birth (early), be-
tween two and seven days (classic) or after seven days 
(late). Intracranial haemorrhage is rare in the early form, 
but occurs in more than 50% of babies with the late 
form and is likely to lead to death or severe neurological 
CH3
CH3
O
O
CH2
CH
CH3
(
)
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH
C
CH2
H
3
Vitamin K1
O
O
CH3
(
)n
Vitamin K2
CH3
H
CH2
CH
CH2
n = 4 – 13
O
O
CH2
O
O
Dicoumarol
OH
OH
C
O
O
Warfarin
OH
CH
CH2
O
C
CH3
FIGURE 10.5  ■  Structure of vitamin K1 (phytomenadione) and vitamin K2 (menaquinone), together with two vitamin K antagonists that 
have anticoagulant properties.
	
10  Clinical biochemistry of nutrition	
187
sequelae. The administration of vitamin K in the neona-
tal period abolishes the risk of deficiency. A single intra-
muscular injection of 1 mg of phytomenadione is highly 
effective for this purpose but suspicions, which now 
appear to be unfounded, were raised that its use led to 
an increased risk of childhood malignancy, particularly 
leukaemia. This adverse association has not been found 
for the administration of oral vitamin K, but the latter 
requires a multi-dose regimen. The current UK recom-
mendation is that either intramuscular or oral vitamin K 
should be offered to all neonates after informed discus-
sion with the parents.
Toxicity from naturally occurring K vitamins would 
appear to be rare, even in quite high doses. However, 
the use of synthetic preparations of menadione for nu-
tritional purposes is best avoided, as serious unwanted 
effects have been recorded (e.g. haemolysis and liver 
damage in neonates).
Water-soluble vitamins
The water-soluble vitamins are polar compounds that, 
with the exception of vitamin B12, tend to be absorbed 
rapidly from the upper small intestine, mainly through 
either sodium-dependent active transport or carrier-­
mediated diffusion. Vitamin B12 and folate are discussed 
in Chapter 26.
Thiamin. The physiologically active form of thiamin 
(vitamin B1) is thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP). This 
functions as a cofactor in the conversion of pyruvate to 
­acetyl-CoA by the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and 
in the conversion of 2–oxoglutarate to succinyl-CoA by 
the 2–oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex. It acts as 
a cofactor to the enzyme transketolase in the pentose 
phosphate pathway and plays a part in the metabolism 
of branched chain amino acids. Thiamin also has non-
cofactor roles: thiamin triphosphate is found in nerve and 
muscle cells, where it activates membrane ion channels, 
possibly by phosphorylating them.
Thiamin is found in most foodstuffs, but wheatgerm, 
oatmeal and yeast are particularly rich sources. However, 
the body store of about 30 mg is only 30 times the daily 
requirement and so an inadequate diet is likely to lead 
to deficiency of thiamin sooner than of any other vita-
min. Thiamin deficiency used to be widespread in areas 
where rice formed a major part of the diet, resulting from 
the consumption of polished rice (from which the husk 
had been removed). In present times, thiamin deficiency 
is seen more typically in alcoholics (alcohol decreases 
the absorption of thiamin). Diets high in carbohydrate 
require more thiamin for their assimilation than diets 
high in fat, and subclinical deficiency may be unmasked 
by refeeding with a carbohydrate-rich diet. Patients on 
long-term renal replacement treatment may become de-
ficient in thiamin (and other water-soluble vitamins) un-
less given supplements.
Most of the clinical features of the disease beriberi 
respond to treatment with thiamin, suggesting that 
it is mainly due to thiamin deficiency. Two forms are 
described, one in which there is peripheral neuropa-
thy, muscle weakness, general fatigue and reduced 
attention span (‘dry’ beriberi) and one in which there 
is also oedema and heart failure (‘wet’ beriberi). Some 
of these features may be the result of coexisting protein 
deficiency.
Patients with thiamin deficiency (commonly alco-
holics) may present with a neuropathy and cardiomy-
opathy, but may also develop an encephalopathy, the 
Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome. Wernicke encephalopa-
thy and Korsakoff psychosis were originally described as 
two separate conditions, but now appear to be the acute 
and chronic manifestations, respectively, of a single con-
dition. Wernicke encephalopathy has an acute onset, 
with ophthalmoplegia, nystagmus, ataxia and stupor or 
apathy. It is a medical emergency: the ophthalmoplegia, 
ataxia and lowered consciousness respond, in most cases 
within two days, to treatment with thiamin but, in up to 
80% of cases, the mental changes fail to resolve com-
pletely and Korsakoff psychosis develops. Once estab-
lished, this responds only slowly or not at all to thiamin 
treatment. The main features are retrograde amnesia, 
difficulty in assimilating new ideas and confabulation. 
Susceptibility to the development of this syndrome in 
thiamin deficiency may be greater in people who have 
a genetic variant of transketolase that binds thiamin less 
avidly than usual.
Thiamin is relatively non-toxic and can be given safely 
if deficiency is suspected. However, anaphylaxis has oc-
curred after parenteral administration, and a wide variety 
of toxic effects has been described in adults with chronic 
intakes in excess of 50 mg/kg body weight or 3 g/24 h.
Riboflavin. Riboflavin (Vitamin B2) is a constituent of 
the two flavins found in flavoproteins, flavin mononu-
cleotide (FMN) and flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), 
each of which acts as an electron carrier in many vital bio-
logical oxidoreduction systems. It is also a constituent of 
the cryptochromes, blue-light sensitive pigments in the 
eye that are important in the setting and maintenance of 
circadian rhythms. Clinical riboflavin deficiency is rare 
in countries where milk is a regular part of the diet; of-
fal is another rich source. Even when dietary deficiency 
is present, clinical effects are rare because any riboflavin 
present in the body can be very efficiently conserved and 
reutilized.
The clinical features of riboflavin deficiency re-
corded in volunteers on a riboflavin-deficient diet in-
clude angular stomatitis, cheilosis, atrophic lingual 
papillae, glossitis, magenta tongue, seborrhoeic skin 
lesions, superficial lesions of the genitalia and vascu-
larization of the cornea. The biochemical basis of these 
clinical manifestations is not immediately obvious and 
it may be that riboflavin deficiency has effects on the 
metabolism of other nutrients, for example pyridoxine, 
iron and folate.
Riboflavin absorption from the gastrointestinal tract is 
readily saturated, and any excess that does occur is rapidly 
excreted in the urine, so riboflavin does not accumulate 
in the body even when the oral intake is very high. This 
is probably just as well, since as well as reoxidation of re-
duced flavin coenzymes being a major source of oxygen 
radicals in the body, riboflavin is itself capable of non-
enzymically generating reactive oxygen species.
188	
Clinical biochemistry
Nicotinamide. Nicotinamide is a constituent of nico-
tinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD
+) and its phosphate 
(NADP
+).
These are involved in a large number of oxidoreduc-
tion reactions in both cytosol and mitochondria, un-
dergoing reversible reduction to NADH and NADPH, 
respectively. The major role of NADH is to transfer 
electrons from metabolic intermediates into the electron 
transfer chain, while NADPH acts as a reducing agent 
in a large number of biosynthetic processes. NAD
+ and 
NADP
+ are commonly referred to as coenzymes, but are 
probably better considered as true substrates.
Nicotinamide and its precursor nicotinic acid are 
both plentiful in animal and plant foods, although in 
some plant sources, for example maize, they are in a 
bound form and biologically unavailable. In man, a small 
amount is also formed in a minor pathway of tryptophan 
catabolism, via kynurenine to nicotinate, and it is usually 
accepted that 60 mg of tryptophan is equivalent to 1 mg 
of dietary nicotinamide or nicotinic acid. Both dietary 
and endogenous sources appear to be relatively impor-
tant, since the deficiency state, pellagra, may occur when 
either is decreased. Simple dietary deficiency is now rare 
unless maize forms the main dietary constituent, but 
may be a complication of therapeutic low-protein diets. 
Decreased formation from tryptophan may occur where 
there is coexisting pyridoxine or riboflavin deficiency, 
since kynureninase and kynurenine hydroxylase are both 
dependent on these. Oestrogens also decrease the rate of 
tryptophan metabolism, so premenopausal women are 
more susceptible than men to borderline dietary defi-
ciency. In Hartnup disease, there is decreased tryptophan 
absorption from the gut, and in carcinoid syndrome, there 
is increased ­usage of tryptophan in the synthesis of large 
amounts of 5-­hydroxytryptamine – patients with either of 
these conditions are, therefore, particularly susceptible to 
decreases in nicotinamide and nicotinic acid intake.
The initial features of pellagra are non-specific (weak-
ness, lassitude, anorexia and indigestion), but are fol-
lowed by pigmented dermatitis in areas of skin exposed 
to sunlight, diarrhoea with widespread inflammation of 
epithelial surfaces and dementia, which may be preceded 
by irritability and depression.
Nicotinic acid is sometimes used in high doses for the 
treatment of combined hyperlipidaemia and the adverse 
effects are known to include flushing, hepatotoxicity, hy-
peruricaemia and impaired glucose tolerance.
‘Niacin’ is sometimes used to mean both nicotinic 
acid and nicotinamide and sometimes just one or other 
of them; because of this imprecision, the term has not 
been used here.
Vitamin B6. Pyridoxal, pyridoxine, pyridoxamine and 
their 5´-phosphates (Fig.  10.6) are interconvertible in 
the body and all have vitamin B6 activity. Pyridoxal phos-
phate is a cofactor for over 60 enzymes that catalyse re-
actions of amino acids, and so the absolute requirement 
is related to the rate of amino acid metabolism. It is also 
a cofactor for glycogen phosphorylase, and has roles in 
the modulation of steroid hormone action and the regu-
lation of gene expression. Primary dietary deficiency of 
vitamin B6 is rare, since it is widely distributed in foods 
(although in some vegetable sources, it may be present 
in a biologically unavailable glycoside form), body stores 
of the vitamin are reasonable and it is synthesized by in-
testinal flora. The first definite cases of deficiency de-
scribed were in infants fed a milk preparation that had 
been overheated during manufacture, destroying much 
of the vitamin B6. Some (but not all) of the infants de-
veloped neurological symptoms, including convulsions, 
which responded to vitamin B6 supplements. Human 
volunteers and animals fed a B6-deficient diet develop 
neurological symptoms together with changes in the 
mouth and skin. The changes in the nervous system are 
presumably due to the role of vitamin B6 in the metabo-
lism of neurotransmitters. Certain drugs are known to 
interfere with vitamin B6 metabolism, for example iso-
niazid, which binds to pyrixoxal-5-phosphate reducing 
its availability, and penicillamine; vitamin B6 supplemen-
tation during drug treatment is advised.
Pharmacological doses of pyridoxine may be useful in 
certain rare inherited conditions, for example hypochro-
mic sideroblastic anaemia, but in others (e.g. premen-
strual tension), the evidence for benefit is less good, and 
in very high doses, pyridoxine may itself cause a severe 
peripheral sensory neuropathy.
N
Pyridoxal
CHO
HO
H3C
CH2OH
N
Pyridoxine
HO
H3C
CH2OH
CH2OH
N
Pyridoxamine
HO
H3C
CH2OH
CH2NH2
N
CHO
HO
H3C
CH2OPO–
O–
O
Pyridoxal 5-phosphate
N
HO
H3C
CH2OH
CH2OPO–
O–
O
Pyridoxine 5-phosphate
N
HO
H3C
CH2NH2
CH2OPO–
O–
O
Pyridoxamine 5-phosphate
FIGURE 10.6  ■  Structures of various forms of vitamin B6.
	
10  Clinical biochemistry of nutrition	
189
Pantothenic acid. Pantothenic acid is a constituent of 
the coenzyme A molecule and is thus involved in many 
major metabolic pathways. It is also present (not as part 
of coenzyme A) in fatty acid synthase.
The name means ‘available everywhere’ and this re-
flects its distribution in foods. Particularly rich sources 
include liver, meat, cereals, milk, egg yolk and fresh veg-
etables. Spontaneous isolated deficiency in man has never 
been proven, but experimental deficiency in human vol-
unteers leads to vomiting, malaise, abdominal distress 
and burning cramps, and later on, tenderness in the heels, 
fatigue and insomnia.
Biotin. Biotin acts as a coenzyme in a number of one-­
carbon transfer reactions. ATP hydrolysis is coupled to the 
carboxylation of the biotin to form N-1′-carboxybiotin, 
which then carboxylates the substrate of the enzyme. 
Examples include pyruvate carboxylase and acetyl-CoA 
carboxylase, so biotin is important in gluconeogenesis 
and lipogenesis and also plays a part in the catabolism of 
branched chain amino acids.
Biotin is widely distributed in foods, with offal, milk 
and eggs being particularly rich sources. Intestinal bacte-
ria synthesize biotin, but it is not clear how much of this 
is available for absorption. Deficiency has been described 
in patients on parenteral nutrition deficient in biotin and 
also in people who consume large amounts of raw eggs: 
egg white contains a glycoprotein called avidin that binds 
biotin and prevents absorption. Such patients develop a 
fine scaly dermatitis and hair loss, but isolated biotin defi-
ciency in man is otherwise unknown, apart from a sugges-
tion that subclinical deficiency in pregnant women may 
be an aetiological factor in some birth defects. Even large 
doses of biotin appear to be non-toxic.
Vitamin C. Vitamin C comprises l-ascorbic acid and the 
oxidized derivative, l-dehydroascorbic acid. In animal 
tissues, 90% is in the form of ascorbic acid, but the two 
are interconvertible and both are biologically active. Man 
is unusual in that most other mammals can synthesize 
ascorbate from d-glucose or d-galactose. Guinea pigs 
cannot and so form a useful experimental model.
Vitamin C is an important aqueous antioxidant in the 
body, although its relationships with other antioxidants 
remain to be fully elucidated. Its best characterized role 
is in the post-translational reduction of proline to form 
hydroxyproline. This imino acid is relatively uncommon 
in the body apart from in collagen, where it is essential, 
and one of the effects of vitamin C deficiency is impaired 
collagen formation. Vitamin C also assists in the intes-
tinal absorption of non-haem iron, by keeping it in the 
ferrous (Fe
2+) form.
The main dietary sources of vitamin C are citrus and 
soft fruits, together with the growing points of certain 
vegetables, although, in the UK, potatoes also make a 
significant contribution. It is one of the most labile of nu-
trients, being destroyed by oxygen, metal ions, alkaline 
conditions, heat and light: cooking reduces the amount of 
dietary ascorbic acid available for absorption.
Deficiency of vitamin C causes scurvy, with perifol-
licular (or more extensive) haemorrhages, bleeding gums, 
poor wound healing, failure of hair follicle eruption and 
anaemia. Factors assumed to contribute to the anaemia 
include blood loss, impaired iron absorption and a re-
duction in the capacity of ascorbic acid to protect folate 
from irreversible oxidation. Patients with scurvy may 
also experience changes in personality and psychomotor 
performance: it is thought that these are due to impaired 
synthesis of catecholamines by dopamine β-hydroxylase, a 
vitamin C-dependent enzyme. Dietary deficiency can oc-
cur, particularly if food is overcooked, and requirements 
are increased in certain patients, for example following 
trauma or surgery or in the presence of certain drugs, for 
example sulfasalazine, aspirin. Smokers also seem to have 
an increased turnover of vitamin C.
There have been many attempts to demonstrate ben-
efits from an excess intake of vitamin C (i.e. higher than 
that required to prevent scurvy) in a diverse range of 
conditions. None of these has yet been proven, although 
as one of the proponents, Linus Pauling, was a double 
Nobel laureate, they remain widely held beliefs. Potential 
risks of very high doses include diarrhoea and increased 
formation of urinary oxalate, although the latter may be 
an in vitro effect in stored urine, and thus not a risk factor 
for renal stones.
Other organic substances. Food contains many other 
organic substances besides those described thus far. 
There is, however, no convincing evidence that any of 
these are essential nutrients in man, although some (e.g. 
choline, pangamic acid, laetrile) have been proposed as 
such, and choline is now regarded as an essential nu-
trient in the USA. Carnitine, which is involved in the 
transport of acyl-CoA across the mitochondrial mem-
brane in fatty acid oxidation, is synthesized in the liver 
in adults, but there may be a dietary requirement in pre-
mature infants.
Some organic (and inorganic) substances are deliber-
ately added to foods. They include preservatives, flavour-
ings, colourings, sweeteners and processing aids. In the 
UK, there are strict legislative controls over the use of 
such additives.
There has been much interest in recent years in foods 
that contain nutrients that have benefits beyond their 
purely nutritional properties (sometimes known as func-
tional foods), and some of these are considered further in 
Chapter 11.
Other organic compounds found in foods (e.g. alco-
hol, caffeine, solanine) have potentially toxic pharma-
cological effects. Solanine is a plant glycoalkaloid that 
occurs in small amounts in all potatoes, but at much 
higher concentrations in green potatoes. It acts as a 
cholinesterase inhibitor, and ingestion of large amounts 
causes abdominal pain followed by nausea, vomiting and 
respiratory problems that can be fatal. Cholinesterase ac-
tivity returns to normal within a few hours of consump-
tion of small amounts of solanine, so there is not usually 
any cumulative ill effect from repeat ingestion of small 
doses. Other toxins are formed in food as a result of pro-
cessing or cooking it: for example 3-monochloropropane 
1,3-diol (from industrial processing of vegetable protein), 
acrylamide 2-propenamide (from frying or baking foods) 
and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (in foods exposed 
to wood smoke) are all carcinogenic, at least in animals. 
190	
Clinical biochemistry
Trans fatty acids are formed during the hydrogenation 
of vegetable and fish oils, although they are also present 
naturally in meat and dairy products: an increased intake 
is associated with increased cardiovascular risk.
Contaminants in food have the potential to cause harm. 
Examples include bacteria, for example Campylobacter 
­jejuni, which causes gastroenteritis; moulds, for example 
patulin, which can grow on apples, and aflatoxins from 
moulds found in foods, including peanuts and corn, which 
are carcinogens particularly associated with ­hepatic cell 
carcinoma.
Trace elements
Minerals are important nutrients, some being major 
body constituents while others (the trace elements) are 
required in much smaller amounts. The trace elements 
that are known to be essential (zinc, copper, selenium, 
molybdenum, manganese and chromium) are considered 
here, although there are a number of others (e.g. arsenic, 
cadmium, fluorine, lead, lithium, nickel, silicon, tin, va-
nadium) that have been suggested as having physiological 
roles, but which have yet to be proven to be essential.
Zinc. Zinc is an essential component of over 200 en-
zymes, having both catalytic and structural roles. Some 
enzymes appear to be more sensitive to zinc deficiency 
than others, and it is of relevance to the clinical bio-
chemist that plasma alkaline phosphatase activity tends 
to decrease when zinc is deficient. Zinc is also incorpo-
rated into proteins that do not have enzyme activity; for 
example, it has a role in maintaining the aggregation of 
presecretory insulin granules and has direct and indirect 
roles in reducing free radical activity. Thus, zinc is im-
portant in most of the major metabolic processes in the 
body, including protein synthesis, cellular replication and 
collagen synthesis.
The best dietary sources of zinc are red meat, shellfish, 
nuts and cereals, although processing food tends to re-
move zinc (e.g. white flour is a poor source). Only about 
30% of dietary zinc is absorbed and there is a significant 
enterohepatic circulation. Absorption occurs through 
both active and passive processes. Some zinc remains in 
enterocytes bound to a metallothionein, the proportion 
depending on the amount of metallothionein present. 
When the body content of zinc is high, metallothionein 
synthesis is stimulated, reducing the amount of zinc en-
tering the circulation.
Although zinc is present in all body tissues, 60% is 
in skeletal muscle, 30% in bone and 4–6% in the skin. 
In the circulation, 80% is contained within red cells, 
while in the plasma, up to one-third is firmly bound to 
α2-macroglobulin and most of the remainder is loosely 
bound to albumin. The main route of excretion is in the 
faeces.
As might be expected from the diversity of its func-
tions, deficiency of zinc tends to have a wide range of ef-
fects. Dermatitis and hair loss are frequent, together with 
growth retardation and poor wound healing. Anorexia, 
lethargy and impaired sensations of taste and smell may 
also occur. Immune function may be depressed, and 
since zinc has a role both in the hepatic synthesis of 
retinol-binding protein and in the conversion of retinol 
to retinal in the retina, night vision may be impaired.
Zinc deficiency can arise from inadequate intake (e.g. 
during parenteral feeding), impaired absorption or in-
creased losses (e.g. through a gastrointestinal fistula). Zinc 
deficiency is an important part of protein–energy malnu-
trition and may limit weight gain during refeeding unless 
adequate amounts are provided. Requirements for zinc 
are increased in premature infants, during pregnancy and 
lactation and following trauma. The autosomal recessive 
disease acrodermatitis enteropathica is due to severely 
impaired intestinal absorption of zinc. Affected children 
have a scaly dermatitis (often secondarily infected), diar-
rhoea and impaired growth, all of which respond to oral 
zinc supplements in relatively high doses.
Chronic ingestion of high zinc intakes in otherwise 
healthy people may lead to features of copper deficiency 
(e.g. microcytic anaemia, neutropenia). This is because 
the induction of metallothionein synthesis in enterocytes 
by zinc results in increased binding of copper to metallo-
thionein, which prevents its transfer to the circulation. 
(This effect is utilized in the treatment of some patients 
with Wilson disease; see Chapter 14.) Acute toxicity has 
been recorded following ingestion of water with a high 
zinc content, or the use of such water in renal dialysis.
Copper. The main role of copper is as a component of 
copper metalloenzymes, of which there are many. In the 
synthesis of collagen and elastin, the cross-linking reac-
tions require various copper-containing amine oxidases, 
and copper is also involved in the oxidation of Fe
2+ to Fe
3+ 
during haemoglobin formation and the binding of iron 
to transferrin. Examples of other copper-containing en-
zymes include superoxide dismutase, tyrosinase and cyto-
chrome c oxidase.
Copper is widely distributed in the diet, occurring, for 
example in shellfish, liver and kidney, with lesser amounts 
in milk, meat and cereals and very little in processed foods. 
Not all dietary copper is absorbed, the proportion vary-
ing from 35% to 70% for reasons that are still not fully 
understood, although an increased intake of zinc reduces 
absorption (see above). From the gut, copper is carried to 
the liver bound to albumin and there is incorporated into 
caeruloplasmin. Caeruloplasmin is then secreted into the 
blood and accounts for 80–90% of the circulating copper. 
The main route for excretion of copper is in the bile, with 
very little in the urine unless renal damage is present or 
copper-binding substances (e.g. penicillamine) have been 
given. Normal copper homoeostasis, therefore, depends 
on the balance between intestinal absorption and biliary 
excretion.
Overt copper deficiency is rare, since the liver contains 
substantial stores, but has been seen in malnourished chil-
dren and in adults on long-term total parenteral nutrition 
(TPN). Features include neutropenia and skeletal fragil-
ity, with a microcytic hypochromic (iron-resistant) anae-
mia if the deficiency is prolonged. In adults, subclinical 
deficiency may be a risk factor for cardiovascular disease – 
in animals, copper deficiency can cause vascular and 
myocardial disease, together with hypercholesterolaemia. 
There is also a rare X-linked recessive disorder known 
as Menkes disease, in which there is impaired copper 
	
10  Clinical biochemistry of nutrition	
191
absorption and renal copper wasting. Affected boys show 
progressive developmental and mental retardation, their 
hair becomes depigmented and sparse and their bones are 
abnormal. Parenteral copper can restore both circulating 
and tissue concentrations, but is otherwise ineffective and 
death typically occurs by the age of three.
Excess copper in the body is toxic, as demonstrated by 
Wilson disease, which is discussed in Chapters 13 and 14. 
However, copper overload purely from chronic dietary 
excess is rare, although it has been described in associa-
tion with contaminated water supplies. Although a prob-
lem of toxicology rather than nutrition, acute ingestion 
of copper salts can cause nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea, 
with intravascular haemolysis in severe cases.
Selenium. Selenium is essential to the activity of the 
enzyme glutathione peroxidase, which is an important 
component of cellular antioxidant capacity. Selenium 
deficiency results in both reduced enzyme activity and 
reduced amounts of the enzyme protein, although when 
the intake of selenium is increased, there is an increase in 
glutathione peroxidase activity only up to a plateau level. 
Other selenoproteins are known, including iodothyro-
nine deiodinase, which catalyses the conversion of thy-
roxine to tri-iodothyronine, and thioredoxin reductase, 
which reduces nucleotides in DNA synthesis.
Cereals, meat and fish contribute most of the dietary 
selenium, mainly in the form of the amino acids seleno-
methionine and selenocysteine. About half of dietary se-
lenium is absorbed, the main route of excretion being in 
the urine. Selenium deficiency, when it occurs, is gener-
ally the result of a low intake and has been described in 
patients on long-term parenteral nutrition and children 
with certain inherited metabolic diseases treated with very 
restrictive therapeutic diets, although such occurrences 
are rare. In certain areas of China, where the soil sele-
nium is low, there is endemic deficiency of selenium and 
a selenium responsive cardiomyopathy (Keshan ­disease) 
has been described. However, a low average selenium in-
take has also been reported in other countries, with no 
specific selenium responsive diseases being described. 
Nonetheless, more recent epidemiological evidence has 
suggested an increased incidence of cancer in low sele-
nium areas, and some countries (e.g. Finland) now add 
selenium to the fertilizers used for arable crops.
Excess dietary selenium causes toxicity in livestock, but it 
is only in selenium-rich areas of China that convincing en-
demic dietary selenosis has been described in man. Features 
include ‘garlic breath’ (due to dimethyl selenide), deformity 
and loss of hair and nails, skin and gastrointestinal symp-
toms and, in severe cases, neurological problems. Similar 
features have been seen in people taking selenium supple-
ments that accidentally contained vastly more selenium 
than they were supposed to. In general, selenium toxicity 
seems to begin at intakes only ten times the normal intake, 
although the threshold may be even lower in the presence 
of certain diseases, for example cystic fibrosis.
Molybdenum. Molybdenum combines with molybdop-
terin to form molybdenum cofactor, essential for the ac-
tivity of the enzymes xanthine oxidase, aldehyde oxidase 
and sulphite oxidase.
The dietary requirement for molybdenum is very 
small and it is present in most human diets in meats, le-
gumes and grains, so that dietary deficiency is exception-
ally rare. Molybdenum deficiency has been reported in 
a patient with Crohn disease on TPN, who developed 
fatigue, somnolence and amino acid intolerance that re-
sponded to molybdenum supplements. There is a rare, 
autosomal recessive, inherited deficiency of molybdenum 
cofactor, which results in severe neurological abnormali-
ties, mental retardation, lens dislocation and xanthinuria 
(see Chapter 9) in affected children, but no clinical im-
provement results from dietary supplementation.
High dietary intakes of molybdenum may be associ-
ated with altered purine metabolism (an increased inci-
dence of gout has been noted in some populations) and 
with poorly understood changes in copper metabolism.
Manganese. Manganese is a component of certain en-
zymes (e.g. pyruvate carboxylase, mitochondrial superox-
ide dismutase, arginase) and is also an activator of many 
others (e.g. hydrolases, glycosyl transferases, kinases, de-
carboxylases), so deficiency could potentially affect the 
metabolism of carbohydrates, glycosaminoglycans and 
cholesterol.
Good dietary sources of manganese include leafy veg-
etables, unrefined cereals and tea, although only a small 
proportion (3–4%) is actually absorbed. The body con-
tent of manganese is low, with about a quarter of this rela-
tively fixed in bone and the highest tissue concentrations 
in the pancreas and liver. The usual route of excretion is 
in the bile.
Deficiency of manganese in animals causes poor 
growth, defective collagen formation, depressed reproduc-
tive function, impaired glucose tolerance and neurological 
deficits, but the effects of dietary deficiency in man are less 
well established. A case of probable manganese deficiency 
occurred in a man on long-term TPN (who had a decrease 
in vitamin K-dependent clotting factors, hypocholesterol-
aemia, mild dermatitis and a slight change in hair colour). 
Dietary toxicity of manganese is unlikely since absorption 
is low and excretion in the bile and urine efficient. Toxicity 
has been recorded in manganese miners, who develop a 
condition clinically similar to Parkinson’s disease, but this 
appears to be due to absorption from manganese ore dust 
in the lungs rather than from the intestine. High signals 
on T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans 
of the brain, consistent with manganese deposition, have 
been well documented in patients on long-term TPN in 
association with evidence of Parkinson disease and neuro-
psychiatric abnormalities.
Chromium. The main biological role of chromium in 
man appears to be to potentiate the action of insulin, as 
part of a low molecular weight chromium binding sub-
stance (chromodulin). Chromium may also be important 
in gene expression, lipoprotein metabolism and in main-
taining nucleic acid structure.
Dietary sources of chromium include yeast, meat, whole 
grains, mushrooms and nuts. Absorption is very low and 
urinary excretion increases with intake. Human deficiency 
was first observed in long-term parenteral nutrition pa-
tients who developed insulin-resistant glucose intolerance 
192	
Clinical biochemistry
and neuropathy. In animals, deficiency also causes im-
paired growth and fertility and hypercholesterolaemia, but 
these have not been seen in humans. In general, there is no 
conclusive evidence that diabetes and hypercholesterolae-
mia are usually associated with chromium deficiency, nor 
that supplementation ameliorates these conditions.
As a normal dietary constituent, chromium toxicity 
seems unlikely to occur. However, the absorption of chro-
mium picolinate, which is marketed as a dietary substitute, 
is higher than from other dietary sources and there have 
been reports of adverse effects, including renal failure. 
Industrial toxicity of chromium salts is well established 
and, recently, local and systemic effects of chromium and 
cobalt from metallic joint prostheses have been recognized.
Fibre
Dietary fibre is a term used to describe carbohydrate 
polymers that are not hydrolysed by the endogenous en-
zymes of the gastrointestinal tract. These include edible 
carbohydrate polymers naturally occurring in the food, car-
bohydrate polymers that have been obtained from food 
raw materials by artificial means and certain synthetic 
polymers. Lignin (a complex carbohydrate polymer con-
taining aromatic residues) is also included in the defini-
tion. Dietary fibre is, therefore, a mixture of substances, 
including non-starch polysaccharides (NSPs), and starch 
and oligosaccharides that are resistant to digestion. Most 
dietary fibre consists of NSPs, and consideration of the 
NSP content of foods is probably the most useful ap-
proach to fibre, particularly since NSPs can be measured 
with more specificity than total dietary fibre.
Non-starch polysaccharides are a complex group 
of polymers that can be classified in a number of ways, 
for example according to the constituent monomers or 
whether the resulting polymer is soluble or not. Cellulose 
is a polymer of glucose but, unlike starches, is an un-
branched β-1,4 glucan. It constitutes about a quarter of 
the NSP intake of an average UK diet and about half of 
the insoluble NSP. Other, non-cellulosic, polysaccharides 
tend to be made up of hexoses (e.g. glucose in the soluble 
glucans), pentoses (e.g. arabinose and xylose in the partly 
soluble arabinoxylans) or uronic acids (e.g. galacturonic 
acid in the soluble pectins).
The exact composition of dietary NSPs depends on 
their source. The richest sources are whole grain cereals, 
with wheat, maize and rice containing mainly insoluble 
forms, and oats, barley and rye a significant proportion 
of soluble NSPs. Fruit and vegetables have a higher wa-
ter content than cereals and so the proportional NSP 
content tends to be lower, with pulses and nuts probably 
being the next best sources after cereals. Vegetables tend 
to contain roughly equal proportions of the soluble and 
insoluble fractions, but in fruits, this varies widely, with 
uronic acid-derived NSPs being the main soluble form.
A low dietary fibre intake has been associated with an 
increased incidence of constipation, diverticular disease, 
appendicitis, gallbladder disease and carcinoma of the 
large bowel, although the precise basis of these associa-
tions is difficult to work out.
Analysing the benefits of dietary fibre is compli-
cated by the fact that its exact quantification in food 
is technically difficult and that studies have tended to 
examine different types and combinations of fibre in 
different populations. A recent meta-analysis found an 
inverse association between the intake of dietary fibre, 
cereal fibre and whole grains and the risk of colorec-
tal cancer, but no association with intake of fibre from 
fruit, vegetables or legumes. Possible mechanisms for 
this protective effect include an increase in stool bulk 
with dilution of faecal carcinogens and decrease in tran-
sit time with reduction in contact of carcinogens with 
the colorectal epithelium. Bacterial fermentation of 
fibre leads to the production of short chain fatty acids, 
which may have an additional protective effect by re-
ducing intra-luminal pH. A similar inverse association 
between the intake of dietary fibre and breast cancer risk 
has been shown and inhibition of intestinal reabsorption 
of oestrogens with increased faecal excretion has been 
postulated as the basis of this.
Certain of the soluble NSPs have also been associ-
ated with short-term decreases in plasma glucose, in-
sulin and cholesterol concentrations, but as yet there is 
no firm evidence either for a dietary lack of NSPs be-
ing implicated in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes or 
hyperlipidaemia, or for a role for dietary NSPs in the 
management of these conditions, other than the fact 
that a high dietary NSP intake tends to be a marker for a 
diet more in line with current ‘healthy eating’ concepts. 
Higher intake of dietary fibre is often associated with 
other lifestyle factors such as increased physical activ-
ity, lower alcohol and dietary fat consumption and lower 
prevalence of obesity, which may act as confounding 
factors in evaluating its role.
High dietary fibre intakes in infants and young chil-
dren may displace energy-rich foods and restrict growth. 
In adults, high dietary intakes of NSP-rich foods are 
probably not harmful, although they may cause flatu-
lence, and there is a possible increase in the risk of 
mechanical bowel problems such as colonic volvulus. 
Divalent cations can bind to certain constituents of 
NSPs, for example to uronic acid residues, or to associ-
ated phytates, but this does not seem to cause mineral 
deficiency on a mixed diet. However, caution should be 
exercised in recommending dietary fibre supplements, 
particularly those high in phytates, to populations with 
borderline mineral balance, for example unprocessed 
bran for the elderly.
ASSESSMENT OF NUTRITIONAL STATUS
General
It is important to be able to assess nutritional status, not 
only in large surveys attempting to define dietary ref-
erence values, but also to determine whether individual 
patients’ nutritional needs are being met, to identify pa-
tients likely to have increased morbidity and mortality 
without nutritional support, and to monitor progress 
with time.
However, the wide range of individual nutrients, and 
the fact that nutritional status is reflected in all body 
compartments, not all of which are easily accessible to 
	
10  Clinical biochemistry of nutrition	
193
measurement, means that precise assessments are dif-
ficult to make. The various techniques that are used 
include:
•	 clinical assessment
•	 dietary assessment
•	 measurement of anthropometric indices
•	 functional assessment
•	 laboratory-based techniques.
Clinical assessment
Evidence of nutritional disorders may become apparent 
during the normal clinical processes of history taking 
and physical examination. The history should ascertain 
normal food intake and dietary preferences, the patient’s 
usual weight and any unexplained weight changes. Any 
difficulties in chewing or swallowing are important, to-
gether with gastrointestinal symptoms such as anorexia, 
nausea, vomiting or altered bowel habit. In the past 
medical history, any chronic disease may have effects on 
nutritional status, and surgery involving the gastroin-
testinal tract or associated organs may also be of impor-
tance. Chronic use of alcohol or drugs (therapeutic or 
otherwise) may have nutritional implications, and socio­
economic factors are important in terms of availabil-
ity of foodstuffs, adequacy of preparation and general 
support.
Physical examination may reveal clinical signs sug-
gestive of generalized nutritional depletion (e.g. muscle 
wasting¸ oedema); evidence of deficiency of specific nu-
trients as described above may also be present.
Dietary assessment
Dietary assessment involves reviewing the intake of food, 
and its individual dietary components, and comparing the 
amount consumed with reference values to see whether 
deficiency or excess is likely. To be maximally accurate, 
this would involve weighing all food eaten and analysing 
its chemical composition, which is clearly impractical for 
clinical purposes. Hence, an approximation of food intake 
must be arrived at and reference then made to standard 
food tables to calculate nutrient content (see Ashwell, in 
Further reading, below).
Methods of dietary assessment can be divided into 
those that record current intake, recall past intake or 
estimate typical intake. Recording current intake can 
be achieved in a quantitative way in which all food is 
weighed or measured prior to being eaten. However, 
this is intrusive even for a short period and an alterna-
tive technique is for the patient to describe the amount 
of food eaten; photographic atlases are available to im-
prove accuracy. Dietary recall methods involve asking 
the patient to recount everything consumed, usually 
in the previous 24 h. Whilst these methods lack ac-
curacy and tend to underestimate food intake they can 
reveal major areas of deficiency, or excess, requiring 
further evaluation. Food frequency questionnaires 
evaluate typical food consumption over a longer pe-
riod. They can be particularly useful for population 
studies, for example assessing vitamin D consumption 
in the elderly.
Anthropometric measurements
Clinical assessment can often indicate under- or overnu-
trition. However, a previously well nourished patient may 
be in a negative nutritional state for a long time before 
appearing clinically undernourished. Anthropometry 
comprises measurements of the human body and there 
are several anthropometric indices that are useful nutri-
tional indicators as a baseline for initial assessment and as 
tools for ongoing monitoring.
Height and weight. In adults, body weight can be used 
as a measure of nutrition in various ways. An individu-
al’s weight can be compared against ‘ideal’ or desirable 
weight using formulae or tables, although it is now usual 
to calculate the body mass index (BMI) (see Table 10.2) in 
this context. The BMI can be used to grade the severity 
of obesity or of chronic energy deficiency but as it can-
not distinguish between fat mass and lean mass it can be 
unrepresentative in patients with a large muscle mass, for 
example athletes, or in patients with an increased weight 
due to fluid retention. Variations in BMI between ethnic 
groups are also documented. In situations when measure-
ment of height is not possible (e.g. immobility, spinal 
disorder), alternative indices such as the demispan – 
the distance between the index/middle finger web and the 
sternal notch – can be used to calculate BMI.
In ill patients, calculation of weight lost as percent-
age of usual weight can be useful, weight loss of more 
than 10% being an indicator of poor clinical outcome. 
However, determination of weight loss by history has 
been proven to be inaccurate.
In the UK, it is recommended that all patients are 
screened for nutritional risk at presentation to a doctor 
or other healthcare professional, and, in in-patient set-
tings (both in hospitals and in nursing homes), at regular 
intervals thereafter. A suitable tool for this purpose is the 
Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool (MUST), which 
considers weight and unintentional weight loss, the time 
over which nutrient intake has been reduced and/or the 
TABLE 10.2  Body mass index (BMI)
BMI is calculated from  
the formula 
BMI
Description
Grade of 
obesity or 
chronic energy 
deficiency
<16
Chronic energy deficiency
III
16–16.9
Chronic energy deficiency
II
17–18.4
Chronic energy deficiency
I
18.5–24.9
Desirable
 
25.0–29.9
Overweight (or pre-obese)
 
30.0–34.9
Obese
I
35.0–39.9
Obese
II
>40.0
Obese
III
weight in kg
height in metres
(
)
2
The ‘desirable’ and other ranges shown are for adult white 
­individuals – the ranges are probably different for other racial 
groups, for example in Asians, the risks associated with being 
overweight begin to increase above 23 kg/m
2.
194	
Clinical biochemistry
likelihood for impaired nutrient intake in the future (see 
Further reading, below, for more details).
In hospitalized patients, serial weight measurements 
are valuable in monitoring nutritional status, particu-
larly where nutritional support is being provided. Acute 
changes are invariably due to changes in fluid balance 
(unless poor technique is responsible), but longer-term 
trends reflect tissue changes. As long as the patient is am-
bulant, weight measurements should be simple to obtain 
and record, although this may be surprisingly difficult to 
achieve on a busy hospital ward.
Nutrition is an important factor in growth and, in chil-
dren, measurement of height and estimation of rate of 
growth is an important part of the assessment of nutri-
tional status, in addition to measurement of weight.
Circumference measurements. In patients who are 
confined to bed, either because of debility or because 
movement is restricted by multiple fluid lines or splints, 
weight measurements are difficult to obtain unless the 
patient is in a special (and expensive) weighing bed. In 
these circumstances, some idea of tissue bulk may be ob-
tained by a mid-arm circumference (MAC) ­measurement 
made with a tape measure. The measure should be placed 
round the non-dominant arm, at a point midway be-
tween the acromion (shoulder tip) and the olecranon 
process (point of the elbow). Age- and sex-related refer-
ence standards are available for the raw measurements, 
which include muscle, fat and bone or attempts can be 
made to refine the measurement to reflect muscle mass 
alone. The first stage is to correct for fat by including the 
triceps skinfold (TSF, see below) measurement and us-
ing the formula (MAC –(π  ×  TSF)) to derive the mid-arm 
muscle circumference. This can be further manipulated 
to give uncorrected muscle area, and finally an adjust-
ment made for the contribution of the humerus, to give 
corrected muscle area. The latter can then be used to esti-
mate total body muscle mass, although given the difficul-
ties in making the two original measurements accurately, 
the margin of error by this stage is quite high. In the re-
search environment, dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry 
(DEXA) is being used to make similar measurements of 
body composition.
While these calculated values may be useful in epide-
miological surveys, in nutritional support the initial MAC 
measurement alone may help to indicate whether support 
is required, and serial measurements help to assess the 
success of treatment, although short-term changes are 
more likely to be due to imprecision in measurement than 
changes in tissue bulk. Measurements of calf circumfer-
ence can be used in a similar way.
Another ‘circumference’ parameter that may be useful in 
assessing the health risks of moderate obesity is to measure 
waist and hip circumferences and calculate the waist:hip 
ratio. This reflects the distribution of fat rather than the 
degree of obesity; the risk of ischaemic heart disease and 
stroke rises sharply with waist:hip ratios of more than 1.0 
for men and 0.8 for women. Even more simply, measure-
ment of waist circumference alone can be used in this con-
text, with a significant increase in cardiovascular risk being 
associated with waist measurements of over 102 cm in men 
and 88 cm in women (in Caucasian populations).
Skinfold thickness. Measurement of skinfold thick-
ness, obtained using calipers, is useful in assessing and 
monitoring nutritional status in patients who cannot be 
weighed, and also has a place in epidemiological surveys. 
However, the technique is prone to large variations, both 
within and between observers. The imprecision arises in 
identification of the exact location for measurement; the 
way the skinfold is picked up; the way the calipers are 
placed on the fold; the compression of the fold by the cal-
ipers and the exact timing of the reading. Some improve-
ment in performance may be achieved by taking the mean 
of three readings, usually on the left (or non-dominant) 
side. As with circumference measurements, the presence 
of oedema at the measurement site may be a further con-
founding factor.
A variety of sites have been used for skinfold measure-
ment, but the most common are triceps, biceps, subscapu-
lar and suprailiac. Equations are available for calculation 
of total body fat from these measurements (usually for re-
search purposes), but this assumes that subcutaneous fat 
reflects total body fat, which is not always the case: obese 
men tend to lay down more intra-abdominal fat than 
women, and visceral fat and subcutaneous fat have been 
shown to be biologically distinct. In clinical practice, body 
weight is more useful than skinfold thickness in the man-
agement of obesity, but in undernourished patients the 
latter may be useful. Age- and sex-related reference stan-
dards are published (e.g. for triceps skinfold thickness) and 
so measurement at presentation may identify severe mal-
nourishment: a triceps skinfold of <5 mm almost always 
reflects low body fat stores. Serial measurements can help 
in monitoring nutritional support but, again, short-term 
changes are more likely to reflect imprecision in measure-
ment than sudden changes in fat stores.
Functional assessment
The effects of nutritional status on certain aspects of 
bodily function can be used in the assessment of under-
nutrition, although with variable degrees of success. The 
best example is probably the effect of haematinic defi-
ciency on red blood cell morphology where, for example 
a hypochromic, microcytic picture may be the first indi-
cation of iron deficiency and macrocytosis of vitamin B12 
or folate deficiency (see Chapter 26).
Functional tests of muscle mass have also been used, 
for example grip strength, isometric knee extension and 
response to electrical stimulation. However, while muscle 
strength correlates with muscle mass in normal subjects, 
there are many non-nutritional factors that can cause 
weakness in sick patients, and malnutrition alone has to 
be quite severe before strength diminishes. There is also 
the possibility that repeated measurements may have a 
training effect on the muscles involved.
Visceral protein is sometimes disproportionately de-
creased in protein deficiency and various measures of vis-
ceral function have been used in nutritional assessment. 
Two of these are discussed below.
Hepatic secretory proteins. The liver synthesizes 
most of the circulating plasma proteins (apart from 
­immunoglobulins) and, in epidemiological studies, there 
	
10  Clinical biochemistry of nutrition	
195
is a clear correlation between plasma concentrations of 
these proteins and other markers of malnutrition. For 
example, in adults who are otherwise well, a plasma al-
bumin <35 g/L and a plasma transferrin <1.5 g/L usually 
indicate protein malnutrition. Since most of these pro-
teins can be measured quite easily, there is a temptation 
to use them as nutritional markers in individual patients, 
but there are many pitfalls for the unwary.
Albumin is probably the most frequently measured 
plasma protein and low concentrations may reflect a de-
ficiency in dietary protein intake. However, it must be re-
membered that decreased synthesis may be due to other 
factors, for example liver disease, and that the plasma con-
centration is also affected by fluid balance, loss of protein 
from the body, tissue catabolism and distribution of albumin 
across the various body compartments. It should also be 
remembered that, while the intravascular concentration of 
albumin is relatively high, more than half of the total mass 
of albumin is actually extravascular. It is noteworthy that in 
uncomplicated starvation, plasma albumin concentrations 
may remain normal for a relatively long period (the frac-
tional catabolic rate decreases), whereas in sepsis, the con-
centration can fall significantly over a much shorter period.
Even in circumstances where the plasma albumin con-
centration does reflect nutritional status, the relatively 
long half-life (20  days) means that it does not respond 
to rapid changes and so measurements of other plasma 
proteins with shorter half-lives have been used. These 
include transferrin (9  days), prealbumin (1–2  days) and 
retinol-binding protein (10 h), but unfortunately, these all 
have similar drawbacks to albumin and are also affected by 
factors such as the acute phase response, oestrogen con-
centrations and factors relating to their own specific func-
tion (e.g. iron deficiency in the case of transferrin). Serial 
determinations may be of more use than single measure-
ments, and measurement of a marker of the acute phase 
reaction (e.g. C-reactive protein) at the same time may 
help in interpretation. In clinical practice, measurement 
of these proteins rarely contributes to the management of 
individual patients, and failure to appreciate their limita-
tions may lead to inappropriate decisions being made.
The immune response. Malnourished people are more 
susceptible to infections. Plasma immunoglobulin con-
centrations are generally maintained, but cell-mediated 
immunity may be impaired. The circulating absolute 
lymphocyte count is often low (<2.0  ×  10
9/L) in malnu-
trition, although this is a very non-specific finding.
Delayed cutaneous hypersensitivity testing against 
common allergens has been used to assess malnutrition, 
but many non-nutritional factors (e.g. infection, malig-
nancy, radiation, surgery, drugs) affect the response and, 
in any case, the results may not be reproducible. In vitro 
tests of T cell function may be an alternative, but in clini-
cal practice neither of these approaches is in common use.
Laboratory-based assessment of individual 
nutrients
Energy
Laboratory-based techniques are not in general use 
for the assessment of energy stores, whether of fat or 
carbohydrate. However, there are techniques for the 
measurement of energy expenditure that may be of use 
in assessing how much energy to provide as part of nutri-
tional support.
Direct calorimetry measures heat loss from the body, 
which can be used to derive the metabolic rate assuming 
that body temperature remains constant and no external 
work is performed. The technique involves the subject 
remaining in a special, insulated room equipped for heat 
exchange, so is not applicable in general clinical practice. 
Indirect calorimetry measures oxygen consumption and 
carbon dioxide production, and from these the respira-
tory quotient can be calculated, together with the energy 
expenditure (Fig. 10.7). This is the technique used by the 
‘metabolic measurement carts’ that have been popular in 
some intensive care units.
The use of doubly-labelled water (containing the sta-
ble isotopes 
2H and 
18O) has produced new data on to-
tal energy expenditure in free-living individuals, but the 
technique is not suitable for the assessment of patients. 
Respiratory quotient
(RQ)
Volume O2 consumed
Volume CO2 produced
Oxygen
consumed
Energy released
from foods
Litres of
oxygen
consumed
Energy
production
(kcal)
Energy expenditure

RQs when metabolizing individual energy sources:
Carbohydrate 
          1.0
Fat 
 
          0.7
Protein (average)               0.8
Excess energy used for 
net fat synthesis 
          >1.01
The amount of energy released per litre of oxygen varies
with different foods, but on average is about 4.82 kcal per
litre of oxygen (at standard temperature and pressure).
Thus:
A more accurate estimation can be obtained by using
a measurement of nitrogen excretion to assess protein
metabolism, and then the RQ to assess the relative
proportions of carbohydrate and fat being used.
FIGURE  10.7  ■  Calculation of respiratory quotient and energy 
expenditure.
196	
Clinical biochemistry
Heart rate can also be used as an index of energy me-
tabolism, but although the measurement is obviously very 
much easier, the relationship between heart rate and en-
ergy expenditure is not linear and there are many con-
founding factors, so it can be useful in studies of groups 
of people but not in individuals.
Basal metabolic rate (BMR) can be estimated for 
healthy individuals from knowledge of age, sex, height 
and weight using the Harris–Benedict (Fig.  10.8), 
Schofield (Fig. 10.9) or similar equations and, for sick pa-
tients, suitable adjustment can then be made for disease 
state, pyrexia, mobility etc. However, the more severely 
ill the patient, the less likely it is that the calculated figure 
truly reflects total energy expenditure.
Protein
Laboratory-based tests for visceral protein have already 
been discussed under functional tests of nutritional sta-
tus. However, there are a number of other tests that assess 
total body protein (predominantly muscle).
Total body nitrogen can be measured by neutron activa-
tion (an estimate of total body protein is simply obtained by 
multiplying this figure by 6.25) and this can demonstrate 
changes over a period of only a few weeks. However, the 
technique is expensive and involves a significant dose of ra-
diation, so it is only used as a research tool. Almost all body 
potassium is intracellular; there is virtually none in adipo-
cytes and potassium in the skeleton and red blood cells is 
not readily exchangeable, so exchangeable potassium mea-
sured using dilution of 
42K is a measure of fat-free mass. By 
monitoring both total body nitrogen and potassium, it can 
be shown that nitrogen losses in malnutrition are relatively 
higher from lean tissue (high potassium content) than from 
fibrous tissue (low potassium content).
Measurements of bioelectrical impedance have also 
been used to predict lean body mass. However, the 
technique actually measures total body water and the 
extension to lean body mass assumes a constant level of 
hydration in such tissue, which may not always be the 
case, particularly in sick individuals.
Outside the research environment, a direct measure 
of muscle mass may be obtained from the 24 h excre-
tion of creatinine, a metabolite of muscle creatine. This 
is sometimes corrected for height (the creatinine:height 
ratio) and standard values are available. However, urinary 
creatinine excretion does fluctuate (e.g. with exercise, py-
rexia, meat intake) and the technique depends on com-
plete urine collections and normal renal function, so that 
in practice, it is not widely used.
It may sometimes be useful to assess nitrogen balance. 
Nitrogen intake may require dietary analysis or, for pa-
tients on enteral or parenteral formulations, it will al-
ready be known. Nitrogen output for research purposes 
involves analysing stool and urine for total nitrogen con-
tent, but in the past, for clinical purposes, urinary urea 
nitrogen has been measured and standard adjustments 
made for urinary non-urea nitrogen and faecal nitrogen. 
This approach was valid for reasonably well patients (as-
suming the urine was not infected with a urea-splitting 
organism), but diverges further from the true nitrogen 
output of the more severely ill the patient, so its use can-
not be recommended.
Vitamins
It is sometimes useful to assess body stores of fat-soluble 
vitamins, as outlined below, but only rarely necessary to 
measure the water-soluble vitamins (with the exception 
of vitamin B12 and folate, see Chapter  26). This is be-
cause they are relatively non-toxic and, if deficiency is 
suspected, a trial of therapy is safe and simpler than trying 
to measure them. The interpretation of laboratory data is 
not without difficulty – some vitamins are affected by the 
acute phase response, for example vitamin D concentra-
tion may fall by up to 40% – so differentiation of true de-
ficiency may be difficult. Measurement of concentrations 
of some vitamins in erythrocytes rather than plasma, 
Adult males
Adult females
In disease - free individuals, the following formulae give an
estimate of BMR in kcal/24h:
W = body weight in kg
H = height in cm
A = age in years
BMR = 665.1 + 9.56W + 1.85H – 4.67A
BMR = 66.5 + 13.75W + 5H – 6.77A
FIGURE  10.8  ■  Harris–Benedict equations for the calculation of 
basal metabolic rate (BMR).
Men
10–17 years BMR  17.7  W  657 
SEE  105
18–29 years BMR  15.1  W  692 
SEE  156
30–59 years BMR  11.5  W  873 
SEE  164
10–17 years BMR  13.4  W  692 SEE  112
18–29 years BMR  14.8  W  487 SEE  120
30–59 years BMR    8.3  W  846 SEE  112
W  body weight in kg
SEE  standard error of estimation
(the true BMR lies in the range calculated BMR  SEE)
As a simpler alternative to the Harris–Benedict equations, the
following equations can be used to calculate BMR in kcal/24 h:
Women
FIGURE  10.9  ■  Schofield equations for the calculation of basal 
metabolic rate (BMR) in kcal/24 h.
	
10  Clinical biochemistry of nutrition	
197
during the acute phase, has been shown to be more rep-
resentative of body stores.
Vitamin A. The standardized definition of vitamin A de-
ficiency is in terms of liver stores of retinol, but this is 
not a practical indicator. By convention, a plasma retinol 
concentration <0.7 μmol/L, is used to define deficiency. 
However, plasma retinol concentration tends to be main-
tained over a wide range of liver reserves, making it an 
insensitive detector of deficiency and as retinol is carried 
bound to retinol-binding protein (RBP) in the plasma, 
conditions reducing RBP concentration (e.g. liver dis-
ease) may lower plasma retinol concentration without 
reflecting decreased stores. The diagnosis of vitamin A 
deficiency is often made on clinical grounds. The re-
sponse to a test dose of vitamin A may help to distinguish 
true deficiency from functional deficiency due to a lack of 
RBP. In the former, the plasma vitamin A concentration 
rises markedly within a few hours; in the latter it does 
not. Very high retinol intakes may increase the plasma 
concentration.
Plasma carotenes can also be measured and, in gen-
eral, reflect dietary intake. Dietary assessment is usually 
all that is necessary for this, but measurement is occasion-
ally helpful to establish whether an odd skin colouration 
is due to hypercarotenaemia or not.
Vitamin D. Patients with a nutritional deficiency of vi-
tamin D may present with clinical symptoms and signs; 
suspicion may also be raised by the finding of an increase 
in plasma alkaline phosphatase activity. Plasma calcium 
may be low but is frequently within the reference range 
as a result of secondary hyperparathyroidism, which may 
result in a low plasma phosphate concentration.
The main storage form of vitamin D in the body is 
25-hydroxycholecalciferol and this is also the main form 
in plasma, where it is bound to a specific binding pro-
tein. Measurement of plasma 25-hydroxycholecalciferol 
provides a useful indicator of vitamin D stores: the refer-
ence range for total 25-hydroxycholecalciferol is of the 
order of 50–140 nmol/L, although the result should be 
interpreted with regard to the time of year, as there can 
be a two-fold seasonal variation in temperate regions. 
Concentrations <50 nmol/L indicate vitamin D insuffi-
ciency that may benefit from supplementation, and values 
<25 nmol/L suggest deficiency.
It is also possible to measure the active metabolite 
of vitamin D (1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol, calcitriol), 
although this is more difficult as the plasma concen-
trations are approximately 1000-fold lower than those 
of 25-­hydroxycholecalciferol. Its synthesis is normally 
closely regulated and concentrations do not reflect 
­vitamin D status. Such measurements tend only to be 
necessary in the investigation of rare, inherited disorders 
of vitamin D metabolism or action (see Chapter 30).
Vitamin D toxicity can occur if supplements are given, 
as the difference between appropriate and toxic intakes 
is fairly small. This is generally detected in the labora-
tory as hypercalcaemia that gets better when the sup-
plements are reduced or stopped, but it is occasionally 
necessary to confirm the diagnosis with plasma vitamin 
D measurement.
Vitamin E. Vitamin E status is assessed by measurement of 
plasma tocopherol concentration, most commonly by high 
performance liquid chromatography. Increases in plasma 
lipoprotein concentrations tend to result in increases in 
plasma tocopherol, so it may be appropriate, in some cir-
cumstances (e.g. in patients with cholestasis or if the plasma 
tocopherol is found to be low in order to confirm deficiency) 
to express the result as a plasma tocopherol:cholesterol ratio.
Vitamin K. Although it is possible to measure vitamin 
K in plasma, the usual laboratory approach is to measure 
the plasma concentrations of the vitamin K-dependent 
clotting factors. In vitamin K deficiency, these are present 
in normal quantities, but in a non-functional state (pro-
teins formed in vitamin K absence – PIVKA), and so a 
functional assay, conventionally the prothrombin time or 
international normalized ratio (INR), is used (although 
the activated partial thromboplastin time is also abnormal 
in vitamin K deficiency).
There is no generally available test of vitamin K excess, 
largely because its lack of toxicity makes it unnecessary.
Thiamin. The single most important factor in detect-
ing thiamin deficiency is a high index of clinical suspi-
cion, and the safest confirmatory test is a trial of thiamin 
supplements, since delay can be harmful in a deficient 
patient. However, assuming appropriate samples can be 
obtained without delaying treatment, there are labora-
tory tests that can be used to assess thiamin status.
Methods are now available for measurement of thia-
mine and its phosphate esters in whole blood, but because 
of the low concentration and consequent analytical prob-
lems, some laboratories still use functional tests of thia-
min deficiency, the most common of which is probably 
measurement of red cell transketolase with and without 
the addition of thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP). In nor-
mal subjects, TPP enhancement of transketolase is up to 
15%, but may be increased to as much as 25% in severe 
deficiency. Urinary thiamin measurement has been used, 
with low outputs being found in clinical deficiency states. 
Discrimination is said to be improved if the percentage 
excretion of a test dose is measured; a higher proportion 
is retained in deficiency.
Riboflavin. The laboratory approach to the assessment 
of riboflavin (vitamin B2) status is similar to that taken 
with thiamin. Urinary excretion can be measured and 
an output of 0.5–0.8 mg/24 h probably indicates an ad-
equate intake, but does not necessarily reflect total body 
content. Factors such as age, physical activity and illness 
can also influence urinary excretion. Discrimination may 
be improved by measuring the percentage excretion of a 
loading dose of riboflavin, an increased proportion being 
retained in deficiency states.
In the blood, about 90% of riboflavin is present in the 
red cells. This can be measured directly, but measure-
ment of red cell glutathione reductase activity is probably 
more useful. The enzyme is flavin adenine dinucleotide 
(FAD) dependent, so that activity falls in riboflavin de-
ficiency, but is restored on addition of FAD. An increase 
in activity of 30% or more confirms riboflavin deficiency. 
The test assesses long-term tissue riboflavin status and is 
198	
Clinical biochemistry
very sensitive. It cannot be used if there is coexistent red 
cell glucose 6-phosphatase deficiency.
Nicotinamide. Laboratory tests of nicotinamide status 
tend not to be entirely satisfactory, possibly because no 
specific functional test has yet been developed. Approaches 
used to date include measurement of whole blood NAD 
concentration and of urinary excretion of nicotinamide 
metabolites, in particular 1-methyl nicotinamide.
Vitamin B6. A variety of biochemical techniques have been 
described for the assessment of vitamin B6 status. Urinary ex-
cretion of 4-pyridoxic acid reflects immediate dietary intake 
and pyridoxal 5-phosphate in blood can also be measured, 
but indirect approaches are less technically demanding and 
have been more widely adopted.
In vitamin B6-deficient subjects, the urinary excretion 
of xanthurenic acid shows a marked increase following 
an l-tryptophan load, and this is the basis of the tryp-
tophan load test. This is relatively easy to perform and 
has been widely used, but interpretation of the results 
requires ­caution as there are a number of other factors 
that can affect tryptophan metabolism. The most useful 
test currently available is probably the measurement of 
red cell aminotransferase (e.g. aspartate aminotransfer-
ase) activity, with and without the addition of pyridoxal 
5-phosphate, in a technique analogous to that used for 
the functional assessment of thiamin (red cell transke-
tolase) and riboflavin (red cell glutathione reductase). 
Serum aminotransferase activities are also affected by vi-
tamin B6 deficiency, but the very wide fluctuations seen 
in disease states make them less useful than erythrocyte 
activities in this context.
Pantothenic acid. Tests of pantothenic acid status are 
rarely necessary and no biochemical test has become gen-
erally accepted. Pantothenic acid itself can be measured 
in urine and serum, the urinary excretion being more im-
mediately affected by dietary intake. Assessment of the 
red cell content of coenzyme A may be a functional test 
of pantothenic acid status.
Biotin. Techniques have been described for the measure-
ment of biotin in both urine and blood. However, these 
are not straightforward and, in practice, biotin status is 
rarely assessed biochemically.
Vitamin C. Vitamin C can be measured in plasma, 
white blood cells and urine. Unfortunately, none of 
these is entirely satisfactory in assessing vitamin C sta-
tus. Plasma concentration tends to reflect recent intake 
and so will fall with decreased intake before body stores 
are depleted. Leukocyte (or buffy coat) vitamin C con-
tent probably reflects body stores better than the plasma 
concentration, but the measurement is technically dif-
ficult, requires large quantities of blood and, if the buffy 
coat content is measured, any abnormality in the relative 
proportions of white cells and platelets will introduce 
further error.
Urinary ascorbate can be measured relatively eas-
ily in a fresh sample, and output decreases quite mark-
edly in deficiency. However, the technique is not very 
specific and various ascorbic acid saturation tests have 
been devised to improve on this. These all assume that 
if body stores are depleted, most of a standard daily dose 
of ascorbic acid will be retained until stores are repleted, 
after which relatively large amounts of ascorbate appear 
in the urine. These tests are not perfect, but are simple 
to carry out and appear to be satisfactory if a clinical sus-
picion of vitamin C deficiency needs to be confirmed. An 
added advantage is that any deficiency is actually treated 
by the test.
Trace elements
There is a general problem in assessing body stores of 
trace elements, in that plasma concentrations are not nec-
essarily related to tissue content, as is apparent in the fol-
lowing discussion.
Zinc. Assessment of body zinc status is not easy. 
Measurement of serum zinc concentration is probably 
the simplest approach, but the result is influenced by 
many things other than total body zinc. There is a di-
urnal variation with a peak at about 10.00 h, fluctuation 
with recent dietary intake and a fall with hypoalbumi-
naemia. It also tends to fall in disease: for example, in 
acute inflammation, interleukin-1 stimulates zinc uptake 
by the liver, although in tissue destruction, the zinc may 
be maintained as zinc is released from the tissues, even 
though net balance is actually negative as losses in urine 
increase.
Urinary zinc excretion is also difficult to interpret. 
Low values may reflect deficiency, but, even if environ-
mental contamination can be avoided, normal or raised 
excretion does not exclude deficiency; urinary losses may 
even be the cause of the deficiency.
Since serum and urine zinc measurements are gener-
ally unsatisfactory, a variety of other approaches have been 
tried. Hair zinc is liable to environmental contamination 
(e.g. from certain shampoos), turns over relatively slowly 
and depends on the rate of hair growth. Erythrocyte zinc 
content responds only slowly to changes in zinc status, 
which can be rapid. (However, the high zinc content of 
red cells, in the enzyme carbonate dehydratase, is im-
portant, since it means that in vitro haemolysis increases 
the measured serum zinc concentration.) Changes in the 
plasma and tissue activities of zinc-dependent enzymes 
like carbonate dehydratase and alkaline phosphatase have 
given varying results. Leukocyte zinc content correlates 
well with muscle content, but its measurement is not easy 
and requires large quantities of blood.
Serum zinc remains a common, albeit unsatisfactory, 
measure of zinc status, although some authorities state 
that a serum zinc concentration <7 μmol/L is a clear in-
dication of deficiency. When true deficiency is suspected, 
a therapeutic trial of zinc supplementation with careful 
clinical monitoring is probably the best approach.
Copper. The diagnosis of copper overload is discussed 
in Chapters 13 and 14. In the detection of copper defi-
ciency, plasma copper concentration may be low, but de-
ficiency may be masked because caeruloplasmin synthesis 
is increased in the acute phase response. Caeruloplasmin 
	
10  Clinical biochemistry of nutrition	
199
is also increased in pregnancy and by exogenous oestro-
gens. Measurement of caeruloplasmin before and after 
moderate copper supplementation may be a useful tech-
nique; an increase confirming deficiency. Interpretation 
of copper concentrations in other body fluids and tissues 
is difficult when looking for deficiency, although changes 
in the activities of copper-containing enzymes like super-
oxide dismutase may prove to be useful functional tests of 
copper deficiency in the future.
Selenium. Plasma selenium concentration is an indica-
tor of recent selenium intake, rather than body stores. 
Measurement of whole blood selenium concentration has 
been used but may give a false picture if there has been 
recent blood transfusion. Selenium in plasma is bound 
to lipoproteins, which may decrease in concentration 
in malnutrition, causing a secondary decrease in plasma 
selenium not necessarily related to body content. The 
activity of the selenium-containing enzyme glutathione 
peroxidase tends to decrease in selenium deficiency and 
may be a better functional indicator, but it is not clear 
whether the measurement is best made in erythrocytes, 
platelets or even plasma. Excess selenium is excreted in 
the urine, so urinary measurements are useful in sus-
pected toxicity, but are not helpful in deficiency.
Molybdenum. Plasma and urine concentrations of 
molybdenum are normally very low and measurements 
in these fluids are not useful in detecting deficiency. 
Increased urinary excretion of xanthine and sulphite, 
which decrease with molybdate supplementation, may be 
a useful approach in confirming suspected deficiency.
Manganese. Measurement of plasma and urine manga-
nese is useful when investigating suspected toxicity, but 
since most manganese is intracellular, whole blood mea-
surements are used in the detection of deficiency.
Chromium. Plasma and urine chromium can be mea-
sured by inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry, 
but the limit of detection is such that they are more useful 
in detecting toxicity.
CONCLUSION
Clinical nutrition is a huge topic, with many different 
professions and specialties involved. Biochemical tests 
have their limitations in measuring nutritional status, and 
it is important for the clinical biochemist to be aware of 
these, in order that the tests are not used inappropriately.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The author would like to thank Stephen K. Bangert who 
wrote the chapter in the previous edition of this book.
Further reading
Ashwell M, editor. McCance and Widdowson. A scientific partnership 
of 60 years. London: The British Nutrition Foundation; 1993. 
Fascinating accounts of the early work on nutrition by McCance and 
Widdowson.
Department of Health. (Report on Health and Social Subjects 41) 
Dietary reference values for food energy and nutrients for the United 
Kingdom. Report of the panel on dietary reference values of the 
committee on medical aspects of food policy. London: HMSO; 1991. 
Still in print and a useful starting point for information about individual 
nutrients.
Geissler C, Powers H, editors. Human nutrition. 12th ed. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2011. 
The twelfth edition of the classic text Human Nutrition and Dietetics, 
previously edited by Garrow, James and Ralph.
Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool (MUST).
This is a five-step screening tool to identify adults who are malnourished, 
at risk of malnutrition, or obese. It can be downloaded from the website of 
the British Association for Parenteral and Enteral Nutrition: www.bapen.
org.uk. Accessed November 2012.
200
C H A P T E R  1 1
Nutritional disorders and their 
management
Ruth M. Ayling
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  200
MALNUTRITION  200
Protein–energy malnutrition in children 
201
Chronic energy deficiency in Western 
adults 
201
OBESITY  201
Aetiology of obesity 
202
Secondary causes of obesity 
203
Appetite 
203
Management of obesity 
205
EATING DISORDERS  207
Anorexia nervosa 
207
Bulimia nervosa 
208
DIET IN THE AETIOLOGY OF DISEASE  208
Dental caries 
208
Cancer 
208
THERAPEUTIC DIETS, DIETARY SUPPLEMENTS 
AND NUTRACEUTICALS  208
PROVISION OF NUTRITION  
SUPPORT  209
Indications for nutrition support 
209
Enteral feeding 
210
Parenteral nutrition 
211
Short bowel syndrome 
213
CONCLUSION  213
INTRODUCTION
The term ‘nutritional disorders’ covers a wide range of 
conditions. Some of these disorders are primarily nutri-
tional and some are not, albeit that nutrition is still an 
important factor. This makes their classification some-
what arbitrary, but the following broad categories can be 
recognized:
•	 specific deficiency caused by inadequate supply of 
individual nutrients and occasionally, oversupply of 
an individual nutrient leading to toxicity, which has 
been discussed in Chapter 10
•	 generalized undernutrition, which is an important 
cause of morbidity and mortality across the world
•	 generalized overnutrition, in the form of obesity, 
which has become an important public health problem
•	 eating disorders are not primarily nutritional disor-
ders, but have important nutritional effects and sig-
nificant metabolic consequences
•	 specific diseases in which dietary factors may be im-
portant in their aetiology. In some cases there may 
be scope for dietary modification to alter the course 
of the disease (e.g. hyperlipidaemia). In others, this 
is not so (e.g. where carcinogenesis has already been 
stimulated by a dietary component)
•	 conditions in which diet has no role in aetiol-
ogy, but for which specific dietary ­intervention 
is an essential part of management (e.g. 
phenylketonuria)
•	 primarily non-nutritional diseases in which gen-
eral nutritional support may improve outcome, 
especially if patients are, or are likely to become, 
malnourished during the course of their illness.
MALNUTRITION
‘Malnutrition’ is often taken to mean inadequate nu-
trition, but this definition also includes dietary ex-
cess, so the term ‘undernutrition’ is to be preferred. 
Undernutrition is a major public health problem in the 
developing world. Diets of affected populations tend to 
be deficient in both macronutrients and micronutrients. 
A high prevalence of bacterial and parasitic disease tends 
to contribute to undernutrition; in addition, an effect of 
undernutrition is to increase susceptibility to infection. 
In children, severe undernutrition is predominantly a 
state of protein energy malnutrition (PEM). In adults, in 
whom protein requirements are relatively lower (since 
growth has ceased), the term chronic energy deficiency 
(CED) is used. In the UK, severe undernutrition is most 
commonly seen in adults, usually in association with in-
tercurrent illness and is discussed later in the chapter 
under nutrition support.
	
11  Nutritional disorders and their management	
201
Protein–energy malnutrition in children
Worldwide, PEM remains the most common disorder 
of infancy and childhood: as many as 200 million chil-
dren may be significantly affected at any one time and 
it accounts for over half the deaths in the under-five age 
group in developing countries. One way of assessing 
and categorizing undernutrition is by using a weight for 
height z score, which compares a child’s height to that of 
a healthy reference population of children of the same 
height or length. The z score is expressed in terms of 
standard deviations (SD) from the mean of the reference 
population. When height or length cannot be measured 
easily, upper arm circumference, which changes little 
in healthy children between the ages of six months and 
five years, can be used as a measure of lean body mass 
to identify undernutrition. Using these methods, acute 
undernutrition can be divided into moderate and severe. 
Moderate undernutrition is defined as a weight for height 
or length z score between −2 and −3SD. Severe undernu-
trition is defined by a z score of <−3SD, an arm circum-
ference <110 mm or the presence of nutritional oedema. 
Moderate or severe undernutrition without nutritional 
oedema is termed marasmus. Undernutrition with oe-
dema is termed kwashiorkor.
Marasmus tends to occur in younger children who 
have the greatest energy requirements and susceptibility 
to infection. Affected children appear emaciated with loss 
of subcutaneous fat, muscle wasting and triangular fa-
cies due to loss of buccal fat pads. In addition to oedema, 
children with kwashiorkor have enlarged and fatty livers. 
They may also have dermatoses and depigmentation of 
hair, the latter being attributed to reduced availability of 
tyrosine, a precursor of melanin.
The classic explanation for the two different syndromes 
suggests that marasmus occurs on a diet poor in protein and 
energy and kwashiorkor on a diet poor in protein but with 
relatively more carbohydrate. In marasmus, insulin secre-
tion would, therefore, be expected to be low, prompting 
breakdown of muscle protein and mobilization of amino 
acids for hepatic synthesis of protein, particularly al-
bumin. In kwashiorkor, relatively higher carbohydrate 
intake would lead to maintenance of insulin secretion 
with relative sparing of muscle protein, therefore limit-
ing amino acids available for synthesis of liver proteins. 
Reduced synthesis of albumin and apolipoproteins would 
lead to hypoalbuminaemia and oedema, and accumula-
tion of lipids in the liver, respectively. However, recent 
studies have found marasmus and kwashiorkor to exist in 
populations where children are eating similar diets. It has 
been suggested that the clinical syndromes may in fact re-
flect differences in the metabolic response to starvation, 
for example varying rates of fatty acid oxidation, rather 
than the content of the diet.
The treatment of PEM is the provision of appro-
priate nutrition and treatment of associated infection. 
Treatment of moderate undernutrition involves the ad-
dition to the diet of suitable nutrient rich supplements 
containing significant energy and the recommended daily 
allowance of micronutrients; examples include cereal and 
legume blended flours and lipid rich fortified spreads.
Severe PEM is associated with atrophy of the small 
bowel mucosa, reducing its capacity for digestion and 
absorption, hence liquid, milk-based products, supple-
mented with potassium and phosphate, are favoured 
for treatment, initially administered as small boluses. 
Intravenous fluids should be avoided, except in children 
with profuse diarrhoea. Children with kwashiorkor have 
increased total body water with sodium retention. Those 
with marasmus have chronic hypovolaemia with sec-
ondary hyperaldosteronism, although tissue breakdown 
and urinary potassium loss tend to result in hypokalae-
mia. However, children with marasmus are particularly 
likely to have a degree of cardiac atrophy and reduced 
stroke volume, predisposing to cardiac failure if fluid 
overloaded. In addition, the reduction in subcutaneous 
fat renders these children susceptible to hypothermia and 
hypoglycaemia during the recovery process.
Chronic energy deficiency in Western adults
Studies of both medical and surgical inpatients in de-
veloped countries indicate that a significant proportion 
of patients have CED, although variation in the criteria 
used to define this means that the exact prevalence is un-
certain. Caution is required in applying the ­marasmus/
kwashiorkor distinction to such patients, since the pres-
ence of hypoalbuminaemia or oedema is more likely 
to be due to the underlying illness than malnutrition. 
Nonetheless, severe CED in such patients has important 
effects. Wasting of respiratory muscles increases the risk 
of chest infection and may delay weaning from a venti-
lator. Myocardial function may be impaired and skeletal 
muscle wasting delays mobilization, with a consequent in-
creased risk of thromboembolism and bed sores. Chronic 
energy deficiency also results in impaired resistance to in-
fection, and gut permeability may be increased, allowing 
entry of bacteria and toxins through the gut wall. Apathy 
and depression impair active efforts at recovery and may 
also impair appetite, worsening the situation further.
The recognition of undernutrition in adults and its 
treatment are considered later in this chapter in the sec-
tion on nutritional support.
OBESITY
Obesity is an excess of body fat. For epidemiological 
studies and population surveys, as well as clinical assess-
ment of individual patients, body mass index (BMI) is fre-
quently used to define overweight (BMI ≥25 kg/m
2) and 
obesity (BMI ≥30 kg/m
2). Whilst it is a useful index, BMI 
is not without problems, but alternative methods are ex-
pensive and not readily available. In children, there are 
marked changes in BMI with age. It is recommended that 
obesity in children is defined with reference to BMI cen-
tiles, and charts are available for this purpose, but there is 
no universally accepted BMI classification system. In the 
UK, it is suggested that the 91st and 95th centiles should 
be used in children as indicators of overweight and obe-
sity, respectively. Estimates of the prevalence of obesity 
202	
Clinical biochemistry
are likely to be subject to variation because of differences 
in the definition, cut-offs and reference standards used.
It is estimated that at least one billion people ­worldwide 
are overweight or obese and at least 300 million are obese. 
In the UK, from 1993 to 2010, the proportion of men 
and women who were overweight remained stable at 
40% for men and 30% for women. However, there was a 
gradual increase in the proportion classified as obese from 
13.2% of men (16.4% of women) in 1993 to 26.2% of 
men (26.1% of women) in 2010. Obesity is associated with 
significant health risks and the economic cost has been es-
timated as 3–8% of total healthcare expenditure. There is 
a relationship between mortality risk and increased BMI 
which, although strongest in those below 50 years of age, 
persists into the ninth decade of life. In addition, various 
complications are associated with obesity (see Table 11.1).
Aetiology of obesity
The aetiology of obesity is complex and influences on 
body fat content include genetic, perinatal, behavioural 
and environmental factors. Epidemiological data indi-
cate that the consumption of a diet that is high in fat 
and the frequent consumption of ‘fast food’ increase 
the risk of obesity. This is well demonstrated by the 
recent rise in obesity in developing countries, whose 
populations have replaced their indigenous diet with a 
more energy-dense Westernized alternative. There is 
also a close relationship between low levels of physical 
activity and weight gain and the duration of television 
viewing is a predictor of obesity risk in both adults and 
children.
Family studies have established that hereditary in-
fluences are important in determining body weight, 
although, to-date, genetic studies have concentrated 
on severe, early-onset forms of obesity, which are rare. 
Mutations resulting in leptin (see below) and leptin-­
receptor deficiencies have been described. Affected 
­children are of normal birth weight, but exhibit extreme 
hyperphagia and gain weight rapidly. Children with con-
genital absence of pro-­opiomelanocortin (POMC) gene 
products also become obese, despite ­glucocorticoid de-
ficiency, an endocrine state normally associated with 
weight loss. These patients characteristically have pale 
skin and red hair, resulting from an absence of the action 
of POMC-derived peptides on melanocytes. A number 
of heterozygous point mutations in POMC have been 
found, which increase the risk of obesity, although are not 
invariably associated with it. Heterozygous mutations in 
the melanocortin receptor MC4R have been associated 
with dominantly inherited obesity and have been found 
in 1–2.5% of those with a BMI of >30 kg/m
2.
There are a number of conditions which have obe-
sity as a feature of their clinical phenotype. The majority 
of these are associated with short stature; this contrasts 
with simple obesity where children tend to be tall. 
Examples of pleiotropic obesity syndromes are shown in 
Table 11.2.
TABLE 11.1  Complications associated 
with obesity
System
Complication
Cardiovascular
Coronary heart disease, cardiac failure, 
hypertension
Respiratory
Sleep apnoea, dyspnoea
Gastrointestinal
Fatty liver, reflux oesophagitis, 
gallstones
Musculoskeletal
Arthritis, back pain
Endocrine and 
metabolic
Type 2 diabetes mellitus, insulin 
resistance, polycystic ovary syndrome, 
amenorrhoea, dyslipidaemia
Skin
Acanthosis nigricans, intertrigo
TABLE 11.2  Pleiotropic obesity syndromes
Syndrome
Genetic basis
Clinical features
Alstrom
Autosomal recessive
ALMS gene located at 2p13
Obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus
Blindness
Dilated cardiomyopathy
Sensorineural hearing loss
Other: hepatic, pulmonary, renal and urological dysfunction
Bardet–Biedl
Autosomal recessive
14 genes code for BB proteins involved  
in ciliary action
Obesity
Hypogonadism
Intellectual impairment
Polydactyly
Retinitis pigmentosa
Carpenter
Autosomal recessive
RAB23 gene located at 6p11
Obesity
Cardiac defects
Craniosynostosis
Polysyndactyly
Prader–Willi
15q 11–13
Imprinted sequence
Obesity and hyperphagia
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
Hypotonia
Intellectual impairment
Short stature
Small hands and feet
	
11  Nutritional disorders and their management	
203
Secondary causes of obesity
Investigation of patients to exclude secondary causes of 
obesity is usually unrewarding, but remains important. 
Clinical features suggesting endocrine pathology should be 
pursued, but in-depth dynamic function testing to exclude 
rare disorders is not usually necessary. Hypothyroidism 
should be excluded by measuring serum thyroid stimu-
lating hormone and free thyroxine concentrations. The 
­investigation of possible Cushing syndrome may be more 
difficult, as false positive results have been described in 
pseudo-Cushing syndrome due to obesity. Growth hor-
mone deficiency may also lead to weight gain, although 
morbid obesity is not usually present. Associations are 
also recognized between obesity and polycystic ovary syn-
drome, hypogonadism and insulinoma.
Some drugs are associated with weight gain. The ef-
fect is assumed to be due either to central effects on ap-
petite (e.g. certain anticonvulsants and antipsychotics) or 
to peripheral metabolic effects (e.g. oral hypoglycaemic 
agents, protease inhibitors).
Appetite
Energy homoeostasis is the result of a complex, inte-
grated process involving neural, humoral and psychologi-
cal factors that are integrated by the brain to ensure that 
nutrient supply remains at appropriate levels for differ-
ent environmental conditions. In the past, there has not 
tended to be an evolutionary advantage in weight loss, 
hence the mechanisms underlying energy homoeostasis 
are tailored to ensure a powerful drive to eat, especially 
after weight loss.
Central appetite control
The hypothalamus. The body’s appetite control centres 
are located in the hypothalamus. The ventromedial hy-
pothalamus is thought to act as the satiety centre and the 
lateral hypothalamus as the feeding centre. Histochemical 
and molecular imaging techniques have shown that the 
hypothalamic nuclei involved in feeding regulation form 
interconnected circuits, utilizing neuropeptides as well as 
the classic amine neurotransmitters
The hypothalamus receives both neural and humoral 
input. At the base of the third ventricle, the arcuate nucleus 
(Arc; also known as the infundibular nucleus in humans) 
is able to receive signals from the circulation. The blood–
brain barrier (BBB) surrounding the Arc is not complete 
and this allows hormones such as leptin, secreted by 
­adipocytes, and insulin, from the pancreas, to gain access 
to the afferent signalling pathway that regulates appetite.
From the Arc, monosynaptic projections are made to 
many other brain regions, with the projections to the para-
ventricular nucleus (PVN) being of importance in the reg-
ulation of food intake. Integration of peripheral and central 
signals relating to energy homoeostasis takes place in the 
Arc. Two neuron populations play a role. The orexigenic 
(appetite-stimulating) peptides neuropeptide Y (NPY) 
and Agouti-related peptide (AgRP) are co-­localized, while 
in another population of neurons, the anorectic (appetite-
inhibiting) peptide cocaine- and amfetamine-regulated 
transcript (CART) and pro-­opiomelanocortin (POMC, 
the precursor of α-melanocyte stimulating hormone 
(αMSH)) are also co-localized. The orexigenic NPY/
AgRP neurons inhibit the anorexigenic POMC neurons 
through γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-ergic interneuro-
nal connections. Fasting increases NPY and AgRP, while 
CART and POMC expression is reduced.
The brain stem. The vagus nerve and sympathetic ­fibres 
transmit satiety signals from the gut and liver to the nu-
cleus of the tractus solitarius (NTS) in the brain stem. In 
areas such as the area postrema, which is in the brain stem 
adjacent to the NTS at the base of the fourth ventricle, 
the BBB is incomplete, also allowing circulating hor-
mones access to the brain. The brain stem and hypothala-
mus are linked by projections from the NTS to the PVN 
and lateral hypothalamus, and from the raphe nuclei to 
the arcuate nucleus. Neurons such as those expressing 
glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) receive afferents from 
the vagal and glossopharyngeal nerves, integrating and 
relaying sensory information to hypothalamic and brain 
stem centres. Whilst the brain stem plays a role in regu-
lating the size of individual meals, it is thought that the 
hypothalamus is necessary for long-term energy balance 
and appetite regulation.
Hypothalamic messengers
Neuropeptide Y. Neuropeptide Y is a 36-amino acid 
peptide member of the family of peptides comprising 
NPY, pancreatic polypeptide (PP) and peptide YY (PYY). 
Neuropeptide Y is one of the most potent stimulators of 
feeding. At least five distinct G-protein coupled receptors 
(Y1, Y2, Y4, Y5 and Y6) mediate the actions of NPY, PYY 
and PP. In rodents, repeated administration of NPY leads 
to hyperphagia and obesity associated with decreased ther-
mogenesis in brown adipose tissue, hyperinsulinaemia, 
hypercorticosteronaemia, reduced plasma testosterone 
concentrations, and insulin resistance in skeletal muscle.
Agouti-related protein. Agouti-related protein in-
creases food intake by acting as an antagonist at central 
melanocortin-3 and melanocortin-4 receptors (see be-
low). In contrast to the fairly short-lived effects of NPY, 
central administration of a single dose of AgRP to ro-
dents leads to an increase in food intake for up to one 
week. Repeated administration leads to hyperphagia and 
obesity.
Melanocortins. Melanocortins are peptides that are 
cleaved from the POMC precursor molecule by tissue-
specific post-translational cleavage (e.g. in the anterior 
pituitary, POMC gives rise to adrenocorticotrophic hor-
mone, ACTH). They bind to a family of melanocortin 
receptors (MC1-R to MC5-R). In the arcuate nucleus, 
αMSH is released from POMC-expressing neurons that 
project to the PVN, where it acts through MC3-R and 
MC4-R to inhibit food intake. The endogenous an-
tagonist AgRP (see above) is released from  the termi-
nals of arcuate NPY/AgRP neurons at the PVN: AgRP 
stimulates food intake by blocking the anorectic effect 
of αMSH. The MC4 receptor, in particular, seems to be 
critical to regulation of body weight; thus far, the most 
common cause of monogenic obesity in humans is muta-
tion in MC4-R.
204	
Clinical biochemistry
Cocaine- and amfetamine-regulated transcript. 
Cocaine- and amfetamine-regulated transcript is co- 
expressed with POMC in arcuate neurons, and these 
­neurons are directly stimulated by leptin (see later). 
Central administration of CART to rats inhibits feeding 
and completely blocks the feeding response stimulated by 
NPY. Food-deprived animals show decreased expression 
of CART mRNA in the arcuate nucleus. CART may thus 
be another endogenous inhibitor of food intake.
5-Hydroxytryptamine. 5-Hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) 
is a monoamine neurotransmitter that is synthesized in 
both the central nervous system and in the chromaffin 
cells of the gastrointestinal tract. There are numerous 
5-HT receptor subtypes: in the brain these receptors oc-
cur mainly in the limbic system and the hypothalamus. 
5-Hydroxytryptamine modifies mood and behaviour, and 
a number of different types of drug that increase the ef-
fects of 5-HT are used as antidepressants. Drugs that ei-
ther mimic 5-HT at its receptors or inhibit its reuptake at 
synapses generally also reduce feeding. The mechanism 
for this is not clear.
Peripheral signals of appetite
Peripheral signals influencing food intake can be broadly 
divided into those that cause satiety and those that are 
secreted in proportion to the amount of fat in the body. 
The gut and the brain seem to have a close evolutionary 
relationship. Peptides discovered in the hypothalamus 
have also been identified in the gut, and gut peptides have 
been found to be produced by the brain.
Gastric emptying and stretching. Slow gastric empty-
ing increases stomach distension, which activates stretch 
receptors. The vagus nerve carries afferent signals related 
to stomach distension to the NTS, facilitating satiety 
by projections to the appetite-regulating nuclei of the 
hypothalamus, for example the PVN. Cholecystokinin 
(CCK) is a potent inhibitor of gastric emptying by va-
gal ­afferent-mediated central mechanisms, and this may 
­explain its anorectic actions. Peptide YY and GLP-1 
(see below) may also cause anorexia by reducing gastric 
­emptying in this way.
The main neural connection from the gastrointestinal 
tract to the brain is through the vagal afferent fibres, via 
the nodose ganglion. Sympathetic afferent fibres in the 
spinal nerves also carry satiety signals to the brain stem, 
as previously described.
Hormones. The endocrinological capacity of the gut is 
diverse, as diffuse populations of endocrine cells are scat-
tered throughout the mucosa. Primary gastrointestinal 
functions such as motility, secretion and absorption are 
regulated by gut hormones, which simultaneously pro-
vide feedback to the CNS on the availability of nutrients, 
thereby regulating food intake.
Insulin. Insulin was the first hormonal candidate, 
related to adipose tissue, to be postulated as the circu-
lating factor that regulates the hypothalamic control of 
food intake. Insulin was also thought to be important in 
achieving the usual long-term stability of body weight 
and fat mass. The rise in circulating insulin in response to 
a glucose load is proportional to fat mass. Insulin reaches 
the CNS via receptor-mediated transport across the BBB 
and through areas of relative permeability. Central ner-
vous system administration of insulin to rodents causes 
a reduction in food intake, while brain-specific insulin 
receptor knockout mice and insulin receptor substrate-2 
knockout mice develop obesity. However, when insulin is 
commenced in patients with type 2 diabetes, weight gain 
rather than weight loss is observed, possibly as a result of 
a loss of the anorexigenic effect of hyperglycaemia and 
the lipogenic actions of insulin.
Cholecystokinin. Cholecystokinin was the first gut 
hormone described to relay the signal of nutrient intake 
to the brain, thus leading to the inhibition of further food 
intake. Cholecystokinin is produced by endocrine cells (I 
cells) present within the jejunum and duodenum and it 
is also found in enteric nerves in the ileum and colon. 
Plasma concentrations of CCK increase in response to 
the intraluminal presence of the digestion products of 
protein and fats. Gastric emptying is potently inhibited 
by CCK through a vagal afferent-mediated central mech-
anism. In addition to causing satiety via vagally mediated 
pathways, CCK can cross the BBB and bind directly to 
specific receptors in the area postrema.
Peptide YY. Peptide YY is secreted from the endocrine 
L cells of the small and large bowel. It is a 36-amino acid 
peptide related to NPY. The highest PYY tissue concen-
trations are in the distal gastrointestinal tract. Postprandial 
PYY concentrations are proportional to meal energy con-
tent. Two isoforms exist, and both PYY1–36 and PYY3–36 
may have local effects on gut motility, inhibit secretion of 
gastric acid and pancreatic enzymes, and inhibit gallblad-
der emptying. Obese individuals have lower circulating 
concentrations of PYY.
It is proposed that PYY3–36, released into the circula-
tion after a meal, inhibits appetite by acting directly on 
the arcuate nucleus via the Y2R, a presynaptic inhibitory 
autoreceptor, leading to an inhibition of the NPY ­neurons 
and a possible reciprocal stimulation of the POMC neu-
rons. There is a tonic GABA-mediated inhibition of 
POMC neurons by NPY neurons, and thus decreased 
GABA-mediated tone as produced by leptin may lead 
to disinhibition of POMC neurons. Thus, peri­pheral 
PYY3–36 reduces the expression of NPY mRNA and in-
creases that of POMC. Exogenous PYY3–36 reduces food 
intake in rodents, rhesus monkeys and in normal weight 
and obese humans.
Pancreatic polypeptide (PP). Pancreatic polypeptide 
(PP) is thought to have arisen by gene duplication of the 
PYY gene, as PP and PYY are closely related structurally. 
The PP cells of the pancreatic islets produce PP in re-
sponse to ingestion of food. This release is in proportion 
to the energy ingested, and postprandial concentrations 
remain elevated for up to 6 h. Obese subjects have low 
PP concentrations, while high concentrations of PP have 
been demonstrated in patients with anorexia nervosa. 
Peripheral administration of PP to rodents and humans 
has been shown to reduce food intake.
Leptin. Leptin is a 167 kDa peptide, the product of the 
ob gene, and is produced predominantly by adipose tissue. 
	
11  Nutritional disorders and their management	
205
Circulating leptin concentrations are directly proportional 
to adiposity and correlate better with total fat mass than 
with body weight. Central or peripheral administration of 
leptin in rodents causes a profound decrease in food intake 
and weight loss. The ob/ob mouse, completely deficient in 
leptin, is hyperphagic, hyperinsulinaemic and very obese, 
and the leptin receptor-defective db/db mouse has a similar 
phenotype. Chronic administration of leptin to the ob/ob 
mouse results in sustained reduction in body weight and 
reduced food intake, but has no effect on the db/db mouse.
Leptin deficiency in humans is rare, although it has 
been suggested that some obese humans have lower 
leptin concentrations than would be expected. Most 
obese people have normal leptin genes and have elevated 
leptin concentrations, reflecting their high adiposity.
Ghrelin. Ghrelin is a 28-amino acid peptide identified 
in 1999 as the endogenous agonist at the growth hormone 
secretagogue receptor, and is present in the circulation of 
healthy individuals. Ghrelin is synthesized in the endocrine 
cells of the stomach and (in much smaller amounts) in the 
hypothalamus. Ghrelin has been shown to increase NPY 
and AgRP in the hypothalamic arcuate nucleus, thus be-
ing postulated to increase appetite and act as an initiator 
of feeding. Plasma concentrations of ghrelin peak before 
a meal and fall rapidly after nutrient ingestion, supporting 
the hypothesis that it has a role as a stimulus to eating by 
signalling pre-meal hunger. A state of negative energy bal-
ance increases fasting plasma ghrelin concentrations, while 
concentrations are reduced by positive energy balance. This 
suggests that ghrelin is also important in long-term regula-
tion of body weight in normal individuals. Exogenous ad-
ministration of ghrelin increases appetite and ad libitum 
caloric intake, as well as growth hormone secretion.
Insulin resistance has been postulated to play a role 
in determining low fasting ghrelin concentrations. 
Attenuated postprandial reduction of ghrelin concen-
trations has been shown in the obese, while in normal 
weight individuals, postprandial suppression of ghrelin 
secretion is proportional to the calories consumed.
Glucagon-like peptide-1. Processing of proglucagon in 
the pancreas results in the formation of glucagon, glicentin-
related pancreatic polypeptide (GRPP) and major progluca-
gon fragments. In intestinal L-cells, proglucagon processing 
results in glicentin, oxyntomodulin (OXM), GLP-1, spacer 
peptide-2 (SP-2) and ­glucagon-like peptide-2 (GLP-2). 
Glucagon-like ­peptide-1 is co-secreted with PYY in re-
sponse to the presence of nutrients in the gut.
Glucagon-like peptide-1 is an incretin, stimulating the 
release of insulin, while also inhibiting the release of glu-
cagon; GLP-1 receptor agonists are used in the treatment 
of type 2 diabetes. Glucagon-like peptide-1 reduces gas-
tric emptying and inhibits gastric acid secretion, while 
also regulating food intake. Central administration of 
GLP-1 in rodents strongly inhibits feeding, and GLP-1 
also seems to produce a small, dose-dependent reduction 
in food intake in humans.
Management of obesity
The objectives of the management of obesity are to re-
duce body weight and then to maintain a lower body 
weight in the longer term. A criterion for success of a 
reduction of 5–15% in body weight has been proposed. 
Various approaches can be used to achieve this, alone, or 
in combination.
Non-surgical options
Dietary approaches offer the obese patient education in 
the principles of healthy eating and a regimen intended 
to achieve a deficit in energy balance. Very low calorie 
diets (400–500 kcal/24 h) have been shown to produce 
greater initial weight loss than low calorie diets (1000–
1500 kcal/24 h), but results after one year are not signifi-
cantly different.
It is difficult to achieve weight loss merely through 
physical exercise. For example, a man of average build 
who completes a marathon in 4.5 h will only burn about 
2000 kcal, approximately the same amount of energy that 
he would be expected to consume during an entire less 
active day. He would have to run a marathon every ten 
days, without an increase in energy intake, to lose a kilo-
gram a month. However, physical activity can contribute 
towards an energy deficit and is important in increasing 
cardiorespiratory fitness.
For some obese patients, learned patterns of eating 
behaviour may be amenable to behaviour modification. 
Establishment of new patterns of eating and physical ac-
tivity makes other strategies for weight loss more likely 
to be successful.
Various drugs have been used for the treatment of obe-
sity. Many have been discontinued due to unacceptable 
side-effects, including recently, sibutramine, a centrally 
acting agent affecting reuptake of serotonin, norepi-
nephrine and dopamine; and rimonabant, an inhibitor 
of cannabinoid receptor-1. Orlistat is a potent inhibitor 
of pancreatic lipase and, therefore, increases faecal fat 
loss when taken orally with food. Adverse effects include 
abdominal distension, flatulence, liquid stools and oc-
casional faecal incontinence. Some of the weight loss in 
those taking the drug may be a consequence of a conscious 
decrease in fat intake to avoid these side-effects. Less than 
1% of an oral dose is absorbed, so it has minimal interac-
tion with most drugs. However, absorption of fat soluble 
vitamins may be affected and supplementation may be re-
quired. Methylcellulose is available for use as a bulking 
agent, with the idea that it produces a feeling of satiety, 
but there is little evidence to support its use. Thyroid hor-
mones have no role in the treatment of obesity, except in 
patients with biochemically proven hypothyroidism.
Bariatric surgery
The limited long-term success of behavioural and drug 
therapy for obesity has led to increased use of surgical 
treatments, with considerable success. Bariatric surgery 
is considered an option for selected patients with a BMI 
≥40 kg/m
2, or those with a BMI >35 kg/m
2 with significant 
comorbidities (e.g. diabetes mellitus), when less invasive 
methods of weight loss have been unsuccessful and the 
patient is at high risk of obesity-associated complications.
Possible contraindications to surgery include signifi-
cant mental health problems, an intercurrent medical 
206	
Clinical biochemistry
condition likely to influence surgical risk, a history of 
poor compliance with medical treatment and pregnancy. 
Patients should be managed by a multidisciplinary team, 
including the surgeon, a metabolic physician, dietitian 
and psychiatrist. Bariatric procedures tend to be de-
scribed as either restrictive or malabsorptive according 
to the nature of the surgery involved (see Figure 11.1). 
However, these descriptions do not define the mecha-
nism of weight loss.
Restrictive procedures. Laparoscopic gastric banding 
involves insertion of an inflatable silicon gastric band 
horizontally around the proximal part of the stomach. 
The gastric band is connected to a subcutaneous injection 
port which, when inflated with saline, leads to constric-
tion and the formation of a gastric pouch.
In a laparoscopic sleeve gastrectomy, over three-­
quarters of the stomach is removed. The gastric remnant 
is used to fashion a sleeve of stomach, rather than a pouch, 
which extends from the oesophagus to the duodenum.
Combined restrictive and malabsorptive procedures. 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass requires the formation of a 
small proximal gastric pouch, which empties into a seg-
ment of jejunum brought up to the pouch as a Roux-en-Y 
loop. It results in a degree of malabsorption as a result of 
bypass of the upper small intestine.
Biliopancreatic diversion with or without duodenal 
switch involves removal of part of the stomach, together 
with an alteration in the path of the small intestine.
Most patients report a reduction in appetite after 
bariatric surgery, an effect more marked after biliopan-
creatic procedures. Weight loss after bariatric surgery 
is often reported as the percentage of excess weight 
loss (%EWL), where excess weight is the total amount 
above ideal weight. In some series, the %EWL has 
been reported to be up to 46% after gastric banding, 
60% after Roux-en-Y bypass and 64% after biliopan-
creatic diversion. In addition to weight loss, there is 
resolution of type 2 diabetes mellitus in many patients 
and improvement in dyslipidaemia, hypertension and 
obstructive sleep apnoea. The percentage of patients 
with resolution of diabetes varies according to the pro-
cedure performed, being highest after biliopancreatic 
diversion, but it is not directly related to %EWL. This 
resolution can be very rapid. This suggests that changes 
in glucose homeostasis are ­operation-specific and may 
be determined by intestinal factors. The stomach is the 
major producer of the orexigenic hormone ghrelin and 
the functional area of the stomach is reduced in the 
majority of these procedures. However, postoperative 
changes in ghrelin are variable and its role in weight 
loss is unclear. The concentration of the anorectic hor-
mone PYY increases early after malabsorptive proce-
dures, probably due to the re-routing of gut contents, 
and is thought to be an important contributor to the 
subsequent weight loss. Incretins, for example GLP-1 
and oxyntomodulin, are thought to play a synergistic 
role in postoperative weight loss.
The mortality rate after bariatric surgery is <1% for 
younger patients with a BMI <50 kg/m
2 and average 
complication rates are <10%. Early complications are 
related to the surgery itself, for example postoperative 
bleeding and anastomotic leak. Longer-term problems 
include erosion from, or displacement of, a gastric band, 
anastomotic stricture and dumping syndrome owing to 
the rapid passage of food into the intestine, as well as vari-
ous metabolic problems, for example metabolic bone dis-
ease and kidney stones.
Following bariatric surgery, long-term follow-up is 
­essential. After surgery, patients should be advised to 
follow a well balanced, calorie-controlled diet. They 
are usually advised to avoid carbonated drinks, high 
sugar foods and foods with textures that are difficult 
to chew such as tough meat and bread. It is also rec-
ommended that solid food be chosen for meals, with 
drinks taken in between. Vitamin and mineral supp­
lementation is recommended after bariatric surgery. 
After combined restrictive and malabsorptive pro-
cedures, but not laparoscopic banding, biochemical 
­assessment of vitamin and trace elements should form 
part of ongoing review. One suggested scheme for 
such monitoring is shown in Table 11.3. It is now rec-
ognized that a significant proportion of obese patients 
are deficient in vitamins and trace elements preopera-
tively. The aetiology includes nutritional deficiency 
from a diet that, whilst ­excessive in energy, is likely to 
have been of poor quality.
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 11.1  ■  Bariatric surgery procedures. (A) Adjustable gastric band (AGB). (B) Vertical sleeve gastrectomy (VSG). (C) Roux-en-Y 
gastric bypass (RYGB). (D) Biliopancreatic diversion with a duodenal switch (BPD–DS).
	
11  Nutritional disorders and their management	
207
EATING DISORDERS
Eating disorders, which include anorexia nervosa, bulimia 
nervosa and atypical eating disorders, are a range of syn-
dromes involving physical, psychological and social fea-
tures. About 1 in 250 females and 1 in 2000 males ­suffer 
from anorexia nervosa and about five times as many from 
bulimia. Atypical eating disorders may be more common, 
with many patients going untreated.
Anorexia nervosa
Anorexia nervosa is characterized by weight loss (or in 
children lack of weight gain), leading to a body weight 
of at least 15% below the normal or expected weight for 
age and height. The weight loss is the result of patients 
perceiving themselves to be too fat and so setting a low 
target body weight that is achieved by food avoidance and, 
sometimes, obsessive exercise. Secondary to weight loss, 
patients with anorexia nervosa show evidence of endocrine 
disturbance involving the hypothalamo–gonadal axis with 
amenorrhoea in females and decreased libido or impotence 
in males.
Patients with anorexia nervosa may become severely 
emaciated and treatment includes nutrition support 
and psychological therapies. Such patients are at risk of 
refeeding syndrome (see p. 211), but may also exhibit 
other biochemical abnormalities prior to reintroduction 
of appropriate nutrition. Hypokalaemia is frequent in 
patients with eating disorders; causes include vomiting 
and loss resulting from misuse of laxatives and diuretics. 
Hypomagnesaemia is also common and may result from 
reduced intake and be secondary to laxative and diuretic 
abuse. Patients who vomit and abuse diuretics are also at 
risk of hypochloraemic metabolic alkalosis. Prolonged 
use of diuretics may lead to hyponatraemia. Patients who 
‘water load’ prior to being weighed at clinic appointments 
may exhibit a dilutional hyponatraemia. Elevation of liver 
enzyme activities may be seen in anorexia. This is usually 
transient and relatively mild, although rarely, severe liver 
damage occurs; the abnormalities may occur before or 
during refeeding and suggested mechanisms include liver 
ischaemia, glutathione depletion and fatty change occur-
ring on refeeding.
At low body weight, there are changes in the 
­hypothalamo–pituitary–gonadal 
axis. 
Menstruation 
ceases and the endocrine changes are of hypogonadotro-
phic ­hypogonadism with low concentrations of follicle 
stimulating hormone, luteinizing hormone and oestra-
diol. These changes are thought to be related to low 
concentrations of leptin, which has a role in gonadotro-
phin releasing hormone secretion. In males, comparable 
changes occur with low concentrations of testosterone. 
Plasma concentrations of free thyroxine and free triio-
dothyronine tend to be low in anorexia, with increased 
concentrations of reverse triiodothyronine. The thy-
roid stimulating hormone response to thyroid releasing 
hormone is abnormal in some patients and it has been 
suggested that this also is secondary to reduced leptin 
secretion. In contrast, plasma cortisol concentrations 
tend to be increased. These and other endocrine changes 
in patients with anorexia nervosa are summarized in 
Box 11.1.
BOX 11.1	
Endocrine abnormalities found 
in anorexia nervosa
The hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal axis
•	 Increased plasma concentrations of cortisol
•	 Increased cortisol production rate
•	 Decreased metabolic clearance of cortisol
•	 Abnormal dexamethasone suppression test (either failure 
of suppression or ‘early escape’)
•	 Increased 24 h urinary excretion of free cortisol
The hypothalamo–pituitary–gonadal axis
•	 Secondary amenorrhoea
•	 Low plasma oestradiol concentrations
•	 Low plasma luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle 
stimulating hormone (FSH) concentrations
•	 Normal LH/FSH response to gonadotrophin releas-
ing hormone (GnRH) following priming
Other hormonal abnormalities
•	 Exaggerated growth hormone (GH) response to 
growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH)
•	 Reduced GH response to apomorphine; abnormal 
release of GH in response to thyrotrophin releasing 
hormone (TRH)
•	 GH response to a glucose load may show a paradoxical rise
•	 GH response to insulin hypoglycaemia may be blunted
•	 Low plasma free T4 and free T3 concentrations
•	 High 
plasma 
reverse 
tri-iodothyronine 
(rT3) 
con­centrations
•	 Delayed thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) response 
to TRH
•	 Subnormal arginine vasopressin (AVP) response to 
increased plasma sodium concentrations
TABLE 11.3  Suggested monitoring scheme after 
bariatric surgery
Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass
Biliopancreatic bypass
First year: 
3–6-monthly
Thereafter: annually
First year: 3-monthly
Thereafter: 3–6-monthly depending 
on results and clinical status
Full blood count
Renal profile
Liver profile
Plasma glucose
Lipid profile
Iron, ferritin,  
vitamin B12
Vitamin D
Also consider: PTH, 
thiamin, folate
Full blood count
Renal profile
Liver profile
Plasma glucose
Lipid profile
Iron, ferritin, vitamin B12
Fat soluble vitamins (6–12-monthly)
A, E, D and prothrombin time
Trace elements (annually)
Zinc, selenium
Metabolic bone evaluation 
(6–12-monthly)
PTH, 24 h urinary calcium
Metabolic stone evaluation 
(12-monthly)
24 h urine calcium, citrate, urate 
and oxalate
208	
Clinical biochemistry
Bulimia nervosa
Bulimia nervosa is also characterized by a self-perception 
of being too fat. However, in contrast to anorexia, there are 
recurrent episodes of overeating. To attempt to counteract 
the fattening effects of the food consumed, the patient may 
alternate overeating with periods of starvation, or may in-
duce vomiting and use drugs such as diuretics, laxatives and 
appetite suppressants to attempt weight reduction.
The endocrine disturbances in bulimia are milder than 
those in anorexia nervosa. Patients have mild hypercor-
tisolism and basal thyroid hormone concentrations are 
normal. The secretion of cholecystokinin in response to a 
meal is impaired in bulimia. About 50% of patients have 
menstrual abnormalities, which may be one of two types. 
Patients with low body weight have low plasma oestra-
diol concentrations and failure of follicular development, 
while those with normal body weight have normal plasma 
oestradiol concentrations, but a failure of progesterone 
secretion in the luteal phase.
Again, the diagnosis is a clinical one, but biochemical 
tests are important in looking for deficiencies, for exam-
ple of potassium. Interestingly, in view of the putative role 
of serotonin in feeding, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, 
tricyclic antidepressants and fluoxetine have been shown 
to have beneficial effects in bulimia. However, the effects 
are smaller than those produced by non-pharmacological 
therapies and are not maintained.
DIET IN THE AETIOLOGY OF DISEASE
Diet is known to modulate factors that are important in 
the aetiology of cardiovascular disease (CVD), and di-
etary change is an important element of CVD risk man-
agement. This topic is discussed in detail in Chapter 38. 
Diet is also important in the aetiology of some gastroin-
testinal diseases (e.g. coeliac disease), and this is discussed 
in Chapter  12. Other conditions in which diet plays a 
causative role include dental caries and some cancers.
Dental caries
The most common reasons for the loss of teeth are den-
tal caries in children and periodontal disease in adults. 
Periodontal disease has only a minor association with 
nutrition, but there is a strong relationship between the 
formation of dental caries and diet.
The first stage of cariogenesis is the formation of plaque. 
Plaque begins to develop on the surface of a clean tooth 
by the adsorption of salivary proteins and glycoproteins to 
form the pellicle. Bacteria (e.g. Streptococcus mutans) then 
become attached to the pellicle and begin to reproduce, 
eventually forming a continuous layer. A polysaccharide 
coating then develops over them, formed from the action 
of bacterial enzymes on dietary sugars. This coating helps 
to maintain plaque integrity, but also acts as a source of 
energy for the bacteria during the gaps between the host’s 
meals. Dietary sugars diffuse into the plaque and are fer-
mented by the plaque bacteria into mainly lactic acid, 
which then dissolves the mineral phase of tooth enamel, 
causing caries. Both the amount and frequency of sugars 
in the diet are positively correlated with caries formation. 
Some foods (e.g. milk, cheese and the sugar substitute xy-
litol) protect against dental caries, as does increasing sali-
vary flow with sugar-free chewing gum.
Dietary fluoride, for example in fluoridated drinking 
water, is important in preventing the development of 
dental caries. A concentration of 1 mg/L increases the re-
sistance of the enamel, particularly if the exposure occurs 
while it is being laid down prior to the tooth erupting, 
and reduces tooth decay in children by about 50%.
Cancer
Many associations have been noted between specific di-
etary components and various cancers (see Table  11.4). 
The overall risk of cancer appears to be highest in popula-
tions that consume diets high in fat and energy, in which 
there is a high prevalence of obesity and in which alcohol 
intake is high. Diets that are high in ‘fibre’, particularly 
those with a high fruit and vegetable content, appear to 
offer some protection from certain cancers. However, re-
search in this area is difficult because, although dietary fac-
tors may predispose to or protect against cancer, the effect 
may be small compared with other known carcinogens (e.g. 
cigarette smoke), there may be interactions between differ-
ent dietary constituents and methods for the measurement 
of dietary intakes are inherently inaccurate. Furthermore, 
altering the amount of any one component of the diet nec-
essarily alters the relative amounts of the others.
THERAPEUTIC DIETS, DIETARY ­SUPPLEMENTS 
AND NUTRACEUTICALS
Details of therapeutic diets can be found in textbooks of 
dietetics, but the main features of some of the more com-
mon ones are summarized in Table 11.5.
Apart from the well-established benefits of therapeutic 
diets, claims are also made that some dietary constituents 
have health benefits beyond their purely nutritional role. 
Functional foods are defined as foods that provide a health 
benefit beyond basic nutrition, when consumed in normal 
amounts as part of a varied diet. Nutraceuticals are dietary 
supplements that provide a concentrated form of an agent 
from a food, in a dose exceeding that obtainable from a 
TABLE 11.4  Some examples of associations 
between dietary factors and cancer
Site of cancer
Associated dietary factors
Mouth, pharynx 
and larynx
Alcohol, very hot drinks, Chinese-style 
salted fish
Oesophagus
Alcohol, very hot drinks, nitrosamines 
(in preserved foods)
Stomach
Smoked fish, pickled foods, cured 
meats, salt; nitrosamines formed in 
the stomach from nitrites in the diet
Large intestine
High fat, high protein diet, low fibre 
intake
Liver
Aflatoxin-contaminated foods 
(aflatoxins are a product of the 
fungus Aspergillus flavus), alcohol
Breast
High fat diet, alcohol
	
11  Nutritional disorders and their management	
209
normal diet. All such products are sold as foods, or food 
supplements, rather than drugs, and so are not subject to 
pharmaceutical licensing regulations. There is, therefore, 
little evidence and there are few clinical trials to enable 
assessment of their efficacy and formal documentation of 
side-effects. It has been noted that kava (Piper methysticum), 
which is said to help in anxiety, is probably hepatotoxic and 
preparations of St John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum) are 
known to decrease the efficacy of antiretroviral drugs, ci-
closporin, tacrolimus and some antiepilepsy drugs.
A probiotic is a preparation containing defined microor-
ganisms in sufficient numbers to alter the microflora of the 
host and exert a beneficial health effect. Such preparations 
are commonly manufactured as a dairy product supple-
mented with species such as Bifidobacteria or Lactobacilli. They 
have been shown to be effective in reducing the duration of 
antibiotic-associated diarrhoea and alleviating symptoms and 
promoting digestion in lactose malabsorption.
Other dietary supplements for which there is less good 
evidence of benefit include coenzyme Q10 (for mitochon-
drial disorders, heart failure and ischaemia–reperfusion 
injury), saw palmetto (for benign prostatic hypertrophy) 
and taurine, carnitine, creatine, chondroitin and glucos-
amine (for osteoarthritis). The American Association of 
Clinical Endocrinologists has produced a useful summary 
of the available evidence (see Further reading, below).
PROVISION OF NUTRITION SUPPORT
Deficiencies of specific vitamins or minerals are treated by 
appropriate supplementation of individual nutrients, and 
this could be thought of as a form of nutritional support. 
However, the term is usually used to mean the provision 
of balanced mixtures of nutrients to replace all, or a major 
part, of normal food intake. It is recommended that nutri-
tion support is provided by a multidisciplinary team (e.g. 
gastroenterologist, pharmacist, clinical biochemist, dieti-
tian, nutrition nurse) that assesses patients on an individual 
basis and makes adjustments to their nutritional therapy 
as required. Such an approach has been shown to improve 
clinical outcomes and reduce morbidity and mortality.
Indications for nutrition support
The basic indications for nutrition support are intestinal 
failure (e.g. after massive bowel resection) or inability to 
eat (e.g. in neurological diseases that affect swallowing). 
However, it should be considered in any patient who is 
malnourished or likely to become so (see Box 11.2).
Simple measures to support nutritional intake include 
food enrichment, for example by the addition of cream 
to soup, or cheese to potato. Various proprietary prepa-
rations exist: modular supplements, typically in powder 
TABLE 11.5  The main features of some therapeutic diets
Disease
Main features of dietetic management
Diabetes mellitus
Reduce risk of microvascular disease by achieving near normal glycaemia, while 
avoiding risk of hypoglycaemia
 
Reduce risk of macrovascular disease, including management of body weight, 
dyslipidaemia and hypertension
 
45–60% dietary energy from carbohydrate, especially from complex carbohydrates or 
those with low glycaemic index
 
May have up to 10% energy from sucrose, provided it is eaten in the context of a 
healthy diet and spread throughout the day
 
<10% energy from saturated and trans fatty acids
 
<10% energy from polyunsaturated fatty acids, including ω3-polyunsaturated fatty 
acids from oily fish
 
10–20% energy from monounsaturated fatty acids
 
Protein not more than 1 g/kg/day, i.e. not a high intake
Obesity
Aim for 10% weight loss. Further targets can be set if appropriate
 
Reduce dietary energy by reducing fat and sugar intake
 
Encourage a regular meal pattern, including complex carbohydrates at each meal
 
Encourage physical activity
Undernutrition, e.g. caused by 
dysphagia, cancer, loss of appetite
Increase protein and energy intake by food fortification measures, energy and 
nutrient-dense foods, and nourishing drinks
 
Prescribe nutritional supplements if measures above fail
Hyperlipidaemia
Reduce saturated fat intake to 10% dietary energy
 
Partially replace saturated fats with monounsaturated fats and complex carbohydrates
 
Increase ω3-polyunsaturated fatty acid intake
 
At least five portions of fruit and vegetables per day
 
Reduce salt intake
 
Avoid excess alcohol
 
Lose weight if obese
Coeliac disease
Eliminate all gluten-containing foods (wheat, barley, rye and possibly oats) from the diet
Allergy
Exclusion diets, e.g. exclusion of wheat, milk, eggs or additives
Renal disease
Normal protein intake, 0.8–1.0 g/kg/day (low protein diets are now rarely used)
 
Maintain energy intake
 
Adjust sodium, potassium and fluid intake depending on whether predominant 
retention or loss
Inherited metabolic diseases, e.g. 
phenylketonuria, galactosaemia
Specialist dietary advice required
210	
Clinical biochemistry
form, contain just one macronutrient, and a range of for-
tified puddings provide both protein and energy. Fortified 
juice-based products and nutritionally complete, milky-
type drinks are also available.
For patients whose intake remains poor, despite use 
of such measures, or in whom their use is inappropri-
ate, nutritional support via the enteral (gut) or parenteral 
(intravenous) route is required. Whenever possible, the 
gut, rather than the intravenous route, should be used 
to deliver nutritional support. There are several reasons 
for this. There appears to be no metabolic advantage in 
­intravenous feeding and there are some positive advan-
tages to enteral feeding. Nutrients are needed in the gut 
lumen to maintain the structural and functional integrity 
of the gastrointestinal tract. Enteral feeding also stimu-
lates gallbladder motility and reduces the risk of choleli-
thiasis. Only a limited proportion of certain nutrients is 
actually absorbed from the gut and, in general, the enteral 
requirements for specific nutrients are better understood 
than parenteral requirements. Enteral feeding can sup-
ply the gut-specific substrates glutamine and short chain 
fatty acids, which are not usually present in commercial 
parenteral feeding solutions. Enteral feeding is also less 
hazardous than use of the intravenous route and, in finan-
cial terms, is much the cheaper of the two options.
In some situations, it may be difficult to decide which 
route is more appropriate. Particularly in postoperative pa-
tients, gut function tends to be assessed by clinical indicators 
of gut motility, for example the presence of bowel sounds 
and the passage of flatus or faeces. It is well-­established that 
in such patients, intestinal function tends to return before 
motility. It may be safe, therefore, to commence enteral 
feeding cautiously before bowel sounds are heard.
Estimates can be made of the basal metabolic rate 
in order to tailor feeds to individual nutritional needs. 
However, guidelines produced by the UK National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) suggest 
that, for patients who are not severely ill or injured, or 
at increased risk of refeeding syndrome (see later), feeds 
should supply the following:
•	 25–35 kcal/kg body weight/day total energy (inclu­
ding that derived from protein)
•	 0.8–1.5 g protein (or equivalent as amino acids) 
(0.13–0.24 g nitrogen)/kg per day
•	 30–35 mL fluid/kg (with allowance for extra losses, 
e.g. from drains or fistulae, and extra input, e.g. 
from intravenous drugs)
•	 adequate electrolytes, minerals and micronutrients 
and fibre if appropriate.
Enteral feeding
The route of administration of enteral feeding tends to 
be determined by the likely duration of feeding, although 
physical constraints, for example oral surgery, may need to 
be taken into consideration. For the majority of patients 
requiring short-term enteral feeding, the most appropriate 
method of delivery is via a fine-bore nasogastric feeding 
tube. Placement of the tube is relatively simple, although 
its correct positioning in the stomach should always be 
checked before use by ensuring aspiration of acidic gastric 
contents (using pH paper), lest inadvertent pulmonary (or, 
rarely, intracranial) misplacement has occurred.
There is a risk of gastric regurgitation and subsequent 
pulmonary aspiration during nasogastric feeding and, to 
minimize this, patients should be nursed at 45° wherever 
possible. For patients at increased risk of aspiration (e.g. 
those on ventilators or being nursed flat after certain neu-
rosurgical procedures, diabetic patients with neuropathy) 
insertion of a feeding tube into the duodenum or jejunum 
may lessen the risk.
For long-term enteral feeding the preferred route is 
often a tube placed through the abdominal wall directly 
into the stomach – a gastrostomy. This avoids local prob-
lems such as rhinitis and nasal erosions, which can be as-
sociated with prolonged use of a nasogastric tube, and is 
more secure. This type of gastrostomy is usually inserted 
percutaneously under endoscopic control (PEG).
The exact nature of the enteral feed given is dependent 
upon the patient’s nutritional requirements, the indica-
tion for feeding and any comorbidity, for example renal 
failure. Whilst a normal diet could be liquefied and used 
for enteral feeding, this is not generally recommended 
owing to the risk of infection. Instead, proprietary feeds 
are preferred. These tend to be of three types: polymeric, 
pre-digested or disease-specific; they are typically nutri-
tionally complete, may contain fibre and generally con-
tain 1–1.5 kcal/mL.
In polymeric feeds, the nitrogen is in the form of 
whole protein, the carbohydrate source is partially hydro-
lysed starch and the fat contains long chain triglycerides. 
In patients with significant malabsorption, a pre-digested 
feed may be appropriate. In this, the nitrogen is supplied 
in the form of short peptides and the fat component con-
tains both long and medium chain triglycerides. In se-
vere malabsorption, elemental feeds providing nitrogen 
as amino acids and carbohydrate as glucose, with very 
little fat, can be used. Feeds can also be manufactured 
with their components adjusted to be suitable for the pa-
tient’s underlying condition, for example low sodium and 
volume in patients with liver failure.
BOX 11.2	
Indications for nutrition support
Nutrition support should be considered in  
people who are malnourished, as defined by  
any of the following:
•	 a BMI of <18.5 kg/m
2
•	 unintentional weight loss >10% within the last 
3–6 months
•	 a BMI of <20 kg/m
2 and unintentional weight loss 
>5% within the last 3–6 months.
Nutrition support should be considered in  
people at risk of malnutrition, as defined  
by any of the following:
•	 have eaten little or nothing for more than five days 
and/or are likely to eat little or nothing for the next 
five days or longer
•	 have a poor absorptive capacity, and/or have high nu-
trient losses and/or have increased nutritional needs 
from causes such as catabolism.
	
11  Nutritional disorders and their management	
211
Parenteral nutrition
In a patient whose gut is not functioning (or is not func-
tioning sufficiently well to sustain adequate nutrition), 
parenteral feeding has to be used. Parenteral nutrition 
(PN) solutions are hyperosmolar and tend to be irritant 
when infused via peripheral cannulae. For short-term 
feeding, such administration is possible (particularly if 
hyperosmolarity is reduced by having fat as a major en-
ergy source),  but infusion into a large vein is preferred. 
This is usually achieved via a midline, peripherally in-
serted central line (PICC) or a central venous line. For 
longer-term feeding, a tunneled line, such as a Hickman, 
is preferred, to reduce the possibility of infection. Ideally, 
lines should be used solely for PN. However, if vascular 
access is compromised, a line with multiple lumens may 
be provided, but one lumen should be specified and re-
served for feeding.
Composition of parenteral nutrition fluids
The carbohydrate component of parenteral nutrition so-
lutions is provided as glucose. Protein is given as a mix-
ture of l-amino acids. There are relatively few data to 
enable characterization of the optimal quantity of total 
or individual amino acids. Parenteral glutamine has been 
shown to be of benefit in certain groups of patients, al-
though the exact situations in which its use is appropriate, 
and the most appropriate dose, are not yet fully defined. 
There are, as yet, no definite clinical recommendations 
regarding supplementation of arginine, branched chain 
amino acids, cysteine or taurine in parenteral nutrition 
solutions. Lipid preparations for parenteral use consist 
of oil stabilized in an emulsion with egg yolk lecithin. 
The most widely available preparations worldwide are 
based on soybean oil, but newer products now exist in-
cluding olive oil-soybean mixtures, fish oil emulsions and 
­multiple lipids (e.g. ‘SMOF’ a mixture of soy, medium 
chain ­triglycerides, olive and fish oil). Fatty acids have a 
role in the immune response, for example via their incor-
poration into cell membranes and effects on membrane 
fluidity and receptor expression. Particularly in patients 
in whom a robust inflammatory response is required, or 
in whom there is a particular risk of exacerbation of oxi-
dative stress, evidence is accumulating that the choice of 
lipid preparation may have an effect on outcome.
Parenteral nutrition should contain appropriate 
amounts of micronutrients. In the past, trace elements 
were added based on knowledge of the requirements of 
well patients eating a normal diet and instances of defi-
ciency and toxicity occurred. Since then, the recommen-
dations for the micronutrient component of commercial 
preparations used in PN have been regularly reviewed, 
the most recent modifications suggesting a decrease in 
the content of copper, manganese and chromium.
Premixed bags of PN solutions, with a variety of 
amino acid (or nitrogen), energy and electrolyte content, 
are readily available from commercial suppliers. The bag 
with contents most suitable for an individual patient’s re-
quirements is chosen and variation in the rate of infusion 
allows some adjustment to the amount of nutrition ad-
ministered. For patients whose requirements cannot be 
accommodated by such premixed bags, individually pre-
scribed nutrition solutions can be prepared under sterile 
conditions in many hospital pharmacies.
Complications of parenteral nutritional support
Malnutrition is known to be associated with adverse ef-
fects that lead to complications and prolonged hospital 
stay. Nutrition support has been shown to improve qual-
ity of life and to reduce complication rates, infection, 
mortality and length of hospital stay. However, nutrition 
support, particularly when provided by the parenteral 
route, is itself associated with complications.
The main non-metabolic complications are ­related to 
the placement and presence of the feeding line. Compli­
cations associated with central venous catheterization 
include arterial puncture, air embolism and pneumotho-
rax. Once inserted, good care of the line is essential, using 
sterile technique to minimize the major risk of catheter-
related sepsis. Other possible complications include line 
blockage, line displacement and thromboembolism.
The aim of monitoring in patients receiving nutrition 
support is to ensure efficacy and to prevent or identify asso-
ciated complications. It is important to keep careful records 
of the amount of nutrition that the patient has actually re-
ceived and to chart any additional fluid input and losses. 
Regular weighing and measurement of skin fold thickness 
may provide an objective way of charting the effectiveness 
of nutrition support. A protocol for laboratory monitoring 
of nutritional support has been proposed by NICE (see 
Table  11.6). Other aspects to be monitored, particularly 
in patients on long-term feeding, include the course of the 
primary disease and the patients’ quality of life.
Electrolyte abnormalities are common in patients re-
ceiving PN and are most likely to occur soon after ini-
tiation of treatment. Abnormalities of sodium, potassium 
and magnesium are common and factors such as gut 
losses through vomiting, faecal or stomal loss, renal fail-
ure and body water excess, for example from ascites, may 
be contributory.
Hyperglycaemia is frequent in parenteral feeding, 
particularly in patients with coexisting sepsis and, if de-
tected, should be controlled with a continuous periph-
eral insulin infusion: careful control of blood glucose has 
been shown to improve outcome in critically ill patients. 
Hypoglycaemia has been documented on abrupt cessa-
tion of total parenteral nutrition, but is not commonly 
encountered with modern feeding regimens.
Hypercalcaemia can occasionally occur in patients 
receiving parenteral nutrition that includes a vitamin D 
supplement, and hypocalcaemia can occur if insufficient 
supplements are given. Hypocalcaemia of unexplained 
origin should prompt measurement of the plasma mag-
nesium concentration, as hypomagnesaemia may itself 
cause hypocalcaemia.
The refeeding syndrome comprises a group of ab-
normalities that may occur when nutrition is provided 
to those who are severely malnourished. The most well 
recognized feature of the syndrome is hypophosphatae-
mia, but other electrolyte abnormalities can also occur 
together with cardiac, pulmonary, neuromuscular and 
212	
Clinical biochemistry
haematological complications. It most commonly occurs 
in association with parenteral nutrition, although it has 
been documented as a complication of enteral nutrition. 
It should be anticipated in those patients at increased risk 
(see Box 11.3) in whom feeding should be commenced at 
a low rate and increased gradually.
The aetiology of the hypophosphataemia is probably 
multifactorial. One important factor is that, during pro-
longed starvation, energy production is derived principally 
from fatty acid oxidation rather than from glucose; however, 
on refeeding and reintroduction of carbohydrate, there is a 
rapid return to the use of glucose as the predominate sub-
strate with a high requirement for phosphate to synthesize 
the phosphorylated intermediates and products of glycoly-
sis (e.g. ATP and 2.3-DPG). This leads to hypophospha-
taemia. There is an intracellular shift of potassium and 
magnesium as a result of increased insulin release, which 
leads to hypokalaemia and hypomagnesaemia. Sodium and 
water retention may occur: an anti-natriuretic action of 
insulin has been suggested as a possible mechanism.
Thiamin deficiency is common in severely malnour-
ished individuals. Thiamin is a cofactor in glycolysis and, 
when carbohydrate intake is restored after caloric depri-
vation, demands are increased. In thiamin deficiency, py-
ruvate is converted to lactate, which may lead to lactic 
acidosis. Precipitation of the complications of thiamin 
deficiency should be prevented in those at risk of refeed-
ing syndrome by administration of thiamin (initially in 
amounts in excess of normal requirements) before com-
mencing, and during, nutrition support.
The clinical features of refeeding syndrome are related 
to the electrolyte abnormalities and vitamin deficiency.
Mild elevation of plasma liver enzyme activities is 
common after several weeks of parenteral feeding. Liver 
histology reveals hepatic steatosis with accumulation of 
macro- and microvesicular fat. However, the histologi-
cal abnormalities are more closely correlated with the 
presence of intra-abdominal sepsis, renal failure and pre- 
existing liver disease than with the duration of PN.
Liver disease is a significant complication of long-
term PN, estimated to occur in 15–60% of patients. In 
adults, steatosis occurs, progressing to intrahepatic cho-
lestasis and then cirrhosis. The incidence of liver disease 
is higher in children, in whom cholestasis occurs earlier 
and can be rapidly progressive. Aetiological factors in-
clude the nature of the primary disease and residual in-
testinal anatomy, the presence of sepsis, lack of enteral 
nutrition and possible nutrient deficiencies or toxicity. 
Management of PN-induced liver disease includes de-
tection and treatment of sepsis and optimization of the 
feeding regimen, perhaps with consideration of reduc-
tion in energy content. Ursodeoxycholic acid has been 
used with some benefit, particularly in neonates; rarely, 
liver and small intestinal transplantation may be required.
The prevalence of metabolic bone disease, character-
ized by reduced bone mineral density (BMD), is high in 
patients on long-term PN. Possible contributing factors 
include abnormalities (insufficiency or excess) of vitamin 
D, calcium, vitamin K, copper and aluminium. In addi-
tion, inflammatory bowel disease, which is an aetiological 
TABLE 11.6  Protocol for laboratory monitoring 
of nutrition support
Parameter
Frequency
Full blood count
Baseline
1–2 times a week until stable
Then weekly
Renal profile
Baseline
Daily until stable
Then 1–2 times a week
Liver profile 
(including 
prothrombin 
time)
Baseline
Twice weekly until stable
Then weekly
Glucose
Baseline
1–2 times a day (more if needed) until 
stable
Then weekly
Calcium, 
albumin
Baseline
Then weekly
Magnesium, 
phosphate
Baseline
Daily if at risk of refeeding syndrome
Three times a week until stable
Then weekly
Iron, ferritin 
folate, vitamin 
B12
Baseline
Every 3–6 months
CRP
Baseline
As required to assess presence of an 
acute phase response and assist 
interpretation of protein, trace 
element and vitamin results
Zinc, copper
Baseline
Then every 2–4 weeks depending on 
result
Selenium
a
Baseline if risk of depletion
Further testing dependent on baseline
Manganese
b
Every 3–6 months if on home PN
Vitamin D
b
6 monthly if on long-term support
Bone 
densitometry
b
On starting home PN
Then every two years
aNeeded primarily for patients having PN in the community.
bRarely needed for patients having enteral feeding. PN, parenteral 
nutrition.
BOX 11.3	
Criteria for identifying people at 
high risk of developing refeeding 
problems
The patient has one or more of the following:
•	 BMI <16 kg/m
2
•	 unintentional weight loss >15% within the last 3–6 months
•	 little or no nutritional intake for more than ten days
•	 low plasma concentrations of potassium, phosphate or 
magnesium prior to feeding.
or
The patient has two or more of the following:
•	 BMI <18.5 kg/m
2
•	 unintentional weight loss >10% within the last 
3–6 months
•	 little or no nutritional intake for more than five days
•	 a history of alcohol abuse or treatment with drugs in-
cluding insulin, chemotherapy, antacids or diuretics.
	
11  Nutritional disorders and their management	
213
factor in a number of the patients, is, itself associated with 
reduced BMD through the action of bone resorbing cyto-
kines and corticosteroid use. The use of bisphosphonates 
may be associated with an increase in BMD (as assessed 
by dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry, DEXA) in patients 
on PN, but their effect on fracture prevention is unclear.
Short bowel syndrome
For the majority of patients, parenteral nutrition is re-
quired for a short period during intercurrent illness. For 
others, it is a long-term treatment and they incorporate 
its administration into their daily routine at home and 
are otherwise well. The majority of these patients will 
have a short bowel. A short bowel is defined as one that 
is of insufficient length to enable adequate absorption, 
so that supplementation of macronutrients, and/or wa-
ter, and/or electrolytes is essential. This is likely to occur 
in patients left with <200 cm of small bowel. The most 
common causes of short bowel syndrome are mesenteric 
artery thrombosis, Crohn disease and radiation damage. 
The majority of patients with a short bowel can be di-
vided into two groups: those with a short bowel and a 
jejunocolic anastomosis, and those with a short bowel and 
a high output stoma. To facilitate management, the latter 
group can be divided into net ‘absorbers’ and net ‘secre-
tors’. The absorbers generally have more than ~100 cm of 
jejunum remaining. They are able to absorb more sodium 
and water from the diet than they take orally and have 
low stomal output. Net secretors have very little residual 
jejunum; stomal output is high (4–8 L/24 h) and losses of 
sodium and water exceed oral input.
Management of a patient with a high output jeju-
nostomy includes oral fluid restriction to reduce stomal 
output. Any fluid given should contain sodium in a con-
centration of at least 100 mmol/L, together with glucose, 
to minimize passive sodium loss and facilitate glucose-
coupled absorption of sodium. Antimotility agents (e.g. 
loperamide and codeine) and antisecretory drugs (e.g. H2 
antagonists, proton-pump inhibitors and somatostatin) 
may be prescribed to further reduce stomal output.
For some patients with short bowel syndrome, small 
bowel transplantation is an alternative to long-term par-
enteral nutrition. Indications for intestinal transplanta-
tion include PN-related liver disease, central venous 
catheter related thrombosis and frequent central line 
sepsis. Patients who experience frequent episodes of de-
hydration, despite intravenous fluids may also be eligible. 
Survival rates after transplantation have shown steady im-
provement and are currently about 80% at one year and 
43% at ten years.
CONCLUSION
Nutritional disorders include a wide spectrum of condi-
tions, including generalized undernutrition, overnutri-
tion leading to obesity, the eating disorders and diseases 
where nutrition has a role in the aetiology. Globally, both 
undernutrition and obesity are important public health 
problems. The treatment of undernutrition is often com-
plicated by factors such as war, famine and infectious 
diseases. Obesity remains difficult to treat once present, 
although the advances in the understanding of the physi-
ology of feeding discussed in this chapter are leading to 
new pharmacological and surgical interventions.
Nutritional interventions in the treatment of diseases 
may involve the use of therapeutic diets, the administra-
tion of dietary supplements or the provision of nutritional 
support, either enteral or parenteral. Nutritional support 
is best delivered by a multidisciplinary team. Further re-
search is required to establish the efficacy (or otherwise) 
of most dietary supplements.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank Stephen K. Bangert and Carel W. 
Le Roux who wrote the chapter in the previous edition 
of this book.
Further reading
American 
Association 
of 
Clinical 
Endocrinologists 
Nutrition 
Guidelines Taskforce. Medical guidelines for the clinical use of 
dietary supplements and nutraceuticals. Endocr Pract 2003;9:417–70. 
A useful summary of the evidence available for some nutraceuticals.
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists, The Obesity Society 
and American Society for Metabolic & Bariatric Surgery Medical 
Guidelines for Clinical Practice for the Perioperative Nutritional, 
Metabolic and Nonsurgical Support of the Bariatric Surgery Patient. 
Surg Obes Relat Dis 2008;S109–84. 
This guidance covers assessment of preoperative assessment of 
bariatric surgery patients and aspects of postoperative nutrition, vitamin 
supplementation and laboratory monitoring.
Geissler C, Powers H, editors. Human nutrition. 12th ed. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone; 2011. 
The twelfth edition of the classic text Human Nutrition and Dietetics, 
previously edited by Garrow, James and Ralph.
Hng KN, Ang YS. Overview of bariatric surgery for the physician. Clin 
Med 2012;12:435–40.
National Collaborating Centre for Acute Care. Nutrition support in 
adults. Oral nutrition support, enteral tube feeding and parenteral 
nutrition. London: National Collaborating Centre for Acute 
Care; 2006.
The NICE guidelines on nutrition support in adults: http://www.nice.
org.uk/guidance/QS24.
Woods SC, D’Aleesio DA. Central control of body weight and appetite. 
J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;93:537–50. 
A review of the mechanisms involved in appetite and satiety.
214
C H A P T E R  1 2
Clinical biochemistry of the 
­gastrointestinal tract
Ingvar T. Bjarnason  •  Roy A. Sherwood
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  214
MOUTH AND OESOPHAGUS  215
STOMACH  215
Helicobacter pylori 
215
Diagnosis of H. pylori infection 
216
Gastric acid secretion 
216
Gastrin 
216
Intrinsic factor 
217
PANCREAS  217
Pancreatic function tests 
217
SMALL BOWEL BACTERIAL  
OVERGROWTH  218
The normal intestinal microflora 
218
Definition, causes and symptoms  
of small bowel bacterial  
overgrowth 
219
Diagnosis of small bowel bacterial 
overgrowth 
219
MALDIGESTION AND MALABSORPTION  219
Clinical features 
219
Carbohydrate absorption 
220
Protein absorption 
222
Fat absorption 
224
INTESTINAL PERMEABILITY  225
FAECAL TESTS OF INTESTINAL  
INFLAMMATION  225
Calprotectin 
225
Calprotectin in disease 
225
Neuroendocrine tumours of the  
gastrointestinal tract and  
pancreas (NETs) 
226
THE ACUTE ABDOMEN  227
Introduction 
227
Acute pancreatitis 
228
Ectopic pregnancy 
229
Acute porphyria 
230
INTRODUCTION
Gastrointestinal complaints continue to account for a 
sizeable proportion of medical consultations. This is 
best illustrated by the fact that irritable bowel syndrome 
(IBS), the most commonly encountered gastrointestinal 
disorder, is estimated to have a prevalence of 20% in the 
UK. About 30% of these people seek medical attention, 
which in turn accounts for as many as 20–50% of patients 
attending general gastroenterology outpatient clinics in 
the UK. Furthermore, the prevalence of reflux oesopha-
gitis and non-specific dyspepsia is increasing, and with 
the advent of safe and effective drugs to inhibit gastric 
acid secretion, it is estimated that the cost of treatment 
for these disorders may grow to account for as much as 
20% of drug expenditure in primary care.
The development of endoscopic techniques has revo-
lutionized the investigation of gastrointestinal disorders. 
The combination of upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, 
colonoscopy and optic and/or wireless capsule enteros-
copy now allows visualization of the whole of the gas-
trointestinal tract and biopsies can be obtained from all 
parts of the bowel. This has resulted in loss of demand 
for many of the classic biochemical investigations (such 
as gastric acid secretion) and, as some of these methods 
are now obsolete, we have omitted them from this chap-
ter. Endoscopy and biochemical investigations, however, 
provide different kinds of information that are, in many 
respects, complementary. Endoscopy provides a static 
morphological picture that by itself, or with biopsy, has 
the potential to provide a diagnosis that automatically 
translates to treatment. Biochemical methods, on the 
other hand, provide a wider range of information. These 
include the following.
•	 Providing a diagnosis. This is a frequently de-
sired purpose of clinical biochemistry, but is rarely 
achieved. Nevertheless, the indirect documentation 
of the presence of Helicobacter pylori is often the only 
test required before treatment, and non-invasive 
tests for small bowel bacterial overgrowth may be 
the only tests required in order to treat diabetic pa-
tients with diarrhoea.
•	 Clinical screening tests prior to invasive investi-
gation. Examples of these kinds of investigations are 
serum transglutaminase antibody measurements and 
tests of intestinal permeability, which, if normal, may 
	
12  Clinical biochemistry of the ­gastrointestinal tract	
215
avoid the need for more invasive tests and, if posi-
tive, are an indication for jejunal or duodenal biopsy.
•	 The detection and assessment of the severity 
of intestinal dysfunction. These tests are called 
upon in order to provide an explanation for clinical 
signs (such as weight loss), for monitoring response 
to therapy and for confirmation of diagnosis (e.g. 
measurement of intestinal permeability following 
gluten withdrawal and challenge in coeliac disease, 
although this is rarely necessary in practice).
•	 Providing prognostic information. Biochemical 
tests are uniquely suited to assess functional changes 
that may herald a drastic change in the activity of the 
disease. This is best exemplified by increased con-
centrations of inflammatory markers in the faeces 
of patients with clinically quiescent inflammatory 
bowel disease (IBD, i.e. ulcerative colitis and Crohn 
disease), as these predict imminent clinical relapse.
•	 Investigating the impact of non-intestinal ­factors 
on intestinal function, whether ­biochemical 
or physiological. These may be exogenous, for 
­example related to radiotherapy, drugs, alcohol, di-
etary or environmental factors, or endogenous, for 
example due to malnutrition, reduced blood flow, 
anaemia etc. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug 
(NSAID)-induced enteropathy is an example of gas-
trointestinal disease caused by an exogenous factor.
Our intention in this chapter is to review new and es-
tablished laboratory-based investigations of the gastro-
intestinal tract that are useful clinically or for research 
purposes. We will not always provide the reference 
ranges for test results, as these may differ depending on 
environmental, geographical and racial factors, as well as 
differences in methodology.
MOUTH AND OESOPHAGUS
Clinical biochemistry has not had a major impact in the 
investigation of oral or oesophageal diseases. The reason 
is obvious in that the main functions of these organs are 
physical, namely grinding of food and transport to the 
stomach. Nevertheless, the buccal mucosa is a common 
site for obtaining material for genetic analysis and saliva 
can be assayed for a number of antibodies (although this 
is rarely done in clinical practice). Although the salivary 
glands and parotid secretions contain amylase (and ini-
tiate digestion of complex carbohydrates), peptides and 
growth factors (that may confer a degree of protection 
to the stomach and accelerate healing of gastric lesions), 
measurements of these are not helpful clinically and are 
used only in research.
The common oesophageal disturbances such as reflux 
and dysmotility (oesophageal spasms, neuromuscular 
incoordination, achalasia etc.) are investigated and di-
agnosed by imaging techniques (endoscopy, radiology), 
high-resolution manometry and pH recording, rather 
than by biochemical methods. Oesophageal cancer, in-
fections (cytomegalovirus, Candida albicans and herpes 
simplex) and drug- and radiation-induced diseases are 
similarly diagnosed largely from the clinical history and 
by endoscopy and biopsy.
STOMACH
The stomach acts as a reservoir for ingested food, where 
it is mixed with acid, mucus and pepsin and then released 
at a controlled rate into the duodenum. The mucosal sur-
face of the stomach is lined with mucus-secreting colum-
nar epithelial cells, interrupted by gastric pits containing 
acid-secreting parietal (or oxyntic) cells and pepsinogen-
secreting chief cells. The secreted hydrochloric acid kills 
many ingested bacteria, provides the acid pH necessary 
for pepsin (from pepsinogen) to begin digesting proteins 
and stimulates bile secretion. Mucus secretion is necessary 
to protect the mucosal surface of the stomach wall from its 
acidic contents. The stomach also secretes intrinsic factor, 
which binds vitamin B12 and allows it to be absorbed in the 
terminal ileum. The muscular contractions of the stomach 
wall have the mechanical effect of macerating food.
Helicobacter pylori
Helicobacter pylori is now accepted to be the main cause 
of gastric and duodenal ulcers; other causes include 
NSAIDs and, very rarely, the Zollinger–Ellison syndrome. 
Helicobacter pylori may play an important role in gastric 
cancers (adenocarcinomas and mucosal–associated lym-
phoid tissue lymphomas) and is undoubtedly the main 
cause of chronic gastritis, though in most patients this is 
asymptomatic. Many experts also believe H. pylori to be a 
major cause of non ulcer-related dyspepsia, and recent rec-
ommendations suggest that anyone who so wishes should 
be tested for H. pylori and treated if found to be positive.
The mode of transmission of H. pylori is uncertain. It 
is thought to be an infection acquired in childhood, pre-
sumably by the faeco–oral route, which would explain the 
higher prevalence in developing countries and the pro-
gressive decline in prevalence in developed countries, with 
better hygiene, preservation of food and smaller family 
sizes. Whatever the mode of transmission, H. pylori elicits 
an inflammatory response that is usually asymptomatic. 
This takes the form of chronic gastritis, with an acute 
inflammatory cell infiltrate of variable severity. Nine out 
of ten people infected by H. pylori do not develop ulcers. 
The variable development of clinically significant disease 
relates to the site of infection, virulence factors (e.g. phos-
pholipases, vacuolating cytotoxins (VAC), CagA protein) 
and poorly defined host factors that include blood flow, 
mucus secretion and pepsinogen stimulation. There are 
three recognized patterns of infection by H. pylori in the 
stomach. The most common type is that of low-grade 
inflammation of the mid-body of the stomach. This oc-
curs in people with a high threshold for immune response 
and H. pylori that has a low expression of CagA and VAC. 
Gastric acid secretion is reduced and there are usually no 
significant clinical consequences. If the microbe is pre-
dominantly in the antrum, the inflammation leads to dys-
function of the antral G-cells that become hyper-reactive 
and secrete disproportionate amounts of gastrin in re-
sponse to food and gastric distension. Gastrin has a trophic 
effect on the gastric parietal cells, increasing their number 
and stimulating them directly, via cell surface receptors, 
to produce more acid, resulting in the hyper-acidic state 
characteristic of patients with duodenal ulceration.
216	
Clinical biochemistry
The third pattern, a pangastric infection with H. pylori, 
is characteristic of those who develop gastric ulcers and 
those at risk of developing gastric cancer. These individu-
als tend to have normal or reduced gastric acid secretion. 
In theory, it would be possible to perform an endoscopy 
on every patient with indigestion and document the pat-
tern of infection. However, this would be prohibitively 
expensive owing to the large number of symptomatic pa-
tients. A less expensive option would be to assess a panel 
of hormones that are secreted from defined anatomical 
locations in the stomach (for instance pepsinogen 1 and 2 
and gastrin-17), but further work is required before this 
approach becomes widely accepted. A more pragmatic 
approach has, therefore, been adopted in adult patients 
under 50–55  years of age, namely to test and treat for 
H. pylori infection, irrespective of the precise diagnosis 
(ulcer, gastritis etc.), unless ‘red flag’ indicators suggestive 
of malignancy (e.g. weight loss, dysphagia) are present.
Having established the presence of H. pylori (see be-
low), there are a number of eradication regimens avail-
able, and the eradication failure rate, after trying at least 
three different regimens, should be <5–10%. If H. pylori 
is successfully eradicated, reinfection rates are extremely 
low (<1%).
Diagnosis of H. pylori infection
There are various methods for the diagnosis of H. pylori 
infection. At endoscopy, it is possible to take biopsies 
from which the organism can be visualized histologi-
cally or cultured, the latter being performed only if 
there are repeated treatment failures. Alternatively, the 
biopsy can be tested directly using commercially avail-
able kits incorporating a gel containing urea and an 
indicator that changes colour at an alkaline pH. In the 
presence of H. pylori (which contains urease), the urea 
is broken down to carbon dioxide and ammonia. The 
latter increases the pH of the gel and a colour change 
takes place. Less invasive methods involve measurement 
of H. pylori-specific antibodies (IgG or IgA). These are 
eminently suitable for screening (sensitivity 92%, speci-
ficity 83%), but cannot be used to document the success 
of treatment as high antibody titres can persist despite 
successful eradication.
The H. pylori breath test is currently the most widely 
used method for non-invasive diagnosis. It uses the same 
principle as the biopsy-based test and comes at a fraction 
of the cost of endoscopy and biopsy. Patients are given 
isotopically labelled urea (
13C or 
14C) to drink. If there 
is no urease present, the urea is absorbed intact and ex-
creted in the urine. If H. pylori is present, labelled car-
bon dioxide is absorbed into the circulation and exhaled 
in the breath. Breath samples are obtained before, and 
45–60 min after, drinking the labelled urea. The detec-
tion of labelled carbon is most commonly performed by 
mass spectrophotometry. The breath test is widely used 
and can also be used to assess the success of the treat-
ment (sensitivity 95%, specificity 96%). Lastly, there are 
commercial kits that use the polymerase chain reaction 
to amplify nuclear sequences specific for H. pylori from 
saliva or faeces (sensitivity 95%, specificity 94%). The 
stool tests are increasingly being used for the detection 
and confirmation of successful eradication of H. pylori 
rather than the breath test.
Gastric acid secretion
Before the discovery of the role of H. pylori in peptic ul-
cer disease, it was common practice to investigate gas-
tric acid secretion in patients with duodenal ulcers, who 
tend to be hyper-secretors, and those with gastric ulcers, 
who tend to have normal or low secretion rates. Gastric 
cancers are often associated with hypochlorhydria, and 
achlorhydria is common in pernicious anaemia and in 
gastric cancer.
Acid secretion tests are now only rarely used in the 
research setting and are no longer available in the vast 
majority of clinical biochemistry departments: they have 
become obsolete as the test results do not alter clinical 
practice or management.
Gastrin
In <0.5% of patients with gastroduodenal ulcers, the cause 
is unregulated gastrin release from an endocrine tumour 
termed a gastrinoma, which can lead to the Zollinger–
Ellison syndrome characterized by multiple gastro-
duodenal ulcers. The persistently high plasma gastrin 
concentrations not only lead to marked hypersecretion of 
gastric acid, but also, because the hormone is trophic for 
parietal cells, to increased parietal cell mass. Patients may 
present with symptoms that are indistinguishable from 
H. pylori-associated peptic ulcer disease. However, coex-
isting diarrhoea (due to acidic inactivation of pancreatic 
enzymes), multiple ulcers involving the second part of the 
duodenum, recurrent ulceration and ulcers refractory to 
conventional treatment should always arouse suspicion. 
Gastrinomas are either sporadic (the more common form) 
or associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 
(MEN 1, Wermer syndrome), a syndrome characterized 
by the presence of two or more of pituitary, pancreatic is-
let and parathyroid tumours. Multiple endocrine neopla-
sia type 1 is also associated with an increased prevalence of 
carcinoid, adrenocortical and thyroid tumours.
Gastrinomas are commonly situated in the pancreas, 
but are increasingly recorded arising from the duodenum, 
stomach and bones. Some 60% are clearly malignant, 
with multiple metastases at diagnosis. Given a suspicion 
of the Zollinger–Ellison syndrome, the first step is to 
measure fasting serum gastrin, as virtually all cases are as-
sociated with high concentrations. The differential diag-
nosis of a mildly elevated gastrin concentration includes 
hypochlorhydria, long-term proton pump inhibitor drug 
therapy, pernicious anaemia and antral G-cell hyperpla-
sia. Given a strong suggestion of a gastrinoma, the next 
step is to localize the tumour, which is best done at a spe-
cialist centre. Techniques for localization of the tumour 
include endoscopic ultrasound, octreotide scanning, 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission 
tomography (PET) and computerized tomography (CT) 
(the latter being particularly useful to detect metastases). 
Definitive diagnosis is histological. The treatment of gas-
trinomas usually involves a combination of surgery, che-
motherapy and acid suppression for symptomatic relief.
	
12  Clinical biochemistry of the ­gastrointestinal tract	
217
Intrinsic factor
Intrinsic factor is a glycoprotein principally secreted by 
the parietal cells of the stomach. Its secretion is governed 
by the same biochemical processes that regulate acid se-
cretion and its action is to assist in the absorption of vita-
min B12. Vitamin B12 is released from dietary proteins by 
the action of pepsin and then combines with R-binders 
(haptocorrins), glycoproteins secreted by the stomach, 
that assist in its protection against acid degradation. It is 
subsequently cleaved from R-binder complexes by pan-
creatic proteolysis in the duodenum and then binds to in-
trinsic factor to form a resistant complex that is taken up 
by ileal cell receptors (cubulin).
The commonest cause of intrinsic factor deficiency 
is autoimmunity; the reason for requesting intrinsic fac-
tor antibody measurement is usually the discovery of a 
low plasma vitamin B12 concentration – a cause of mac-
rocytic anaemia and various neurological disorders. The 
diagnosis of pernicious anaemia is based on the finding 
of a low plasma B12 concentration together with the pres-
ence of antiparietal cell antibodies and/or intrinsic factor 
antibodies (see Chapter 27). Current automated vitamin 
B12 assays suffer, in differing amounts, from interference 
from intrinsic factor antibodies; alternative strategies for 
assessment of B12 status include measurement of serum 
homocysteine, methylmalonic acid and holotranscobala-
min concentrations. Other causes of intrinsic factor de-
ficiency leading to low plasma B12 include gastrectomy, 
achlorhydria and congenital absence of intrinsic factor, 
which is rare. Vitamin B12 deficiency can also occur be-
cause of deficient intake (e.g. in vegans, starvation or 
reduced food intake of any cause) or in small bowel dis-
ease involving the terminal ileum. Gastric biopsies show-
ing histopathological features of atrophic gastritis may 
be helpful and there are some indications that patients 
should undergo surveillance endoscopies once a diagno-
sis is made because of an increased incidence of gastric 
cancer. In patients in whom small bowel disease is sus-
pected, the choice is that of wireless capsule enteroscopy 
or CT/MRI enteroclysis (specialized techniques in which 
a contrast medium is infused into the small intestine) for 
diagnosis. Previously, on finding a low vitamin B12 con-
centration, it was customary to request a Schilling test, 
which had the potential to help in the differential diag-
nosis, but this test has become obsolete as imaging tech-
niques have improved. Although proton pump inhibitors 
induce a state of gastric acid hyposecretion and are widely 
used, it is exceptionally rare to see vitamin B12 deficiency 
in these patients.
PANCREAS
The exocrine function of the pancreas includes the 
­production of bicarbonate and enzymes, including amy-
lase, lipase, trypsin, chymotrypsin, esterases and car-
boxypeptidases. The differential diagnosis of exocrine 
pancreatic disease in neonates and children is predomi-
nantly between cystic fibrosis and pancreatic acinar cell 
aplasia (Shwachman–Diamond syndrome). The major dis-
eases affecting the pancreas in adults are acute pancreatitis, 
chronic pancreatitis leading to pancreatic insufficiency 
and carcinoma of the pancreas. Chronic pancreatitis re-
sults in progressive loss of both islet cells and acinar tissue. 
Presentation is typically with recurrent upper abdominal 
pain radiating to the back, although malabsorption, for 
example steatorrhoea, may be the presenting feature. 
Approximately 90% of the pancreatic acinar tissue must 
be lost before features of malabsorption become apparent 
and clinically significant reduction in endocrine function 
generally occurs late in the disease process.
Pancreatic function tests
Tests of pancreatic function are usually divided into the 
direct (invasive) tests and indirect tests on blood, urine or 
faecal samples.
Direct or invasive function tests
The ‘gold standard’ test of pancreatic function is the 
secretin–pancreozymin test. This test assesses exocrine 
function by measuring bicarbonate and pancreatic en-
zyme secretion (amylase and trypsin) in aspirates from a 
tube sited in the duodenum, usually under fluoroscopic 
control. Secretin is given to induce fluid secretion, 
while pancreozymin or its analogue caerulein (secretin–­
caerulein test), is given to induce enzyme production. 
This test requires meticulous attention to technique in 
positioning the tube correctly and maintaining its pa-
tency, and is uncomfortable for the patient. This test is 
now rarely used in routine practice. However, it remains 
the test that has the highest sensitivity and specificity for 
the differential diagnosis of pancreatic insufficiency.
Non-invasive pancreatic function testing
Serum enzymes. The measurement of pancreatic en-
zymes in serum is standard practice in acute pancreati-
tis, but is seldom useful in the investigation of chronic 
pancreatitis.
Amylase is the most commonly measured enzyme 
­owing to the availability of cheap, easily automated meth-
ods. A disadvantage is the lack of specificity for the pan-
creas, as amylase in the circulation is derived from both 
pancreatic and non-pancreatic (mostly salivary) sources in 
approximately equal amounts. Measurement of the spe-
cific pancreatic amylase can be achieved using immuno­
subtraction techniques. Consideration of the ethnicity 
of the patient is important when interpreting amylase re-
sults, as subjects of African origin have a higher reference 
range for non-pancreatic amylase. The mechanism for this 
difference is unknown. An increase in both the pancreatic 
and non-pancreatic fractions may indicate the presence of 
macroamylasaemia – immunoglobulin–amylase complexes 
that have a prolonged half-life in the circulation owing to 
a reduction in clearance. Non-pancreatic causes of an in-
creased serum amylase are given in Table 12.1. Lipase has 
greater specificity for pancreatic disease than amylase, but 
methods available tend to be more complex and expen-
sive. The majority of the lipase in blood is the pancreatic 
form, although a sublingual lipase is also present. Lipase 
is not affected by ethnicity. Trypsin is 100% specific to 
218	
Clinical biochemistry
the pancreas and would therefore, theoretically, be the 
best of the three enzymes to measure. However, there are 
physiological obstacles that mean that trypsin itself is sel-
dom measured in blood samples. Trypsin is produced and 
stored in the pancreas as its inactive zymogen form (tryp-
sinogen), and is activated after secretion into the intesti-
nal tract. Active trypsin entering the circulation is bound 
immediately to the protease inhibitors α2-macroglobulin 
and α1-antitrypsin. Once bound, trypsin is not measurable 
using standard techniques, but any trypsinogen entering 
the circulation can be measured as ‘immunoreactive tryp-
sinogen’ (IRT). Immunoreactive trypsinogen can be used 
as a first-line test for screening for cystic fibrosis using the 
blood spots taken on Guthrie cards at 7–10 days of age. 
A national programme of cystic fibrosis screening started 
in 2006–2007 in the UK; IRT is used for initial screening 
with subsequent genetic testing for confirmation.
Faecal tests. The measurement of faecal fat excretion 
as a test of fat malabsorption (and thus indirectly of pan-
creatic exocrine function), is now regarded as obsolete by 
most clinical biochemists and gastroenterologists.
Pancreatic enzymes that have been measured in faeces 
include chymotrypsin and elastase. Stool chymotrypsin 
measurements have suffered from a lack of standardiza-
tion in the techniques used, making it difficult to com-
pare results obtained from the various groups who have 
used the test. Measurement of faecal pancreatic elastase-1 
is now recommended as the marker of choice for detect-
ing pancreatic insufficiency. Elastase is an endopeptidase 
and sterol binding protein. As with chymotrypsin, elas-
tase is not degraded during transit through the intestinal 
tract and is stable in faecal samples in vitro. Two com-
mercially available enzyme linked immunosorbent assays 
(ELISAs) using antibodies specific for pancreatic elastase 
have been studied in patients with pancreatic insuffi-
ciency. Sensitivities of 60–100% for moderate to severe 
pancreatic disease, using a cut-off of 200 μg/g wet weight, 
have been reported for faecal elastase. Discrimination be-
tween diarrhoea of pancreatic and non-pancreatic origins 
has been reported to be good, with better specificity than 
chymotrypsin. Faecal elastase measurements may also be 
useful in determining the amount of pancreatic enzyme 
replacement therapy required in patients with cystic fi-
brosis or chronic pancreatic insufficiency (chymotrypsin 
cannot be used for this purpose). While biochemical tests 
attempt to give a functional diagnosis in chronic pancre-
atitis, imaging techniques provide further information 
that may disclose the cause. Plain abdominal radiography, 
endoscopic ultrasound, CT and magnetic resonance chol-
angiopancreatography (MRCP) are all useful. Endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) with, or 
more commonly without, secretin stimulation is widely 
used, but carries a 10% risk of significant complications.
SMALL BOWEL BACTERIAL OVERGROWTH
With the discovery of microbes in the 19th century, theo-
ries were formulated linking the intestine with the devel-
opment of systemic disease as a result of an unfavourable 
interaction between intestinal luminal microbes and the 
body. These ideas are equally evident today in the mass 
media, whereby producers of live yoghurts (containing 
viable bacteria) seek to equate ingestion of their products 
(probiotics) with health, vitality and happiness.
The normal intestinal microflora
Despite the perceived importance of intestinal bacteria, 
the reality is that we are still at the descriptive stages of as-
sessing the normal intestinal flora and do not fully under-
stand its function and impact on our well-being. Though 
the bulk of intestinal microbes inhabit the lower bowel, 
even the stomach is not usually sterile with bacterial popu-
lation counts (predominantly Gram-positive aerobes) of 
up to 10
3 per gram of luminal content. The jejunum has a 
similarly Gram-positive flora, with a higher population of 
up to 10
4 per gram of luminal contents. The ileum contains 
a more varied flora that includes both aerobes and anaer-
obes, with populations in the region of 10
5–10
8 per gram. 
In the large intestine, Gram-negative anaerobes become 
the predominant species, overall bacterial populations ris-
ing significantly to 10
10–10
12 per gram of caecal content. 
Similar counts are present in the distal colon where the 
bacterial flora corresponds to that seen on faecal analyses.
TABLE 12.1  Non-pancreatic causes of an elevated plasma amylase activity
Condition
Reason for hyperamylasaemia
Perforated peptic ulcer
Increased entry of pancreatic enzymes into the circulation
Small bowel obstruction or perforation
Increased entry of pancreatic enzymes into the circulation
Ruptured ectopic (tubal) pregnancy and 
salpingitis
Release of Fallopian tube amylase
Salivary gland inflammation, e.g. with calculi 
or mumps
Release of salivary gland amylase
Opiate administration
Contraction of the sphincter of Oddi
Renal failure
Impaired renal clearance of amylase
Macroamylasaemia
Amylase becomes combined with a plasma protein (in some cases, an 
immunoglobulin), and the increased size of the complex results in 
impaired renal clearance. Thus, hyperamylasaemia may be detected in the 
absence of disease
Certain tumours of the lung and ovary
Production of amylase by the tumour
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Impaired renal clearance
Subjects of African origin
Higher circulating amylase of unknown cause
	
12  Clinical biochemistry of the ­gastrointestinal tract	
219
The above data have been obtained using invasive tech-
niques not commonly used in clinical practice. However, 
intestinal bacterial populations and species differ between 
individuals and relate in a complex way to age, diet, geo-
graphical and racial factors, antimicrobial treatment and 
intrinsic gut diseases.
Definition, causes and symptoms of small 
bowel bacterial overgrowth
The relatively small numbers of bacteria normally pres-
ent in the small intestine are probably of little signifi-
cance. However, problems can arise when the bacterial 
population of the small intestine is increased – bacterial 
overgrowth. An essential consideration of this definition 
is that bacterial overgrowth is based on quantitative and 
qualitative estimates of coliform bacteria in small bowel 
aspirates, something which is not possible in routine clin-
ical practice. There are a number of diseases and condi-
tions associated with small bowel bacterial overgrowth, a 
combination of factors predisposing to overgrowth in any 
given condition. Gastric hypochlorhydria of any cause may 
contribute to small bowel bacterial overgrowth. Other 
factors include: alterations in systemic immunology (e.g. 
isolated immunoglobin A deficiency, hypogammaglobu-
linaemia, combined immune deficiency, infection with 
human immunodeficiency virus); impaired motility (e.g. 
advanced age, autonomic neuropathy in diabetes, fibrosis 
in scleroderma); pancreatic insufficiency; oral antibiotics; 
intrinsic small bowel disease (e.g. jejunal diverticulosis, 
coeliac disease, small bowel Crohn disease), and surgery 
(removal of the ileocaecal junction, surgically induced 
blind loops and, increasingly, bariatric surgery).
Small bowel bacterial overgrowth can be asympto­
matic or be associated with non-specific symptoms, such 
as abdominal distension (bloating), eructation, flatulence, 
borborygmi and diarrhoea. The classic clinical presenta-
tion includes vitamin B12 deficiency (intestinal bacteria 
compete with enterocytes for this vitamin), high blood 
folate concentrations (bacteria are a source of this vi-
tamin) and fat malabsorption, and is rarely seen today. 
Rather, the condition is thought of when patients who 
are predisposed to overgrowth present with intestinal 
symptoms, for example diabetic patients with diarrhoea, 
weight loss and anaemia. An interesting suggestion is that 
small bowel bacterial overgrowth (intestinal dysbiosis) 
may be responsible for the symptoms in a proportion of 
patients diagnosed with IBS.
Diagnosis of small bowel bacterial 
overgrowth
Because of geographical and/or racial differences in small 
bowel bacterial flora, it is advisable that each laboratory 
independently establishes its own reference ranges for in-
vestigatory tests. The gold standard diagnostic procedure 
is microbiological examination (quantitative and qualita-
tive bacteriological cultures) of small bowel contents, but 
this is impractical for routine clinical practice. More con-
venient, non-invasive biochemical procedures, based on 
oral administration of substances that are metabolized by 
bacteria to yield products that can be detected in breath, 
have now been introduced, but their reliability remains 
controversial. The substances employed are either not 
absorbed from the small intestine (e.g. lactulose), there-
fore becoming available for metabolism by bacteria, or 
normally absorbed from the small bowel (e.g. glucose 
and d-xylose) and, therefore, only subject to metabolism 
by bacteria when these are present in the small bowel. 
Lactulose and similar test substances have the theoretical 
advantage of assessing the whole of the small bowel while 
the readily absorbed ones may be more selective for the 
proximal small bowel. The test results are also dependent 
upon the rate of intestinal transit. When transit is very 
rapid, the ingested load may be delivered to the caecum 
and give a false positive result. Furthermore, the tests 
vary in their sensitivity, presumably due to the influence 
of other ill-defined factors.
The 
14C-glycocholate breath test was one of the first to 
be used for the non-invasive diagnosis of small bowel bac-
terial overgrowth, but it is obsolete because false negative 
results are common. Small bowel bacterial breath tests 
now in routine use include those involving test substances 
labelled with 
13C (less commonly 
14C), labelled CO2 and 
breath hydrogen tests. Hydrogen breath tests depend 
on the fact that mammalian cells do not produce hydro-
gen. A breath hydrogen >20 ppm in expired gas after ad-
ministration of the test substance (50 g glucose or 10 g 
lactulose) indicates bacterial overgrowth. Breath hydro-
gen is relatively simple to measure as a near-patient test. 
However, there are inherent limitations in the detection 
of breath hydrogen, for example with smoking and be-
cause of hydrogen production by oral flora. Carbohydrate 
may also be retained within the gut from an earlier meal. 
Abnormalities in gut transit and concomitant antibiotic 
therapy can also influence the result. Curiously, some 
individuals fail to produce breath hydrogen when chal-
lenged with a non-absorbed carbohydrate such as lactu-
lose. There are a number of different protocols available 
for the performance of such breath tests and their value 
continues to be debated.
MALDIGESTION AND MALABSORPTION
It is conventional to distinguish between impaired uptake 
of nutrients due to maldigestion on the one hand and 
malabsorption on the other. The symptoms produced by 
the two conditions share many clinical features and there 
is a very broad spectrum of underlying causes. However, 
as the two processes are integrated and so inextricably 
linked, they are often lumped together as ‘malabsorp-
tion’. A very clear understanding of both the normal pro-
cesses of digestion and absorption and the ways in which 
they can be disturbed is crucial to identifying the role that 
clinical biochemistry plays, both in making the clinical 
diagnosis and assessing prognosis.
Clinical features
Malabsorption can involve single or multiple nutrients. 
Accordingly, some patients may present with a single 
clinical feature; others may have several. Clinical features 
can relate to nutrient deficiency (or deficiencies), the 
220	
Clinical biochemistry
retention of nutrients in the gut (leading, e.g. to increased 
bacterial fermentation) or both.
Genetically determined intestinal lactase deficiency 
(see below) is a paradigm for maldigestion. The symptoms 
range from none, to those of abdominal bloating, exces-
sive flatulence and watery diarrhoea (reminiscent of IBS), 
largely depending on the degree of the lactase deficiency, 
intake of lactose and intestinal transit time. Coeliac dis-
ease is an example of a condition causing malabsorption. 
Early recognition of the disease is now common but, in 
the past, the classic presenting features included: fre-
quent loose stools, steatorrhoea, anaemia (iron or folic 
acid deficiency), wasting or impaired growth, osteoma-
lacia (malabsorption of vitamin D and calcium), tetany 
(hypocalcaemia) and, occasionally, easy bruising (vitamin 
K deficiency). Exposure to gluten fractions present in 
wheat and several other cereals is an essential predispos-
ing factor for coeliac disease. These fractions are thought 
to undergo an enzymatic reaction by transglutaminase 
(which catalyses the deamidation of specific residues of 
glutamine to glutamate). In patients with the disease (and 
mostly in those with the characteristic human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA) alleles DQ2 and DQ8), the peptide pro-
duced has an affinity for a groove in the encoded HLA 
molecules. This in turn evokes an abnormal intestinal 
mucosal T  cell response, resulting in an inflammatory 
response that causes the characteristic changes of coeliac 
disease. The antibody response evoked can be useful in 
diagnosis. Anti-tissue transglutaminase antibodies are not 
a substitute for the definitive diagnostic test (the demon-
stration of total villous atrophy in a small bowel biopsy), 
but are useful as a screening procedure prior to endoscopy 
and in follow-up, as they usually become normal with 
successful treatment. Examples of ways in which malab-
sorption can present are shown in Table 12.2. Some of 
the basic laboratory investigations that should be carried 
out in patients in whom a diagnosis of malabsorption is 
suspected, are shown in Table 12.3. If all of these tests are 
normal, the diagnosis is unlikely; if they are abnormal, the 
next step is to look for a specific cause, guided by the his-
tory, clinical findings and laboratory results. Anaemia is 
a particularly common feature of gastric and small bowel 
disease. The physiology and biochemistry of the vitamins 
and minerals involved in blood formation is discussed in 
detail in Chapter 27. Metabolic bone disease is discussed 
in detail in Chapter 31. In patients with malabsorption, 
much emphasis has hitherto been placed on malabsorp-
tion of calcium and vitamin D leading to osteomalacia. 
The advent of dual energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) 
scans with reliable, sensitive and reproducible quantita-
tion of bone mineral density has made it clear that there 
is a high prevalence of reduced bone mineral density in 
patients with coeliac disease and Crohn disease, even with 
successful treatment. Bone mineral density is frequently 
reduced in both disorders and osteoporosis may be seen 
in up to 25% of patients. Bone disease in these condi-
tions predominantly affects the hips, with vertebrae and 
the forearm bones somewhat less severely affected. An 
important point is that reduced bone mineral density is 
often present in IBD at diagnosis and is independent of 
corticosteroid treatment (which is itself a cause of osteo-
porosis). Reduced bone mineral density in patients with 
IBD is associated with cytokine spillover from the gut 
into the circulation, leading to impairment of osteoblas-
tic activity with no concomitant decrease in osteoclastic 
activity.
Carbohydrate absorption
Dietary carbohydrates
In most human diets, carbohydrates are the principal 
source of energy. The major form in the diet is starch, 
which accounts for about two-thirds of digestible dietary 
carbohydrate, the remaining third being made up of su-
crose, lactose and their constituent monosaccharides. 
Starch is a polymer of glucose consisting of two forms: 
amylose and amylopectin. Amylose consists of long, un-
branched chains of glucose molecules joined by α-1,4 
TABLE 12.2  Examples of the way in which 
­malabsorption can present
Presentation
Cause
Passage of pale, bulky, 
offensive stools
Fat malabsorption or 
maldigestion
Abdominal distension, 
borborygmi, watery 
diarrhoea and excessive 
flatus
Malabsorption of 
carbohydrate
Vague malaise and 
tiredness, sometimes 
with weight loss (adults); 
growth retardation 
(children)
Generalized deficiency of 
nutrients
Anaemia
Deficiency of iron, folate or 
vitamin B12
Easy bruising or bleeding
Deficiency of vitamin K
Failure to thrive (infants)
Generalized deficiency of 
nutrients
TABLE 12.3  Some basic laboratory 
­investigations in patients with suspected 
malabsorption
Investigation
To look for
Tests for evidence of malabsorption
Full blood count
Anaemia, evidence of 
haematinic deficiency
Ferritin
Iron deficiency
Vitamin B12
B12 deficiency
Folate
Folate deficiency
Prothrombin time/
International normalized 
ratio
Vitamin K deficiency
Albumin
Malnutrition
Vitamin D
Vitamin D deficiency
Tests for causes of malabsorption
C-reactive protein
Inflammatory conditions
Immunoglobulins
Hypogammaglobulinaemia
Antigliadin and anti-
tissue transglutaminase 
antibodies
Coeliac disease
Faecal elastase
Pancreatic insufficiency
	
12  Clinical biochemistry of the ­gastrointestinal tract	
221
links. Amylopectin consists of chains of glucose mol-
ecules with branching points for side chains every 12–25 
glucose units. At each branching point, there is an α-1,6 
link. Sucrose and lactose are disaccharides, sucrose con-
sisting of a dimer of glucose and fructose, while lactose is 
a dimer of glucose and galactose.
Digestion of carbohydrates
Luminal events in carbohydrate digestion. The 
initial step in starch absorption is enzymatic digestion 
of α-1,4 links by salivary amylase to release maltose (di-
mer of two glucose molecules) and maltotriose (trimer of 
three glucose molecules). The salivary enzyme is rapidly 
inactivated by gastric acid, but hydrolysis is continued 
by pancreatic amylase, the end-products being maltose, 
maltotriose, short-branched oligosaccharides and α-limit 
dextrins, the latter two being residual branched segments 
resulting from incomplete digestion of amylopectin. No 
free glucose is produced.
Enterocyte events in carbohydrate digestion. The 
final step of carbohydrate digestion, the conversion of 
oligosaccharides to monosaccharides, is performed by 
the disaccharidases of the small intestinal enterocytes. 
The main disaccharidases are maltase, sucrase-isomaltase 
and lactase (see Fig.  12.1). These enzymes are synthe-
sized on the endoplasmic reticulum, transported to the 
Golgi apparatus and then to the brush border. They are 
distributed throughout the length of the small intestine, 
but sucrase and lactase are in highest concentrations in 
the jejunum. They are normally present in considerable 
­excess, so that some reduction in activity does not nor-
mally result in symptoms.
The three main monosaccharides derived from the 
diet (glucose, galactose and fructose) are absorbed by sat-
urable carrier-mediated transport systems in the entero-
cyte brush border. Secondary active transport of glucose 
and galactose occurs through a sodium co-transport sys-
tem, driven by a sodium gradient dependent on Na
+,K
+-
ATPase on the basolateral surface of the cell. Fructose 
absorption is not active, but occurs through carrier-­
mediated (facilitated) diffusion.
Both the digestion and absorption of carbohydrates 
are highly efficient, but the process is incomplete, par-
ticularly for starch, with up to one-fifth of dietary starch 
failing to be absorbed. The efficiency of starch absorp-
tion varies, depending on the foodstuff from which it is 
SUCROSE
MALTOTRIOSE
α-DEXTRINS
TREHALOSE
CELLOBIOSE
LACTOSE
sucrase
maltase
isomaltase
trehalase
lactase
lactase
POLYSACCHARIDES
MONOSACCHARIDES
STARCH amylase
D-FRUCTOSE
D-GLUCOSE
D-GALACTOSE
exfoliation
NO hydrolytic activity
INULIN
DEXTRAN
CELLULOSE
VARIOUS GUMS
LACTULOSE
MELIBIOSE
RAFFINOSE etc.
NO hydrolytic activity
Absorption
MALTOSE
LACTULOSE
3-O-methyl-D-GLUCOSE
D-XYLOSE
L-RHAMNOSE
non-mediated diffusion
active mediated
passive mediated
non-mediated diffusion
passive
MEDIATED transport
active Na
+-linked
MEDIATED transport
portal vascular system
NO TRANSPORT – but about 0.1%
of Dextran MW 3000 is absorbed
by simple diffusion
NO TRANSPORT – but about 0.5%
of lactulose and 0.28% of raffinose
are absorbed by simple diffusion
Metabolic loss
Recovery in 5 h urine collection
nil
nil
50%
20%
0.22% (0.02–0.50%) of oral dose
51% (38–62%) of oral dose
33% (23–48%) of oral dose
10% (5–16%) of oral dose
Liver
Kidneys
A  ABSORBABLE
B  NON-ABSORBABLE
C  TEST SUGARS (absorption/permeability):
?
OLIGOSACCHARIDES
FIGURE 12.1  ■  Digestion and absorption of saccharides. (A) Ingested starch is broken down to the various disaccharides by salivary 
and pancreatic amylase. The disaccharides are cleaved by the various brush border disaccharidases to yield d-fructose, d-glucose 
and d-galactose. These in turn are transported across the brush border and enterocytes, and into the circulation by specific transport 
systems. (B) Non-hydrolysable polysaccharides, disaccharides and trisaccharides are thought to be excluded from permeation across 
the brush border. The small quantities that do permeate the intestine appear to pass by a paracellular route or through areas of cell 
extrusion (apoptosis). (C) Four commonly used sugars, used in a combined test of intestinal absorptive capacity and intestinal perme-
ability, use different transport routes across the intestine, which allows assessment of the various intestinal functions. This increases 
the discriminatory value of the tests when assessing intestinal disease.
222	
Clinical biochemistry
derived. For example, rice starch is highly absorbed, but 
between 10 and 20% of starch in wheat and certain beans 
enters the colon, where bacteria produce short chain 
fatty acids (which may be an important energy source for 
colon­ocytes), methane and hydrogen.
Clinical aspects of carbohydrate absorption
Although inherited disorders of sucrase-isomaltase and 
of transport proteins causing glucose-galactose malab-
sorption and fructose malabsorption are recognized, they 
are very uncommon. Adult lactase deficiency, however, 
is common in humans and may be regarded as a normal 
finding in many ethnic groups. Malabsorption of carbo-
hydrates predisposes to osmotic diarrhoea with excessive 
flatus, abdominal distension and discomfort (‘griping’ 
pains).
Lactase deficiency. Lactase activity is highest in the 
earliest months of life, but levels of the enzyme usually 
decline in all races after weaning. The prevalence of adult 
lactase deficiency is highly variable between races; so, for 
example, 5–15% of northern Europeans have demon-
strable hypolactasia or alactasia, but >70% of Africans, 
Asians and especially Inuits have deficiency of the en-
zyme. However, the vast majority of affected individu-
als are asymptomatic, because overall completeness of 
disaccharide hydrolysis depends on the amount ingested, 
intestinal dilution and transit times, as well as the state of 
the enzyme (reduced or absent enzyme activity).
In practice, the diagnosis is often made by a therapeu-
tic trial of a diet low in lactose, but metabolic tests are 
available (see below) and the diagnosis can be confirmed 
by assaying lactase activity in small bowel biopsy samples 
(though this is rarely required). Congenital lactase de-
ficiency (i.e. lactase deficiency that is present at birth) 
has been described, but is extremely rare. The form of 
enzyme deficiency discussed above is usually known as 
primary or ‘genetic’ lactase deficiency. However, lactase 
deficiency may also complicate mucosal diseases of the 
small intestine and is then referred to as ‘secondary’. This 
secondary lactase deficiency is a regular feature of coeliac 
disease, and is also seen in tropical sprue, IBD, radiation 
enteritis, chronic alcoholism with malnutrition and the 
enteropathy associated with acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome (AIDS). It may also accompany infections such 
as acute gastroenteritis and giardiasis, but usually resolves 
following resolution or successful treatment of the illness.
Investigation of carbohydrate absorption
The glucose tolerance test is of no value in the detection 
of malabsorption. The small intestinal reserve capacity 
for absorption of d-glucose is so great that absorption 
is usually well maintained, even when mucosal disease is 
severe. Furthermore, the rise in blood glucose concen-
tration following oral administration is influenced by ad-
ditional factors such as gastric emptying and endocrine 
status, which complicate interpretation.
Xylose absorption test. d-Xylose, a pentose sugar of 
plant origin, has been the basis of an absorption test 
in routine clinical use since the 1930s. In the human, 
d-xylose is absorbed mainly from the jejunum, by a pas-
sive carrier-mediated system distinct from that utilized by 
d-glucose. Unlike d-glucose, there is no reserve capac-
ity for the intestinal uptake of d-xylose, which made this 
sugar a potentially good indicator, responsive to minor 
changes in jejunal absorption. However, the concentra-
tion of xylose measured after an oral dose is affected by 
other factors including renal, hepatic and cardiac disease 
and the test is no longer widely available.
Lactose tolerance test. This test may be used in sus-
pected lactase deficiency. In essence, serial blood sam-
ples for glucose estimation are taken after oral ingestion 
of 50 g of lactose. A rise in venous plasma glucose of 
<1.1 mmol/L is indicative of impaired lactose hydrolysis. 
The occurrence of typical symptoms following ingestion 
of lactose provides further evidence for the diagnosis.
Differential 
tests 
of 
intestinal 
disaccharide 
hydrolysis. Small amounts of non-hydrolysable disac-
charides are absorbed by passive diffusion and appear in 
the urine: when hydrolysable disaccharides are not hy-
drolysed for some reason, the same thing happens. The 
intestinal uptake and urinary excretion of intact disac-
charides in urine are, therefore, influenced by the extent 
of small intestinal disaccharidase activity: the greater the 
rate of hydrolysis, the less the excretion of intact disac-
charide in urine. Excretion ratios of hydrolysable:non-­
hydrolysable disaccharides following ingestion of a 
mixture are, therefore inversely proportional to the ef-
ficacy of intestinal hydrolysis. Accurate, non-invasive 
­assessment of ­intestinal lactase, sucrase or isomaltase 
can be made, using measurements of lactose/lactulose, 
sucrose/lactulose or palatinose/lactulose excretion ratios 
respectively, either separately or in combination. Ratios 
of lactose, sucrose or palatinose divided by lactulose (% 
molar dose excreted) may indicate isolated (genetically 
determined or primary) deficiency of lactase, sucrase 
(rare, a cause for severe diarrhoea in children) or palati-
nase (for isomaltase, not clinically relevant). However, if 
the absorption of two or more disaccharides is impaired, 
this suggests a secondary deficiency, for example mucosal 
diseases such as coeliac disease, infection or immune de-
ficiency. Representative results using this test in patients 
with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection are 
shown in Figure 12.2.
This is undoubtedly the test of choice for the accu-
rate and reliable assessment of whole bowel disacchari-
dase activity. It is, however, also more labour intensive 
and demanding on the patient than the other procedures 
mentioned above.
Protein absorption
The average Western diet contains some 80–100 g of 
protein per day, which provides not only the amino acids 
necessary for protein synthesis, but also some (10–15%) 
of the energy content of the diet. In addition, the gut di-
gests and absorbs substantial amounts (perhaps 60 g) of 
endogenous protein derived from intestinal secretions, 
mucus and the shedding of mucosal cells.
	
12  Clinical biochemistry of the ­gastrointestinal tract	
223
Digestion of proteins
Protein digestion takes place throughout the length of 
the small intestine and is efficient, with only 5% of the 
protein entering the gut lumen being lost in the stools 
each day.
Protein digestion begins in the stomach with the 
grinding and mixing action of gastric peristalsis and the 
food being exposed to gastric acid and pepsin. Pepsin is 
a protease that cleaves internal peptide bonds adjacent to 
hydrophobic amino acids. Pepsin is inactivated at a pH 
>4.0 and its action is, therefore, confined to the stomach. 
Digestion of proteins proceeds further through the ac-
tion of the pancreatic proteases trypsin, chymotrypsin, 
elastase and carboxypeptidases A and B in the proximal 
jejunum. These are secreted as inactive proenzymes. 
Trypsin is released from trypsinogen by the brush border-
derived enterokinase and activates the other proenzymes. 
Trypsin, chymotrypsin and elastase are endopeptidases, 
hydrolysing peptide bonds adjacent to certain specific 
amino acids, while carboxypeptidases A and B are exo-
peptidases, removing amino acids one at a time from the 
C-terminal ends of the peptides. The proteases reduce 
chyme to a mixture of free amino acids and oligopeptides 
(of between two and six amino acid residues). These are 
then further digested by brush border peptidases. There 
are at least eight mucosal peptidases that are synthesized 
and transported in a similar manner to the disacchari-
dases. However, unlike carbohydrates, the peptides are 
not completely digested to their constituent units, brush 
border enzyme action leaving a mixture of amino acids, 
di- and tripeptides. There are specific transport systems 
that effectively absorb di- and tripeptides and, indeed, do 
so at a faster rate than for free amino acids; this discov-
ery has had implications for the development of enteral 
feeding regimens. Peptide uptake is by sodium-linked ac-
tive transport. Once inside the mucosa, peptidases within 
the enterocyte cleave small peptides to their constituent 
amino acids. A number of transport systems exist for the 
uptake of luminal amino acids and there are some rare 
inherited defects of amino acid absorption, including 
Hartnup disease (p. 171) and cystinuria (p. 170).
Clinical aspects of protein absorption
The most common cause of protein malnutrition world-
wide is inadequate intake, often combined with poor 
­absorption due to tropical enteropathy and frequent epi-
sodes of infective enteritis. The clinical syndrome is best 
illustrated by children from famine areas of the third world 
with their pot bellies (ascites because of hypoalbuminae-
mia). There are no specific syndromes of protein malab-
sorption, although protein deficiency can contribute to 
the wasting and nutritional disturbance of severe malab-
sorption syndrome. In several diseases, for example Crohn 
disease, ulcerative colitis and Whipple disease, excessive 
protein loss into the gut produces the syndrome of protein-­
losing enteropathy. This process is not one of malabsorp-
tion, although there may be associated malabsorption.
0
Lactose/lactulose
Sucrose/lactulose
Palatinose/lactulose
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
1.1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0
HIV
AIDS
HIV
AIDS
HIV
AIDS
Pathogen +ve
Well
Diarrhoea
Pathogen –ve
Well
Pathogen +ve
Well
Diarrhoea
Pathogen –ve
Well
Pathogen +ve
Well
Diarrhoea
Pathogen –ve
Well
FIGURE 12.2  ■  Quantitative estimation of the rate of intestinal hydrolysis of ingested disaccharides in patients with HIV and AIDS. The 
test is carried out after an overnight fast and a preceding 12–18 h dietary exclusion of lactose- and sucrose-containing foods. Subjects 
ingest a solution containing lactulose 5 g, lactose 10 g, sucrose 10 g and palatinose 10 g (with or without l-rhamnose, which allows the 
integrity of intestinal permeability to be assessed at the same time), followed by a 10 h urinary collection with measurement of the 
disaccharides (% dose excreted) and calculation of the ratios. Well subjects have molar lactose/lactulose, sucrose/lactulose and pala-
tinose/lactulose urine excretion ratios <0.3, indicative of normal intestinal lactase, sucrase and palatinase activities. Increased ratios 
in patients with the various stages of HIV are indicative of impaired hydrolysis of each of these sugars. The fact that the hydrolysis of 
all three sugars is impaired shows that this is secondary disaccharidase deficiency.
224	
Clinical biochemistry
Investigation of protein absorption
There is no clinically useful non-invasive method of as-
sessing protein digestion and absorption. Furthermore, 
there is little clinical need for such tests as mucosal dis-
eases causing amino acid malabsorption are so rare. 
Protein-losing enteropathy can, however, be detected 
easily, most accurately by measuring the faecal excretion 
of intravenously administered albumin labelled with 
51Cr 
and somewhat less reliably by measurement of faecal α1-
antitrypsin and α1-antichymotrypsin.
Fat absorption
Although the average fat content of the diet has been fall-
ing in the Western world over the last 20  years in re-
sponse to medical advice, the average fat intake is still of 
the order of 90–100 g/day. There has also been a relative 
decline in the proportion of saturated fat in the diet with a 
concomitant increase in polyunsaturated fatty acids. The 
principal long chain polyunsaturated fatty acids are lin-
oleic (C18:2) and linolenic (C18:3) acids. The other dom-
inant fatty acids are oleic (C18:1) and palmitic (C16:0) 
acids. In food, these are mainly present as esters with 
glycerol (triacylglycerols or triglycerides). Additional 
dietary fat consists of phospholipid, cholesterol and fat-
soluble vitamins. Because fats are insoluble in water, the 
mechanisms for their digestion and absorption are com-
plex, but an understanding of the mechanism of fat diges-
tion and absorption is crucial to an understanding of the 
wide variety of diseases that cause malabsorption of fat 
and are consequently associated with steatorrhoea.
Digestion of triacylglycerols
Luminal digestion. The first stage in the digestion of 
triacylglycerols is the process of peristaltic emulsifica-
tion. Physical grinding of food, first by chewing and then 
in the stomach, produces an initial, relatively unstable 
emulsion that enters the duodenum. The emulsion is sta-
bilized as the fat droplets are coated with phospholipid, 
provided exogenously in the diet and endogenously from 
bile. Further stabilization is achieved by a coating of bile 
salts and with small amounts of monoacylglycerols and 
fatty acid ions.
The main digestion of the emulsion occurs through the 
action of pancreatic lipase, but a minor initial component 
of digestion may be provided through the actions of lin-
gual and gastric lipases, which have pH optima in the acid 
range. This component is important, however, in provid-
ing partial digestion of triglycerides to enhance and con-
tribute to the stability of the emulsion. Pancreatic lipase 
acts in conjunction with a cofactor, pancreatic colipase, 
which is secreted in an inactive form (procolipase) and 
subsequently activated by tryptic digestion. Pancreatic li-
pase activity is greatest at near neutral pH and is therefore 
dependent on adequate bicarbonate secretion from the 
pancreas, under the influence of secretin. The combined 
action of lipase and colipase hydrolyses triacylglycerols to 
release fatty acids from the 1 and 3 positions, so that each 
triacylglycerol molecule is hydrolysed to a monoacylglyc-
erol (with a fatty acid attached at the 2 position) and two 
free fatty acids. Bile salts are amphipathic, that is, they 
contain both water-soluble and lipid-soluble components. 
This property allows them to aggregate in micelles such 
that the hydrophobic components line up adjacent to one 
another on the inside of the micelle with the hydrophilic 
aspects facing outwards into the aqueous phase. The wa-
ter-insoluble fatty acids, monoglycerides and cholesterol 
are, therefore, held ‘inside’ the micelle to form a highly 
stable particulate emulsion. While triacylglycerol absorp-
tion is fairly efficient in the absence of bile salts, by con-
trast the absorption of cholesterol and fat-soluble vitamins 
is severely compromised unless the bile salt concentration 
in the duodenum is above a critical micellar concentration.
Absorption of triacylglycerols. The transport of lip-
ids across the surface of enterocytes is by passive diffu-
sion, that is, the lipids partition across lipid components 
in the brush border membrane. The microclimate at 
the enterocyte surface is slightly more acidic than in the 
jejunal lumen, which encourages the liberation of fatty 
acids from micelles. There is some suggestion, however, 
that a component of fat absorption for certain fatty ac-
ids, particularly linoleic and oleic acids, may occur by 
facilitated diffusion. Triacylglycerols are resynthesized 
from monoacylglycerols and fatty acids in enterocytes 
and incorporated into chylomicrons. The carrier protein 
apolipoprotein B48 is essential for chylomicron synthesis, 
and absence of this protein, as in congenital abetalipo-
proteinaemia, produces severe fat malabsorption. While 
longer chain triacylglycerols (above C10) pass into the 
lymphatics, medium chain triacylglycerols (C6–10) are at 
least partly absorbed intact, probably by passive diffusion, 
to reach the liver by the portal circulation.
Digestion and absorption of other fats
Phospholipids are hydrolysed to fatty acids and lysophos-
phatidylcholine by pancreatic phospholipase A2, while cho-
lesteryl esters are hydrolysed by a pancreatic esterase. The 
fatty acids form micelles with bile acids, and thus both lipids 
are ultimately transported to enterocytes in a similar way 
to the digestion products of triacylglycerols. Phospholipids 
are resynthesized in the endoplasmic reticulum of mucosal 
cells and cholesterol is esterified by acyl-CoA cholesterol 
acyltransferase before being incorporated into chylomi-
crons. The efficiency of fat absorption is considerable so 
that, in health, the process is virtually complete. Most fat 
absorption occurs within the proximal jejunum.
Clinical aspects of fat malabsorption
Fat absorption is a complex, multistage process. Therefore, 
disease at several levels in the alimentary system can result 
in fat malabsorption, which, when severe, is characterized 
by the presence of steatorrhoea. Interference with deliv-
ery of bile salts into the duodenum, pancreatic exocrine 
deficiency, failure to achieve near-neutral duodenal pH 
either from hypersecretion of gastric acid or hyposecre-
tion of pancreatic bicarbonate, and mucosal disease due 
to villous atrophy, lymphangiectasia, abetalipoprotein-
aemia etc, can all result in steatorrhoea. Tests of fat ab-
sorption have been used in the past as screening methods 
to detect malabsorption. In modern clinical practice, it 
	
12  Clinical biochemistry of the ­gastrointestinal tract	
225
is increasingly evident that confirmation of steatorrhoea 
(rather than quantification) by microscopy of faeces for 
fat after suitable staining is sufficient to initiate appropri-
ate investigation of the relevant organs that may play a 
role in fat digestion and absorption.
Investigation of fat absorption
Faecal fat excretion. Quantitative measurement of fae-
cal fat excretion is the most sensitive method of detecting 
fat malabsorption. However, this investigation is unpleas-
ant both for patients and laboratory staff, and few labo-
ratories now include it in their repertoires. There have 
been a number of efforts to find alternative measures of fat 
absorption. The 
14C-triolein (or 
13C) breath test is prob-
ably the best of these, but, nevertheless, is not widely used.
13/14C-triolein breath test. Following an overnight fast 
and collection of a basal sample of expired air, the patient 
is given 
13C- or 
14C-triolein in a 60 g fat meal. Hourly 
breath samples are then collected for 7 h for measure-
ment of labelled carbon expiration. If triolein is effec-
tively absorbed, large amounts of labelled CO2 will appear 
in the expired breath, fat malabsorption being indicated 
by smaller amounts being exhaled. However, when ste-
atorrhoea is macroscopically obvious, confirmation by 
measurement is not required, and investigation should be 
directed towards diagnosing the cause.
INTESTINAL PERMEABILITY
An alternative approach to the measurement of absorp-
tive function in the assessment of small bowel disease is 
to assess barrier function – that is the ability of the in-
testine to exclude compounds from being absorbed. 
Increased intestinal permeability is not characteristic of 
any single disease, but is seen in a variety of gastrointes-
tinal pathologies.
Previously, tests using the differential permeability of 
combinations of sugars were used to assess intestinal per-
meability, but these are now largely obsolete, because of 
capsule enteroscopy. For those interested in these tests, 
details are provided in Further reading.
FAECAL TESTS OF INTESTINAL  
INFLAMMATION
The intestinal tract is a most hospitable environment for 
bacteria. The intestine has developed a very effective and 
complicated way of accommodating them and protecting 
the host, but it is clear that the defence system is some-
what less than 100% efficient. If there is a breach in mu-
cosal integrity of any sort, the microbes gain an advantage 
and elicit a significant inflammatory reaction. Hence, 
almost all colonic and most small bowel disorders are 
­associated with inflammation.
The first reliable quantitative non-invasive test for as-
sessing intestinal inflammation was the 
111indium white 
cell technique, which involved abdominal scintigraphy 
(for localization of disease) and a four-day faecal collection 
(for quantitative estimation of the inflammatory activity). 
The test is uniquely sensitive for the detection of inflam-
mation, but is not disease-specific. Disadvantages are its 
cost, the requirement for special labelling facilities, a high 
dose of radiation and the inconvenience of a complete 
four-day faecal collection. Simpler methods were needed 
and subsequently developed. The qualities of a marker for 
assessing intestinal inflammation are that it should be 
stable, resistant to degradation by intestinal bacteria, eas-
ily extractable from faeces, easily assayed and, preferably, 
specific for a particular type of inflammatory cell. Two 
such markers have undergone rigorous testing, namely 
calprotectin and lactoferrin with other proteins, includ-
ing M2PK and S100A12, entering the field more recently. 
Calprotectin acts as a representative for this group of pro-
teins and its use will, therefore, be described in detail.
Calprotectin
Calprotectin accounts for about 60% of total soluble 
proteins in the cytosolic fraction of neutrophil granulo-
cytes. It is a member of the S100 family of calcium and 
zinc binding proteins (a heterodimer of S100A8/A9) and 
is found in neutrophils, monocytes and some squamous 
epithelial cells. It is released by activation of leukocytes as 
a consequence of inflammatory disease. Calprotectin has 
antimicrobial properties and, in addition, it can inhibit 
the proliferation of both normal and malignant cells, 
probably by sequestration of zinc, which is a critical ele-
ment for many enzymes. In particular, the metallopro-
teinases MMP-2, MMP-3, MMP-7, MMP-8, MMP-9 
and MMP-13 are inhibited in vitro by calprotectin at bio-
logically relevant concentrations, suggesting that it may 
have important regulatory functions.
In the presence of calcium, calprotectin is remarkably 
resistant to proteolytic degradation and it is this fact that 
underlies its stability in faeces. Commercially available kits 
can be obtained for the extraction of calprotectin from fae-
ces and quantitation by ELISA and require no more than a 
200 mg sample. Reference ranges should be established by 
individual laboratories, as there are almost certainly racial 
and geographical variations. In the UK, the upper limit of 
the reference range for faecal calprotectin is 50–60 μg/g. 
African Caribbeans resident in the UK may have values 
up to 200 μg/g without disease. In general, when used 
as a screening procedure for intestinal disease, increased 
values between 50 and 200 μg/g rarely disclose significant 
disease. In these cases, we recommend repeating the test 
before further investigation. Calprotectin concentrations 
between 200 and 500 μg/g are commonly seen in patients 
with diverticulitis, colon malignancies and polyps, and 
those on NSAIDs, whilst those with values >500 μg/g al-
most invariably have IBD or intestinal infections.
Calprotectin in disease
Inflammatory bowel disease
Studies from different groups have shown that faecal cal-
protectin concentrations are almost invariably increased 
above healthy controls in patients with active ulcerative 
colitis and Crohn disease. The clinical implication is that 
faecal calprotectin clearly has potential as a screening test 
to distinguish patients with IBS, who will have normal 
226	
Clinical biochemistry
concentrations, from those with IBD, whose concentra-
tions are characteristically increased by at least ten-fold 
in active disease.
Patients with clinically inactive IBD may have a nor-
mal faecal calprotectin (depending on treatment), but 
often have an increased concentration. The considerable 
overlap between the values in clinically active and inac-
tive disease is such that it is inadvisable to make predic-
tions of a patient’s clinical status based solely on faecal 
calprotectin concentrations.
Faecal calprotectin is particularly useful in patients with 
inactive ulcerative colitis and Crohn disease, as values five 
times above the upper limit of normal have 90% sensitiv-
ity and 83% specificity in predicting clinical relapse within 
six months, allowing the opportunity for early treatment.
Colorectal cancer
Colorectal cancer (adenocarcinoma) is the second most 
common cause of death from malignancy in the Western 
world. Survival rates are closely related to the stage of cancer 
at the time of diagnosis, and the most promising approach 
to reducing mortality rates is the early detection of pre-
cancerous or cancerous lesions. The most widely accepted 
non-invasive method for detecting colorectal cancer is fae-
cal occult blood (FOB) testing. Screening in asymptomatic 
populations has, at best, reduced mortality rates by 15–33%; 
a national bowel cancer screening programme using faecal 
occult blood testing was initiated in the UK in 2006.
Various studies have consistently demonstrated 
that faecal calprotectin concentrations are increased 
in ­patients with colorectal cancer. Sensitivity is of the 
­order of 80–90%, whereas that for FOB is only 40–58%. 
Furthermore, faecal calprotectin is increased in 50% of 
patients with colorectal polyps (some of which may be 
precancerous). However, the test is not recommended for 
cancer screening purposes because of its lack of specific-
ity. Numerous faecal molecular marker probes, usually 
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) based, are currently be-
ing tested for the detection of colorectal cancer. To-date, 
they lack sensitivity, but are very specific.
Irritable bowel syndrome
Given that faecal calprotectin has a sensitivity of almost 
100% in detecting patients with active IBD, this raises 
the possibility of using it as a screening test to distinguish 
between these patients attending outpatient clinics and 
the more common patients with IBS who do not warrant 
invasive investigation. The main value of the test in pa-
tients with IBS is that a normal test result practically rules 
out chronic inflammatory bowel disease and thereby re-
duces the need for invasive investigation. Of patients with 
IBS, 15–20% have raised faecal calprotectin, typically to 
2-3 times normal.
Neuroendocrine tumours of the 
­gastrointestinal tract and pancreas (NETs)
Neuroendocrine tumours of the gastrointestinal tract are 
relatively rare, but easily diagnosed when they produce 
clinically distinct and specific syndromes. However, many 
of the tumours do not secrete substances that lead to the 
specific syndromes, and are only detected because of the 
physical effects of local or metastatic lesions. A propor-
tion of these tumours have a genetic predisposition due 
to a loss of tumour suppressor genes, namely multiple en-
docrine neoplasia (MEN) type 1 and 2 (see Chapter 41).
As a group, the neuroendocrine tumours are charac-
terized histologically by sheets of small round cells that 
are derived from intestinal neuroendocrine cells in the 
submucosa, with very infrequent mitosis. It is, therefore, 
not usually possible to distinguish between a benign and 
malignant tumour histologically, unless there is evidence 
of metastasis. This contrasts very sharply with the com-
mon gastrointestinal cancers (oesophageal, gastric and 
colonic) that originate from the epithelial cells (squa-
mous cell cancer and adenocarcinomas), where histo-
pathological diagnosis is usually straightforward. From 
the clinical biochemistry viewpoint, it is most logical to 
discuss the different tumours according to the clinical 
syndromes that they cause.
Intestinal carcinoid tumours and the 
carcinoid syndrome
The carcinoid syndrome. The cardinal present-
ing symptoms of the carcinoid syndrome are persistent 
­diarrhoea (40–80%), flushing (30–70%) and nondescript 
abdominal pain (10%). The diarrhoea is watery and the 
need to defecate often coincides with the flushing peri-
ods. The flushing is intermittent, of sudden onset, brief 
(lasting for <15 min), associated with a feeling of warmth 
and can be precipitated by alcohol ingestion, exercise or 
by certain foods, especially cheese. The flushing is mainly 
on the neck and face and is otherwise not distinctively 
different from menopausal flushing or drug-induced 
flushing (chlorpropamide and calcium channel blockers). 
Moreover, there are other well-recognized, albeit less 
common, manifestations of the carcinoid syndrome. 
Cardiac valvular involvement (10% of patients) present 
as right sided heart failure. A further 10% of patients 
develop asthma-like symptoms, and those with meta-
bolically active tumours that utilize much of the ingested 
tryptophan may have pellagra-like skin lesions due to 
nicotinic acid (niacin) deficiency.
The carcinoid syndrome is a manifestation of a carci-
noid tumour, a tumour of argentaffin cells that can occur 
anywhere in tissue derived from the embryonic gut, but 
most frequently is found in the ileum. Its pathophysiol-
ogy, diagnosis and management are discussed in detail in 
Chapter 41. Measurement of urine 5-HIAA and/or serum 
chromogranin A is used in the diagnosis and monitoring 
of carcinoid syndrome patients.
Pancreatic endocrine tumours
Pancreatic endocrine tumours have been variously called 
‘islet cell tumours’ or APUDomas (amine precursor up-
take and decarboxylation) and are of similar origin to 
carcinoids. They share certain features, consisting of ho-
mogeneous sheets of small cells with very few mitoses. 
Malignant potential may be indicated by local invasion 
or metastasis, and each tumour is usually associated with 
	
12  Clinical biochemistry of the ­gastrointestinal tract	
227
symptoms attributable to a single hormone/peptide, al-
though the tumour may release a number of hormones. 
Unlike carcinoids, pancreatic endocrine tumours are 
mostly functional, that is, they are associated with symp-
toms that are attributable to the hormone that they re-
lease. Their prominence in textbooks is disproportionate 
to their clinical importance, and the vast majority of pa-
tients are managed and treated within specialist units. As 
a group of tumours, they are exceptionally rare with an 
annual incidence of 1–2/millon population. Insulinomas 
and gastrinomas are the most common, with vasoactive 
intestinal peptide (VIPomas), glucagonomas and so-
matostatinomas being ten times rarer, while others are 
confined to single case reports. Pancreatic endocrine tu-
mours are not infrequently discovered because of their 
association with MEN-1 and 2 (see Chapter 41) or the 
phacomatoses (tuberous sclerosis, von Hippel–Lindau 
and von Recklinghausen disease).
Insulinomas. Tumours of the β cells of the pancreas se-
crete insulin without the normal physiological feedback 
action of circulating blood glucose. Fifty per cent of in-
sulinomas are <1 cm in diameter at diagnosis, most are 
solitary (except when associated with MEN) and 90% are 
benign. Insulinomas typically present with symptoms of 
hypoglycaemia, especially after fasting or exercise. The 
most common symptoms are loss of consciousness (some-
times presenting as coma), dizziness, diplopia, blurred vi-
sion, confusion, abnormal behaviour, excessive sweating, 
palpitations and weight gain (because of the increased 
food intake that relieves some of the symptoms). The 
diagnosis is based on the presence of ‘Whipple’s triad’, 
namely symptoms of hypoglycaemia, documented hypo-
glycaemia and relief of symptoms when glucose is admin-
istered to restore normal blood glucose concentrations.
The first step in the diagnosis of insulinoma is the 
documentation of fasting hypoglycaemia, which can 
best be differentiated from postprandial hypoglycae-
mia from the clinical history. A low plasma glucose 
concentration in the presence of inappropriately high 
insulin and C-peptide concentrations is strongly sug-
gestive of an insulinoma. Insulin and C-peptide are 
formed in equimolar amounts from the enzymatic 
cleavage of proinsulin. A high insulin concentration 
in the presence of a low C-peptide concentration is 
indicative of the administration of exogenous insulin. 
Hypoglycaemia associated with misuse of sulfonylureas 
may need to be excluded from the differential diagnosis 
by measurement of serum sulfonylurea concentrations. 
Other causes of hypoglycaemia, including alcohol mis-
use, Addison disease and liver failure, should also be 
excluded. Hypoglycaemia can be life-threatening and 
only surgery can offer curative treatment. Techniques 
such as CT and MRI may localize tumours larger than 
1 cm, but at least 50% of tumours are smaller than this. 
Angiography has a high detection rate for smaller in-
sulinomas, as these are highly vascular, and endoscopic 
ultrasound is increasingly used for their detection. In 
the most difficult cases, it may be necessary to sample 
venous blood selectively from the pancreas in order to 
detect a differential increase in C-peptide concentra-
tions following arterial injection of calcium.
Glucagonoma. The clinical hallmark of a glucagonoma 
is the symptom complex of migratory necrolytic ery-
thema, weight loss and anaemia. Glucose concentrations 
may be high due to the antagonist action of glucagon to 
insulin. The skin lesions are the most distinct component 
of glucagonoma, and the difficulty recognizing them may 
account for the fact that they have often been a feature of 
the disease for an average of six years prior to diagnosis.
Unlike insulinomas, glucagonomas are usually large 
(>5 cm) at the time of diagnosis and >50% are malignant. 
Localization by conventional imaging techniques is, there-
fore, not a problem. The diagnosis can be confirmed by 
finding raised plasma glucagon concentrations: these are 
usually elevated five-fold or more. Minor elevations of glu-
cagon can be found in chronic renal failure, acute pancre-
atitis and severe trauma, especially with burns and sepsis, 
but these conditions are easily identified clinically. Surgery 
should always be considered despite the malignant nature of 
many of the tumours. The medical treatment is largely di-
rected at control of diabetes; octreotide is sometimes useful.
VIPoma. VIPomas are rare tumours, characterized by 
copious watery diarrhoea with dehydration and hypoka-
laemia. The severity of the diarrhoea is comparable to 
that seen in cholera with excretions in excess of 2 L/24 h. 
The diagnostic feature of the diarrhoea is that it continues 
despite prolonged fasting. Plasma VIP concentrations are 
elevated 4–5-fold; the same imaging techniques are used 
to localize the tumour as in glucagonomas. VIPomas have 
the same propensity as glucagonomas for malignancy. 
While surgery is usually considered, their medical man-
agement remains important with rehydration and correc-
tion of electrolyte disturbances in severe cases, and use of 
antidiarrhoeals (e.g. loperamide, codeine phosphate and 
somatostatin analogues).
Somatostatinoma. Excessive secretion of somatostatin 
(the somatostatin syndrome) is characterized by diabe-
tes (somatostatin inhibits release of insulin); diarrhoea 
(because of inhibition of exocrine pancreatic function); 
weight loss and gallstones (a result of impaired gallbladder 
contraction). However, as pancreatic surgery for tumours 
becomes more common, it is evident that only 10% of 
somatostatinomas are functional, that is, associated with 
the somatostatin syndrome. Somatostatinomas tend to be 
large (2–10 cm at diagnosis), and the majority are malig-
nant with evidence of metastasis being present at the time 
of diagnosis. A significant number are detected during 
cholecystectomy or following pancreatic tumour work-
up. Occasionally, symptomatic patients with the soma-
tostatin syndrome are diagnosed on the basis of increased 
plasma somatostatin concentrations. Treatment options 
include surgery and chemotherapy.
THE ACUTE ABDOMEN
Introduction
The term acute abdomen is used to indicate the rapid on-
set of severe symptoms that may indicate potentially life-
threatening intra-abdominal pathology requiring urgent 
228	
Clinical biochemistry
surgical intervention. Its clinical importance is not in 
doubt. Many of the diseases that present in this way have 
a high mortality if not treated surgically; conversely, oth-
ers are associated with high mortality and morbidity if 
surgery is performed. The vast majority of patients with 
an acute abdomen present initially to an accident and 
emergency department (at least in the UK) and are then 
transferred to the care of surgeons.
The clinical diagnosis is based principally on the 
nature of the pain. Common causes of the acute abdo-
men are shown in Box 12.1. Additionally, there are dis-
eases such as measles causing ileitis and perforation that 
have a higher incidence in the developing world. Non-
abdominal pathologies may simulate an acute abdomen.
History and examination often yield a likely diagnosis, 
but investigations are helpful in providing confirmation, 
e.g. testing for pregnancy in women with lower abdomi-
nal pain, measurement of amylase when acute pancreati-
tis is suspected. In addition, a full blood count may reveal 
an increase in neutrophil count suggestive of infection or 
anaemia secondary to blood loss, and it is important to 
have knowledge of renal function and electrolytes prior 
to undertaking surgery.
There follows a brief account of the disorders where 
clinical biochemistry may play an important role in con-
firming the diagnosis of diseases that present as an acute 
abdomen, namely acute pancreatitis, ectopic pregnancy 
and porphyria. It should, however, be appreciated that 
other diagnostic modalities can also provide important 
information, for example, ultrasound or CT examination 
in suspected acute pancreatitis.
Acute pancreatitis
Acute pancreatitis is an acute inflammation of the pan-
creas. Some cases may be self-limiting, but others may 
be severe and associated with organ failure including pul-
monary insufficiency and acute kidney injury and with lo-
cal complications such as pancreatic necrosis, abscess or 
pseudocyst formation.
Table  12.4 shows the factors that are recognized 
to be important in its aetiology, of which gallstones 
and alcohol account for >80% of cases. The precise 
pathogenesis is often uncertain, but the most widely 
accepted hypotheses suggest that insults to the pan-
creas cause activation of zymogens (inactive pro-
enzymes) within the gland and consequent autolytic 
destruction and production of inflammatory cyto-
kines and chemokines. How the initial insult brings 
about these changes is disputed, although ischaemia 
may promote both.
Almost all patients with acute pancreatitis have ab-
dominal pain. This is severe epigastric pain, usually of 
sudden onset, often with radiation to the back. In more 
severe cases, there is nausea and vomiting, fever, hypo-
tension, shock and multiorgan failure that may lead to 
death. Biochemical features of acute pancreatitis include: 
uraemia (compromised renal function); hypoalbuminae-
mia (extravasation); hypocalcaemia (partly related to hy-
poalbuminaemia and partly because fatty acids released 
in and around the inflamed pancreas by pancreatic lipase 
form insoluble calcium salts); hyperglycaemia (increased 
sympathetic activity and destruction of the islets of 
Langerhans); metabolic acidosis; hypoxaemia, and raised 
plasma activities of liver enzymes. None of these is in-
variably present and none is diagnostic for pancreatitis. 
In acute necrotizing pancreatitis, methaemalbuminaemia 
may be detectable. The main use of these tests is to pro-
vide information about the prognosis, and they may also 
influence management. Biochemical tests that are used 
for their diagnostic potential in acute pancreatitis include 
amylase and lipase.
Amylase
In acute pancreatitis, amylase activity rises within 2–12 h 
of the onset of symptoms, usually returning to normal 
within 3–5  days. Serum amylase above five times the 
­upper reference limit is very suggestive of acute pancre-
atitis. Smaller increases may have other explanations (see 
Table 12.1).
In exceptionally rare cases, pancreatitis severe enough 
to cause death may occur without a rise in serum amy-
lase. A persistently high amylase following an attack of 
acute pancreatitis suggests the formation of a pancreatic 
BOX 12.1	
Causes of an acute abdomen
Common causes
•	 Non-specific abdominal pain
•	 Acute appendicitis
•	 Acute cholecystitis, ascending cholangitis
•	 Small and large bowel obstruction
•	 Intussusception, volvulus and strangulated hernias
•	 Renal/ureteric colic
•	 Perforated peptic ulcer
•	 Acute pancreatitis
•	 Acute diverticulitis
•	 Gynaecological conditions (salpingitis, ectopic pregnancy)
•	 Ruptured aortic aneurysm
•	 Bleeding (haematoma) associated with anticoagulation
Less common causes
•	 Gastroenteritis including infection with Salmonella, 
Shigella, Yersinia, measles virus etc.
•	 Crohn disease
•	 Mesenteric lymphadenitis
•	 Pyelonephritis
•	 Meckel diverticulitis
Conditions that may simulate an acute  
abdomen
•	 Acute intermittent porphyria
•	 Myocardial infarction
•	 Myocarditis
•	 Pulmonary embolism
•	 Pneumothorax
•	 Pneumonia
•	 Oesophagitis (reflux, infectious)
•	 Oesophageal rupture
•	 Sickle-cell crisis
•	 Acute leukaemia
•	 Herpes zoster
•	 Familial Mediterranean fever
	
12  Clinical biochemistry of the ­gastrointestinal tract	
229
pseudocyst, a cyst containing pancreatic enzymes, which 
needs to be differentiated from an abscess, which is in-
fective in nature. Since amylase is excreted in urine, the 
diagnostic efficacy of urinary amylase measurement in 
acute pancreatitis has also been investigated. Diagnostic 
performance can be improved by the simultaneous mea-
surement of amylase and creatinine in paired serum and 
urine samples. The normal ratio of amylase clearance to 
creatinine clearance is 2.2–4.2%, rising to 6.3–13.3% in 
acute pancreatitis. This approach is less convenient than 
simply measuring serum amylase. In general, the main use 
of urinary amylase is in establishing a diagnosis of macro­
amylasaemia. This is a condition where serum amylase 
is consistently raised (characteristically 2–3-fold) owing 
to the formation of complexes of amylase from non-
pancreatic and pancreatic origin with immunoglobulins, 
usually IgG. When this is the case, a raised serum ac-
tivity is not accompanied by a correspondingly increased 
urinary amylase. The isoenzyme raised in the plasma in 
illness depends on the source of the amylase, for example 
in pancreatitis, the P enzyme is raised, whereas in rup-
tured tubal pregnancy, the S isoenzyme is increased, and 
in renal failure, both S and P are raised. An increase in 
both isoenzyme fractions of amylase with a normal lipase 
is also suggestive of macroamylasaemia.
Lipase
The rise in plasma lipase activity approximately paral-
lels that of amylase. Measurement of both enzymes may 
improve diagnostic accuracy, at least in part because the 
fall in lipase is slower, so that it remains raised for lon-
ger following an acute attack. Lipase activity increases 
in any condition where hyperamylasaemia is due to pan-
creatic pathology, but not when the amylase is of non-­
pancreatic origin. In particular, serum lipase activity is 
normal in macroamylasaemia. While lipase measure-
ments overcome some of the non-specificity of amylase 
estimation in acute pancreatitis, lipase may still be raised 
in non-­pancreatic disease. This, together with the fact 
that analytical methods for lipase are more complex and 
expensive than those for amylase means that lipase mea-
surements are not widely used in the UK. Nevertheless, 
national guidelines recommend the measurement of lipase 
for diagnosis.
Choice of test for pancreatitis
Of the approaches discussed above, the measurement of 
serum amylase activity is the most frequently used bio-
chemical test for pancreatitis, mainly because it is easy 
to perform. In areas where there is a large population of 
African Caribbeans (who have a higher reference range), 
the measurement of lipase may occasionally be useful to 
establish whether a raised amylase is of pancreatic ori-
gin. A number of other markers of acute pancreatitis have 
been investigated (e.g. elastase and phospholipase A2), but 
as yet these have not become established in routine use.
Ectopic pregnancy
A fertilized ovum occasionally may implant outside 
the uterus, where it gives rise to an ectopic pregnancy. 
The most common site is in one of the Fallopian tubes. 
Although this is not a common cause of an acute abdo-
men, even in young women, it is important because if 
a tubal pregnancy ruptures, the resulting massive intra-
abdominal haemorrhage is life-threatening.
Serum progesterone is lower in absolute concentra-
tion and human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG), which 
normally doubles in concentration every two days after 
implantation, tends to increase somewhat less rapidly in 
ectopic than in normal pregnancy. However, while such 
measures can be useful, they are not applicable in an acute 
situation. Rapid, sensitive urinary hCG assays are now 
available as near patient tests and will usually indicate 
whether or not the patient is pregnant (although occa-
sionally hCG is undetectable in both maternal urine and 
TABLE 12.4  Causes of acute pancreatitis
Factors
Comment
Gallstones
The most frequent, and best established, aetiological factor. Migrating small gallstones may block 
the pancreatic duct (some people believe that reflux of bile into the pancreas is also important) 
and thereby initiate the damage
Alcohol misuse
The acute effects of ethanol on the pancreas are complex. Alcohol alters pancreatic blood flow and, 
coupled with the generation of free radicals from ethanol metabolism, this may cause free radical 
damage. Alcoholic stimulation of pancreatic secretion coupled with spasm of the sphincter of 
Oddi could lead to obstructive injury. Ethanol may also sensitize the pancreas to the effects of 
other agents that lead to zymogen activation and the generation of harmful cytokines. The overall 
contribution of these factors to the development of alcoholic pancreatitis is unclear
Drugs
Thiazide diuretics, oral contraceptives, corticosteroids, 5-aminosalicylic acids (used in the treatment 
of inflammatory bowel disease), azathioprine, 6-mercaptopurine, asparaginase, didanosine, 
valproate, statins and other drugs have all been implicated as aetiological agents, but only rarely. 
The mechanisms are unknown
Hypercalcaemia
Often quoted, but the majority of patients with hypercalcaemia do not develop pancreatitis
Hypertriglyceridaemia
Severe hypertriglyceridaemia is important in its own right, but excessive alcohol ingestion is a 
confounding factor in many cases
Trauma
Blunt trauma to the abdomen may occasionally cause acute pancreatitis; the trauma may also be 
iatrogenic, e.g. following endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ECRP)
Infectious causes
Coxsackievirus, Ascaris lumbricoides, Candida, Salmonella, HIV
Rare causes
Pancreatic tumours, hereditary pancreatitis, autoimmune pancreatitis, scorpion toxins, idiopathic
230	
Clinical biochemistry
serum in ectopic pregnancy). Quantitation of serum hCG 
is valuable, since, in a normal pregnancy, a gestational sac 
should be detectable in the uterus on transabdominal ul-
trasonography once the hCG is >1000 IU/L. The clini-
cal diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy can be difficult, and 
the results of biochemical tests have to be considered in 
light of the clinical assessment and the results of other 
techniques, such as transabdominal and transvaginal 
ultrasonography.
Acute porphyria
Acute porphyria is an exceptionally rare cause of an acute 
abdomen. The diagnosis may be suggested by the history 
(e.g. the association of the abdominal pain with the in-
gestion of a drug known to provoke acute attacks in sus-
ceptible subjects), or occasionally by someone noticing 
that the patient’s urine is dark red, or that it darkens on 
standing.
The porphyrias are discussed in detail in Chapter 28, 
but in a patient with acute abdominal pain, a nega-
tive screening test for urinary porphobilinogen (PBG) 
­effectively excludes porphyria as the cause of the pain. 
(δ-Aminolaevulinic acid dehydratase deficiency remains a 
theoretical possibility, but only isolated cases of this con-
dition have been reported.) If the test for urinary PBG is 
positive, then one of the acute porphyrias is likely.
Further reading
Ayling RM. New faecal tests in gastroenterology. Ann Clin Biochem 
2012;49:44–54.
Bjarnason I, Macpherson A, Hollander D. Intestinal permeability: an 
overview. Gastroenterology 1995;108:1566–81. 
A review of the clinical aspects of intestinal permeability testing.
Bures J, Cyrany J, Kohoustova D et  al. Small intestinal bacterial 
overgrowth syndrome. World J Gastroenterol 2010;16:2978–90. 
Review of aetiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis and treatment of small 
intestinal bacterial overgrowth syndrome.
Feldman M, Friedman LS, Brandt LJ, editors. Sleisenger and Fordtran’s 
gastrointestinal and liver disease. 9th ed. Philadelphia: WB Saunders; 
2010. 
This is the single most important and comprehensive textbook of 
gastroenterology available and contains a most extensive, accurate and up-
to-date account of biochemistry and the clinical biochemistry tests available, 
covering practically all gastrointestinal diseases in detail.
Goddard AF, James MW, McIntyre AS et  al. Guidelines for the 
management of iron deficiency anaemia. Gut 2011;60:1309–16. 
British Society of Gastroenterology guidelines for investigation and 
management of IDA.
Lieb II JG, Draganov PV. Pancreatic function testing: here to stay for 
the 21st century. World J Gastroenterol 2008;14:3149–58. 
Review of tests for chronic pancreatitis with particular emphasis on the 
combined biochemical and endoscopic tests.
Ramage JK, Ahmed A, Ardill J et al. Guidelines for the management 
of gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine (including carcinoid) 
tumours (NETs). Gut 2012;61:6–32. 
UK and Ireland Neuroendocrine Tumour Society guidelines for NETs 
including the use of biochemical tests and imaging for diagnosis.
Thomas PD, Forbes A, Green J et al. Guidelines for the investigation 
of chronic diarrhoea, 2nd ed. Gut 2003;52(Suppl. V):v1–15. 
The British Society of Gastroenterology guidelines on tests for malabsorption.
231
INTRODUCTION
It is widely accepted that the term ‘liver function tests’, 
as currently used in clinical practice, is a misnomer. 
Certainly this is true as compared with pulmonary or 
renal function tests. These describe the measurement 
of distinct physiological and biochemical organ func-
tions that have meaning in the absence of any organ 
pathology. In marked contrast, most of the parameters 
that comprise the standard liver ‘function’ tests, such 
as the plasma activities of certain aminotransferases, 
which have major and well-defined roles within the cell, 
have no functional significance at all in plasma, where 
they are simply markers of hepatocyte disruption. 
Their measurement is only of any significance when 
applied to liver pathology. To this extent, understand-
ing of the conventional liver function tests relies on a 
broad grasp of the principles of liver disease, and the 
present chapter should, therefore, be read in conjunc-
tion with Chapter 14.
This is not to say that the function of the liver is not 
well understood. But, while it is conventional to list the 
functions that the liver can perform, this detracts from 
gaining a broad conceptual picture of what the liver 
‘does’. Essentially, the liver is a regulatory barrier be-
tween the systemic circulation and the organism’s envi-
ronment experienced via the gut. The job of the acinus, 
the functional unit of the liver, is to regulate the con-
centrations of solutes entering the systemic circulation 
via the terminal hepatic venules or being excreted in the 
bile. It is the principal organ of metabolic homoeostasis, 
that is, maintenance of blood composition within physi-
ologically acceptable limits by the conversion, synthesis 
and release of components required by other organs and 
by removal of toxic substances that may be injurious to 
tissues.
This chapter reviews briefly the anatomy, physiology 
and biochemistry of the normal liver as a basis for un-
derstanding the tests currently applied in clinical practice 
and those that may be developed in the future.
C H A P T E R  1 3
Assessment of hepatic function 
and ­investigation of jaundice
Roy A. Sherwood  • Adrian Bomford
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  231
ANATOMY OF THE LIVER  232
The hepatic circulation 
232
Macroscopic structure 
232
Microscopic structure 
232
Ultrastructure 
233
Bile, bile ducts and biliary drainage 
234
HEPATIC REGENERATION  234
PHYSIOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS  234
Carbohydrate metabolism 
234
Lipid metabolism 
234
Protein metabolism 
235
Biotransformation and excretion 
235
Bile secretion 
236
LIVER FUNCTION TESTS  236
Bilirubin and bile pigment metabolism 
237
Plasma enzyme activities 
239
Plasma proteins 
241
Bile acids 
243
Quantitative evaluation of liver function 
243
Other tests of liver function 
244
USES OF LIVER FUNCTION TESTS  245
Differential diagnosis of jaundice 
245
The inherited hyperbilirubinaemias 
245
Monitoring response to therapy 246
Neonatal jaundice 247
ABNORMAL LIVER FUNCTION TESTS IN  
ASYMPTOMATIC PATIENTS  247
Bilirubin 
247
Alkaline phosphatase 
247
Aminotransferases 
247
γ-Glutamyltransferase 
248
NORMAL LIVER FUNCTION TESTS IN THE PRESENCE 
OF OVERT LIVER DISEASE  248
ROLE OF LIVER FUNCTION TESTS IN ASSESSING 
PROGNOSIS  248
Chronic liver disease 
248
Acute liver failure 
249
CONCLUSION  249
232	
Clinical biochemistry
ANATOMY OF THE LIVER
The macroscopic and microscopic anatomy of the liver 
is difficult to understand, partly because of its inherently 
complicated three-dimensional structure and partly be-
cause of the recent trend to replace simple (but mislead-
ing) morphological descriptions with more accurate, but 
less obvious, functional descriptions.
The hepatic circulation
The liver has a dual blood supply. Arterial blood, direct 
from the aorta, is supplied via the hepatic artery from 
the coeliac axis. The second source is the portal vein, 
which is formed by the joining of the superior mesen-
teric and splenic veins and which collects blood from 
the gut. After passage through the sinusoids (see below), 
blood drains from the liver via the hepatic veins at the 
posterior aspect of the liver into the inferior vena cava 
and thence to the right side of the heart. The portal ve-
nous system delivers about 80% of the blood and 20% 
of the oxygen supplied to the liver. A major cause of ab-
normal function in chronic liver disease is disturbance 
of blood flow through the liver, consequent on the fi-
brosis that follows chronic liver cell damage, but if the 
portal vein is blocked, relatively normal liver function 
can be maintained for many years. Arterial occlusion oc-
curring suddenly, for example as a result of trauma, leads 
to acute liver failure, but more gradual occlusion by a 
tumour mass is compatible with normal liver function 
for quite long periods.
Macroscopic structure
The liver is a wedge-shaped organ located in the right up-
per quadrant of the abdomen. Its mass varies with that of 
the individual, being in the order of 22 g/kg body weight. 
In a typical 70 kg subject, the liver weighs about 1.5 kg. It 
has a large right lobe, a smaller left lobe anteriorly and 
two further small lobes, the quadrate and the caudate 
lobes. These lobes relate to the venous drainage, not to 
the portal distribution (see below). Thus, the left hepatic 
vein drains the left hepatic lobe and the right and middle 
hepatic veins drain the right hepatic lobe. In terms of 
the portal structures, there are two functional lobes de-
fined by the right and left portal veins. The division is 
marked by a line joining the inferior vena cava and the 
gallbladder bed (Fig. 13.1).
Microscopic structure
Hepatocytes, the hepatic parenchymal cells, comprise 
about 80% of the total cell mass of the liver. As viewed 
under the microscope, the functional unit of the liver ap-
pears to be the acinus, often termed the lobule, and it is 
in terms of this structure that pathological changes are 
described. Since liver biopsy has, under many circum-
stances, become the de facto ‘gold standard’ of liver disease 
diagnosis, it is important to understand this terminology. 
It is also important to understand that this unit does not 
comprise a homogeneous collection of hepatocytes and 
that there is marked functional heterogeneity across the 
acinus, with different zones having different physiologi-
cal and biochemical functions (see below).
The acinus
The acinar/lobular concept of the structure of the liver is 
based on a central efferent terminal hepatic venule sur-
rounded by radially oriented plates of hepatocytes and si-
nusoidal channels. Three to five portal tracts (or ‘triads’), 
containing branches of the portal vein, hepatic artery and 
bile duct, are situated around the periphery of each acinus 
(Fig. 13.2A).
The acini represent microcirculatory units compris-
ing groups of liver cells, each fed by a single terminal 
portal venule and hepatic arteriole, the blood from 
which passes via the sinusoids into a terminal hepatic 
vein (Fig.  13.2B). Flow is unidirectional, from portal 
tract to hepatic vein. The 20 or so hepatocytes that sepa-
rate the portal tracts from the terminal hepatic vein in an 
acinus have been arbitrarily separated into three zones, 
through which the portal blood passes sequentially. Zone 
1 is conventionally used to describe hepatocytes nearest 
the afferent arteriole in the portal tract (the periportal 
area), and those surrounding the terminal hepatic vein, 
in the ‘centrilobular’ or ‘perivenular’ area, are described 
as zone 3. Between these two zones is an ill-defined area 
(zone 2), which is intermediate in terms of the composi-
tion of the perfusing blood. It must be emphasized that 
there are no anatomical boundaries between these three 
zones but, clearly, as blood perfuses each zone sequen-
tially, its composition is altered and this leads to the 
functional heterogeneity of hepatocytes across the acini 
in response to the changes in their microenvironment. 
Zone 1 hepatocytes receive blood rich in oxygen and 
have a high level of metabolic activity. It is not surpris-
ing, therefore, that oxidative functions of the liver tend 
Falciform
ligament
Right
Left
Artery
Bile duct
Vein
Left
Right
Liver
FIGURE 13.1  ■ The anterior surface of the liver.  The labelling in the 
upper part of the figure represents the conventional description 
into a right and left lobe separated by the falciform ligament. 
The lower part of the labelling refers to the right and left lobes 
defined by distribution of the portal structures. The right and left 
portal structures (portal vein, hepatic artery and bile ducts) enter 
the functional right and left lobes, respectively.
	
13  Assessment of hepatic function and ­investigation of jaundice	
233
to be performed mainly by hepatocytes in zone 1, with 
metabolic processes that can operate at lower oxygen 
tensions occurring mainly in zone 3.
A detailed discussion of the functional heterogeneity of 
the three zones is not undertaken here, but we mention 
some examples that could be important if damage to the 
liver is not uniform. Thus, oxidative metabolism (the re-
spiratory chain, citric acid cycle and fatty acid oxidation), 
gluconeogenesis, urea synthesis and the production and 
excretion of bile all occur mainly in zone 1, while glycoly-
sis, glutamine synthesis from ammonia, and xenobiotic me-
tabolism occur predominantly in zone 3. It is not difficult 
to appreciate that different pathological insults may differ-
entially damage the various zones. Perhaps blood tests may 
eventually be developed to investigate the integrity of the 
different zones and thereby reduce the need for histologi-
cal examination in the diagnosis of different liver disorders.
Ultrastructure
Hepatocytes are arranged in single-cell sheets or ‘plates’, 
supported by a fine mesh of a collagenous material (re-
ticulin) and separated from overlying ­fenestrated endo-
thelial lining cells by the space of Disse (Fig. 13.3). The 
hepatocytes are exposed to blood flowing through the 
sinusoids on each side of the plates. Their sinusoidal sur-
faces have a microvillar structure that greatly increases 
the surface area of the cell membrane, thereby facilitat-
ing efficient exchange of solutes between the blood and 
the cells. Bile produced by the hepatocytes is excreted 
via specific transporters located in the membrane of the 
biliary canaliculi (see below). The latter are formed by 
invaginations of the smooth basolateral membranes 
between adjacent hepatocytes, and also have a micro-
villar structure. Direct communication between the 
blood and bile is prevented by tight junctions in the 
basolateral membranes on either side of the biliary 
canaliculi. In addition to the endothelial cells that fil-
ter fluid exchanged between the sinusoidal lumen and 
Hepatocyte
Sinusoid
Endothelial
cell
Perisinusoidal
space of Disse
Pericellular
space
Pericellular
flow
Nucleus
Bile canaliculus
Junctional
complex
Gap junctions
FIGURE 13.3  ■  Ultrastructure of the liver. Solutes can pass out 
of the sinusoid, which does not have a conventional basement 
membrane, and across the space of Disse. Here they may be 
taken up across the hepatocyte membrane and subsequently 
across the canalicular membrane, or enter the canaliculus 
through the ‘paracellular pathway’ via the intercellular junctions.
Lobule
Branch of
hepatic artery
Hepatic cells
Biliary canaliculi
THV
THV
HA
BD
TPV
TPV = Terminal portal venule
THV = Terminal hepatic venule
HA = Hepatic arteriole
BD = Bile duct
Portal area
Central vein
Sinusoids
1
2
3
Acinus
B
A
Branch of
portal vein
Bile ducts
FIGURE 13.2  ■  (A) The conventional hepatic acinus (lobule) based on the central vein with surrounding portal tracts. (B) The hepatic 
acinus and its three functional zones. The axis is formed by the terminal portal venule, hepatic arteriole and bile duct. Blood flows 
from the periphery of the acinus to the terminal hepatic venule.
234	
Clinical biochemistry
the space of Disse, the sinusoids also contain Kupffer 
cells (a major part of the reticuloendothelial system), 
hepatic stellate cells (vitamin A-storing, fat-storing 
cells, also known as Ito cells, that produce ­several 
connective tissue components) and liver-resident 
natural killer cells with antitumour activity. These non-
parenchymal cells are an area of intensive research; 
current evidence suggests that they play a major role in 
synthesis of growth factors responsible for control of 
liver regeneration and development of fibrosis in liver 
disorders (see below).
Bile, bile ducts and biliary drainage
The biliary canaliculi formed between adjacent hepato-
cytes are continuous with canaliculi between other he-
patocytes within the plane of the liver cell plates, and 
eventually drain into ductules lined by specific biliary 
epithelial cells and ultimately into the major bile ducts, 
thence to the common bile duct and the gut. Interruption 
of the flow of bile, the exocrine secretion of the liver, is 
responsible for many of the signs of hepatobiliary disease. 
Bile pigment and bile acid metabolism are described be-
low, and the pathological anatomy of the liver and biliary 
tract is described in Chapter 14.
HEPATIC REGENERATION
The fact that the liver has a great capacity for regeneration is 
the rationale for much of the practice of clinical hepatology, 
particularly for undertaking prolonged periods of liver- 
intensive care during acute liver failure and for the ­feasibility 
of extensive resection, particularly for the management 
of primary and, less commonly, secondary malignant liver 
tumours.
Hepatic regeneration has been studied mainly in ani-
mals, most extensively the rodent model, after partial he-
patic resection. Twenty-four hours after liver resection, 
there is extensive division of the remaining cells accom-
panied by a surge in DNA synthesis; this is followed 24 h 
later by increased replication of the non-parenchymal 
cells. The initiation of these events is by growth factors 
that are now being identified. Epidermal growth factor 
(EGF), transforming growth factor α (TGFα) and hepa-
tocyte growth factor (HGF) are all involved in switch-
ing on regeneration, and transforming growth factor β 
(TGFβ) is involved in switching it off. Normally qui-
escent differentiated hepatocytes replicate rapidly after 
resection, while intrahepatic precursor cells, termed oval 
cells, proliferate and generate lineage only in situations 
where hepatocyte proliferation is blocked or delayed. 
Bone marrow cells can generate oval cells, but such 
transdifferentiation is now known to be inefficient and 
occurs only rarely.
PHYSIOLOGICAL FUNCTIONS
Because the various functions of the liver may fail at differ-
ent times, creating differing clinical pictures, it is necessary 
to consider each function separately. The physiology and 
biochemistry of the liver subsume most of intermediary 
metabolism and, as such, are clearly beyond the scope of 
this chapter. Other than giving a brief outline, emphasis is 
placed on those functions whose measurement or distur-
bance is important in liver tests or pathology, respectively.
Carbohydrate metabolism
As has been known for many years, removal of the liver 
in an animal leads to death from hypoglycaemia. A major 
metabolic function of the liver is to store sugar and reduce 
the variations in blood glucose consequent upon the hu-
man habit of eating intermittently. Thus, during a meal, 
the liver stores glucose as glycogen and then releases it 
(glycogenolysis) slowly when food is not being eaten. 
This is particularly important for those organs such as the 
brain and red blood cells that have an obligatory require-
ment for glucose. Specific glucose transporter molecules 
located in the sinusoidal membrane that mediate facili-
tated diffusion are involved in both processes. Between 
meals, as the supply of glycogen decreases (only about 
75 g can be stored), the liver starts to make glucose (glu-
coneogenesis) from other sources, particularly lactate, but 
also pyruvate, glycerol and alanine, although only from 
alanine is there a significant net production of glucose. 
During more prolonged periods of starvation, the total 
body requirement for glucose falls and energy demand is 
increasingly met by production of ketone bodies, derived 
mainly from fatty acids via acetyl-CoA. Apart from being 
stored, glucose is used by the liver as an energy substrate 
via glycolysis and the citric acid cycle, or for the synthesis 
of fatty acids and triglycerides.
Insulin is secreted in response to the rise in blood glu-
cose concentration after a meal and promotes an increase 
in peripheral glucose uptake and a decrease in gluconeo-
genesis. In acute liver failure, the liver may not be able 
to maintain an adequate concentration of blood glucose 
and hypoglycaemia may become a life-threatening com-
plication; in chronic liver disease, hyperglycaemia is more 
common, most likely because of a failure of the liver to 
store glycogen and failure of peripheral tissues to take up 
glucose adequately. The liver also metabolizes other di-
etary sugars including fructose and galactose, converting 
them to glucose phosphates (see Chapter 14).
Lipid metabolism
After a meal, dietary triglycerides are hydrolysed to free 
fatty acids and monoglycerides by pancreatic lipases and 
dissolved in an aqueous medium, facilitated by the deter-
gent action of bile salts excreted by the liver into the gut. 
The liver meets its own metabolic energy requirements, 
and those of the body as a whole, by mitochondrial 
β-oxidation of short chain fatty acids. The resultant acetyl-
CoA either enters the citric acid cycle or reacts with 
another molecule of acetyl-CoA to form ketone bodies. 
Although the role of the liver is central to the oxidation 
of fatty acids, most tissues contain the enzymes required 
to undertake complete oxidation. The liver also synthe-
sizes fatty acids, triglycerides, cholesterol, phospholipids 
and lipoproteins. Disturbances of fatty acid metabolism, 
including decreased oxidation (as in excessive alcohol 
	
13  Assessment of hepatic function and ­investigation of jaundice	
235
consumption), increased hepatic fatty acid synthesis and 
decreased breakdown of triglycerides to fatty acids and 
glycerol, may all be involved in the development of fatty 
liver (‘steatosis’), an increasingly prevalent problem found 
in obesity and as an additional or incidental histological 
finding in many liver disorders.
Protein metabolism
Hepatic protein metabolism is central to the assessment 
of liver function, and its disturbance underlies many of 
the clinical complications that occur in severe liver cell 
dysfunction.
Synthesis
Other than the immunoglobulins, most circulating pro-
teins are synthesized wholly or largely by the liver, and 
the concentrations of several are used as a measure of 
hepatic synthetic function. Apart from albumin, transco-
balamin II and C-reactive protein, all are glycoproteins. 
Glycosylation (often with terminal sialic acid residues on 
the carbohydrate moieties) has several functions. In some 
instances (e.g. fibronectin), it serves to make the pro-
tein resistant to proteolysis; in others it affects function. 
In yet others (e.g. caeruloplasmin), it affects the half-life 
of the protein in the blood, because hepatocytes possess 
receptors that can bind galactose and some other carbo-
hydrate residues exposed after removal of sialic acid and 
remove the desialylated glycoproteins from the circula-
tion. Disturbance in glycosylation produces some specific 
defects in protein structure that may be useful clinically in 
the diagnosis of alcoholic (see p. 242) and malignant liver 
disease (see Chapter 14).
Metabolism of amino acids and disposal of urea
A 70 kg man on a normal diet needs to excrete between 
10 and 20 g of nitrogen per 24 h. This derives, in the 
form of ammonia, from amino acids that are surplus 
to requirements (and cannot be stored) and those that 
are not reutilized after normal turnover. The ammonia 
is converted into urea in the liver and excreted by the 
kidneys. The liver processes dietary amino acids arriv-
ing via the portal vein and from breakdown of muscle 
proteins, both for its own requirements and for export 
to peripheral tissues. Aromatic amino acids (AAA: phe-
nylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan) are metabolized by 
the liver, but hepatic extraction of branched chain amino 
acids (BCAA: leucine, isoleucine and valine) is small and 
these are taken up largely by muscle. The ratio of BCAA/
AAA is decreased in acute liver failure and this altera-
tion forms the basis of one theory of the pathogenesis 
of hepatic encephalopathy, namely that it is due to the 
toxic effects of increased concentrations of ammonia on 
the brain.
The major pathways of ammonia production and 
clearance are shown in Figure 13.4. Amino acids first un-
dergo transamination to glutamate, followed by oxidative 
deamination with the formation of ammonia. The resul-
tant ammonia is fed into the Krebs–Henseleit (urea) cycle 
and excreted as urea or stored transiently as glutamine 
(through the action of glutamine synthase). Additional 
ammonia is produced by the action of intestinal bacte-
ria on dietary protein and urea present in gut contents. 
Plasma ammonia concentration is measured in many lab-
oratories and a raised concentration is taken as evidence 
that an encephalopathic state is due to hepatic pathology. 
Measurement of the various enzymes involved in the urea 
cycle is increasingly undertaken for diagnosis of inherited 
abnormalities of urea synthesis.
Biotransformation and excretion
The lungs and kidneys are effective in excreting vola-
tile and water-soluble substances, respectively, but many 
compounds, both exogenous (such as drugs) and endog-
enous, including end products of metabolism, are lipid 
soluble and non-volatile. Many of these compounds are 
toxic, and a vital function of the liver is to render such 
substances more water soluble so that they can be ex-
creted in urine or bile.
Two phases of biotransformation of metabolites by the 
liver are recognized. In phase I, a suitable polar group is 
made available, which is conjugated in phase II. Phase 
I reactions occur in the smooth endoplasmic reticulum 
and are mediated mainly by the mixed function oxidase 
system (cytochrome P450 isoenzymes) that utilize at-
mospheric oxygen, typically generating hydroxylated 
or carboxylated compounds. Phase II reactions involve 
their subsequent conjugation by the action of glucuro-
nyl transferases with glucuronic acid, acetyl or methyl 
radicals or, in the case of bile acids, with glycine, taurine 
or sulphate (see below). There is considerable functional 
heterogeneity of the glucuronyl transferases, of which 
there are several isoenzymes that have varied substrate 
specificities, particularly for exogenous compounds. An 
alternative, non-oxidative pathway for biotransforma-
tion of both endogenous and exogenous substances is 
by conjugation with reduced glutathione by glutathione 
S-transferases.
FIGURE 13.4  ■  Production and disposal of ammonia.
236	
Clinical biochemistry
Bile secretion
The constituents of bile, the exocrine secretion of the liver, 
are conjugated bile salts, cholesterol, phospholipids (mainly 
lecithin), bilirubin mono- and diglucuronides, electrolytes 
and small amounts of protein. The liver is the major site 
of cholesterol biosynthesis and the sole site of conversion 
of cholesterol into bile acids, which are the major organic 
anions excreted by the liver. The primary bile acids, cho-
lic and chenodeoxycholic acid, are conjugated with either 
glycine or taurine to form bile salts, which enhances their 
solubility at the pH of body fluids (Fig. 13.5). This facili-
tates their main function of solubilizing both biliary cho-
lesterol and the products of dietary fat digestion resulting 
from lipid hydrolysis. Secondary bile acids, deoxycholic 
and lithocholic acids, are derived from primary bile acids 
by the action of intestinal bacterial 7α-dehydroxylase, ei-
ther as bile salts or deconjugated bile acids. Most of the 
bile acids reaching the gut are reabsorbed in the terminal 
ileum and return via the portal vein to the liver (enterohepatic 
circulation) where, as free acids, they are again conjugated 
and excreted. A third metabolite, ursodeoxycholate (a 
stereoisomer of chenodeoxycholic acid), is found in trace 
amounts and has been classified as a tertiary bile acid. This 
enterohepatic circulation is regulated by the activities of 
distinct bile salt transport proteins, including the canalicu-
lar bile salt export pump, the ileal sodium-dependent bile 
salt transporter and the hepatic sinusoidal sodium–tauro-
cholate co-transporting polypeptide. Several other bile salt 
transporters and organic anion-transporting polypeptides 
have been characterized (see below). During bile secretory 
failure (cholestasis), bile salt transport proteins undergo 
adaptive responses that serve to protect the liver from re-
tention of toxic bile salts and facilitate non-hepatic routes 
of bile salt excretion. The measurement of serum bile acids 
has been extensively investigated as a test of liver function 
(see p. 243).
LIVER FUNCTION TESTS
Liver function tests have four potential applications.
1.	 As an aid to establishing whether an individual 
has liver disease. In effect, they are being used to 
answer the question, ‘Is there any evidence of liver 
damage or dysfunction’?
2.	 As an aid to making a specific diagnosis. While 
functional tests are clearly distinct from diagnostic 
tests, it is still reasonable to assume that certain pat-
terns of dysfunction may be characteristic of par-
ticular diseases.
3.	 To establish the severity of liver dysfunction or 
damage once a specific diagnosis has been estab-
lished. This is important from a prognostic point 
of view, although the standard biochemical ‘liver 
function tests’ do not always reflect accurately the 
severity of tissue damage.
4.	 To monitor the progression of the disease and any 
response to therapeutic intervention.
Within this framework, two classes of tests will be con-
sidered. The first are the standard liver function tests – a 
group of tests often applied irrespectively of the suspected 
Liver
Small bowel
Faecal
excretion
Ileum
Gall bladder
Cholesterol
Cholic acid
Taurocholic
acid
Glycocholic acid
Synthesis
Conjugation
Secretion
Deoxycocholic
acid
7  -Dehydroxylase
CDC glycine
CDCA
CDC taurine
Chenodeoxycholic
acid (CDCA)
α
FIGURE 13.5  ■  Synthesis and enterohepatic circulation of bile acids.
	
13  Assessment of hepatic function and ­investigation of jaundice	
237
diagnosis and to which all the caveats about lack of true 
functional assessment apply. The second group includes 
those biochemical assays used for assessment of liver 
disease in specific situations, for example α1-antitrypsin in 
suspected deficiency of this protein and α-fetoprotein 
in suspected primary hepatic cancer (hepatocellular 
cancer). The latter are described briefly here, for the 
sake of completeness, and in more detail in the next 
chapter in the context of their diagnostic application. 
The standard liver function tests are usually considered 
to include the plasma total bilirubin concentration, the 
activities in plasma of certain enzymes (particularly 
alanine and/or aspartate aminotransferases, alkaline 
phosphatase and γ-glutamyltransferase), and the total 
plasma protein, albumin and globulin concentrations. 
The prothrombin time (discussed later) also provides 
useful information about the synthetic capacity of the 
liver in the short term, as it is a functional measure of 
factor VII (among others) concentration and this clot-
ting factor has a short half-life in plasma (see below). It 
has been estimated that this group of tests will correctly 
allocate patients to a liver disease/non-liver disease cat-
egory in about 75% of cases.
Bilirubin and bile pigment metabolism
Although bilirubin has been characterized as a non-
toxic metabolic product of a relatively minor metabolic 
pathway, marked elevation in its plasma concentration 
leads to the alarming sign of jaundice and usually sug-
gests the presence of underlying liver or biliary tract 
disease that may range from trivial to life-threatening, 
especially in neonates (see below). Accurate interpre-
tation of the laboratory tests associated with bile pig-
ment metabolism in the jaundiced individual requires a 
clear understanding of the physiology and biochemis-
try of the bile pigments. Most bilirubin is derived from 
the breakdown of haem, itself derived from senescent 
red blood cells (Fig.  13.6). A much smaller propor-
tion comes from other haemoproteins such as catalase, 
myoglobin and the cytochromes. An even smaller frac-
tion comes from ‘ineffective erythropoiesis’, although 
this may represent a significant source of bilirubin in 
haematological conditions such as thalassaemia and 
pernicious anaemia. The initial and rate-limiting step 
is the oxidation of haem to biliverdin by haem oxygen-
ase; this is followed by reduction (catalysed by biliver-
din reductase) to bilirubin, with the production of an 
equimolar amount of carbon monoxide and ferric (Fe
3+) 
iron. These reactions take place in the macrophages of 
the reticuloendothelial system, predominantly in the 
liver, spleen and bone marrow. The resultant ‘uncon-
jugated’ bilirubin is tightly bound to albumin in a 1:1 
molar ratio, but additional binding sites of lower af-
finity are recruited in hyperbilirubinaemic states. This 
binding limits extrahepatic uptake of the potentially 
toxic unconjugated bilirubin and facilitates transport 
to the liver. Other molecules, such as thyroxine and 
certain drugs, can compete for albumin binding sites 
and thereby displace bilirubin, although the clinical rel-
evance of this displacement is limited, except possibly 
in neonates.
Bilirubin, tightly bound to albumin, is actively trans-
ported across the hepatocyte sinusoidal membrane and 
binds to ligandin (glutathione transferase B). It is then 
conjugated with glucuronic acid by the action of uridine 
diphosphate (UDP)-glucuronosyltransferase (glucuronyl 
transferase) to form mono- and diglucuronides and thereby 
rendered water soluble (Fig. 13.7). Glucuronidated bili-
rubin is secreted via an active transport mechanism into 
the biliary canaliculi and thence reaches the gut. The 
components of this transport pathway have been identi-
fied as products of genes encoding multidrug resistance 
(MDR) proteins (MRPs) and MDR-associated proteins. 
The protein MDR3 is known to transport phosphatidyl-
choline to chaperone bile salts, while MRP2 pumps gluc-
uronidated compounds, that is, conjugated bilirubin as 
well as organic anions. Secretion is probably rate limiting 
in the overall transport of bilirubin from plasma to bile. 
In the gut, some bilirubin is deconjugated by bacterial 
glucuronidases and (being fat soluble again) is reabsorbed, 
but most is oxidized to urobilinogen; this is further me-
tabolized to other pigments, particularly stercobilin, and 
excreted (Fig. 13.8). A small amount of urobilinogen is 
reabsorbed and undergoes an enterohepatic circulation. 
Conjugated bilirubin also circulates bound to albumin, 
but with low affinity, such that the unbound fraction can 
Fe3
FIGURE 13.6  ■  Formation of bilirubin.
238	
Clinical biochemistry
be filtered by the glomeruli and excreted by the kidneys, 
giving rise to pigmented urine. A small fraction is reab-
sorbed by the renal tubules.
The significance of hyperbilirubinaemia
Less than 500 mg of bilirubin is produced each day, but 
the normal liver can conjugate up to 1500 mg/day. This 
large functional reserve is one reason why the plasma bili-
rubin concentration is an insensitive test for liver disease, 
since it begins to rise only after significant liver damage 
has occurred. In more than 95% of the apparently healthy 
adult population, the plasma bilirubin concentration is 
<25 μmol/L and this can be considered the upper limit of 
the reference range (Fig. 13.9). It is virtually all unconju-
gated. Jaundice can be detected by experienced observers 
when the plasma concentration exceeds 50 μmol/L and, 
when it rises above 100 μmol/L, it will be apparent to lay 
observers.
The absolute concentration of plasma bilirubin is of 
little help in establishing a diagnosis. Its measurement is, 
however, important in monitoring the progress of dis-
eases such as primary biliary cirrhosis, where changes are 
of prognostic significance (see p. 248), neonatal jaundice 
(with respect to the need for exchange transfusion), for 
assessing response to treatment (such as surgical relief of 
bile duct obstruction) and to detect hyperbilirubinaemia 
that is suspected, but not clinically apparent. In addi-
tion, the absolute concentration of bilirubin is impor-
tant in prescribing the correct dose of certain cytotoxic 
agents, especially if they are normally excreted in bile. 
B
B
D
C
A
N
H
A
Me
CH
CH2
A
CH
O
N
H
B
Me
CH2
CH2
CO2H
CH2
N
H
D
CH
Me
CH2
CH
O
N
H
C
Me
CH2
CH2
CO2H
FIGURE 13.7  ■  (A) The unfolded structure of bilirubin showing the 
site of glucuronic acid conjugation (arrows), which breaks the 
hydrogen bonding and results in the molecule becoming sol-
uble. (B) The folded structure showing the extensive hydrogen 
bonding.
Bilirubin
diglucuronide
Unconjugated bilirubin
Urobilinogens
Small
bowel
Liver
Large
bowel
Urinary
excretion
Stercobilin and
urobilin
Spontaneous
oxidation
Reduction
by intestinal
anaerobes
ß-Glucuronidase
Faecal
excretion
FIGURE  13.8  ■  Enterohepatic 
circulation 
of 
bilirubin 
and 
urobilinogen.
FIGURE  13.9  ■  Distribution of serum bilirubin concentrations 
in 18 454 apparently healthy men. (From Bailey A, Robinson D, 
Dawson M 1977 Does Gilbert’s disease exist? Lancet i:931–933, 
with permission).
	
13  Assessment of hepatic function and ­investigation of jaundice	
239
For example, in patients treated with doxorubicin for ma-
lignant liver disease, the dose must be decreased in the 
presence of hyperbilirubinaemia to avoid drug-induced 
myelosuppression. The highest concentrations of biliru-
bin (sometimes approaching 1000 μmol/L) are seen when 
conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia of any cause is compli-
cated by renal failure.
Tests for quantitation of bilirubin and its 
­conjugated and unconjugated fractions
Current methods for the determination of plasma bili-
rubin are based on the diazo coupling of the pigments 
first described by Ehrlich in 1883. Two molecules of 
azodipyrrole, which can be measured spectrophotometri-
cally, are formed per molecule of bilirubin. In 1916, van 
den Berg and Muller noted that bilirubin from patients 
with obstructive jaundice reacted ‘directly’, whereas bili-
rubin from patients with haemolytic jaundice reacted 
‘indirectly’, that is, an accelerator such as alcohol was 
required. The direct reacting pigment was later identi-
fied as conjugated bilirubin (CB) and the indirect reacting 
pigment as unconjugated bilirubin (UCB).
Although the distinction was found to be useful clini-
cally, it soon became apparent that there is not, in fact, 
a precise relationship between indirectly reacting bili-
rubin and UCB, and directly reacting bilirubin and CB, 
respectively. In particular, direct measurements overes-
timate CB at low concentrations and underestimate it 
at high concentrations. To overcome these limitations, 
the alkaline methanolysis method was developed. The 
bilirubin mono- and diglucuronide conjugates are con-
verted to the corresponding mono- and dimethyl esters 
by treatment with alkaline methanol. Unconjugated 
bilirubin is not affected by the reaction and is extracted 
into chloroform with the methyl ester derivatives. The 
pigments can then be separated and quantified by high 
performance liquid chromatography (HPLC). This ap-
proach shows that CB is virtually undetectable in plasma 
from healthy subjects or from patients with Gilbert syn-
drome. Techniques permitting accurate estimation of 
the two fractions at low bilirubin concentrations may 
become available routinely, and the detection of CB 
might then become the most specific and sensitive test 
of hepatobiliary function. Bilirubin bound to albumin 
(bili-albumin, delta bilirubin), probably covalently, is a 
third form of bilirubin. It may account for up to 90% 
of total bilirubin in both hepatocellular and cholestatic 
jaundice, although both impaired excretion and an intact 
conjugation mechanism are required for its formation. 
It is not detectable in healthy subjects or patients with 
unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemias, including Gilbert 
syndrome. It is this form of bilirubin that persists in the 
plasma of patients recovering from jaundice after biliru-
bin has ceased to be detectable in the urine. The precise 
mechanism by which jaundice ­occurs in patients with 
severe, long-term liver dysfunction has still not been 
firmly established. Both conjugated and unconjugated 
bilirubin are present, but the former ­predominates. 
Clinically, most patients retain the ability to conjugate 
bilirubin but have pigmented, bilirubin-containing 
urine. It is likely that conjugated bilirubin refluxes 
retrogradely across the sinusoidal poles of hepatocytes 
because excretion via the biliary canalicular membrane 
becomes rate-limiting in the ­severely damaged liver. 
Leakage from damaged canaliculi via the paracellular 
pathway may also occur.
Plasma enzyme activities
As noted above, the enzymes used as liver tests, have little 
or no physiological function in the plasma: rather, they 
are empirical markers of some type of liver damage.
Alkaline phosphatase
The term alkaline phosphatase (ALP) describes a group 
of enzymes that hydrolyse phosphate esters at alkaline 
pH, although the physiological substrate within the body 
is not known. Alkaline phosphatase is present in several 
tissues, but the plasma component comprises mainly 
contributions from liver, bone, intestine and (during 
pregnancy) the placenta. There are two liver-derived iso-
enzymes. One derives from the hepatocyte and the other 
from the exterior surface of the biliary canalicular mem-
brane. The latter probably enters the bloodstream via 
the paracellular pathway (see Fig. 13.3), although, in the 
presence of obstruction, it becomes distributed through-
out the cytoplasm and may enter the plasma directly from 
across the plasma membrane. The function of hepatic 
ALP is unknown, but it may be involved in the transport 
of bile acids into bile.
The activity of plasma ALP rises when there is any 
form of obstruction to the biliary tract, whether me-
chanical or otherwise. The original assumption that this 
was due to failure of clearance by the obstructed liver 
was shown in the 1960s to be false. It was found that 
the clearance of ALP is not dependent on a patent bili-
ary system and that during cholestasis only the liver ALP 
increases in activity, not the bone and intestinal isoen-
zymes. Subsequent studies have shown that this increase 
is from de novo synthesis of alkaline phosphatase, and it 
is possible in rat models to show that this is due to in-
creased translation of the ALP mRNA rather than to in-
creased transcription. The activity is definitely of biliary 
origin and the rise can be inhibited by blocking RNA 
synthesis. Biliary tract obstruction on its own is not suf-
ficient to give rise to increased plasma activity of liver 
ALP; it appears that a high concentration of bile acids 
is also required, perhaps to solubilize the ALP bound to 
the canalicular membrane.
In cholestatic diseases due to biliary tract obstruction, 
the site of the obstruction may be at any level, from high 
in the small intrahepatic bile ducts (e.g. in primary biliary 
cirrhosis) down to the common bile duct (e.g. with gall-
stones). A rise in ALP activity usually predates the onset 
of clinical jaundice and, in those situations where surgical 
relief is possible, the return of plasma bilirubin to within 
the reference range usually precedes that of ALP. In a pa-
tient with symptoms of pain over the liver, an elevated 
ALP activity in the presence of a normal plasma bilirubin 
concentration is strongly suggestive of a hepatic space-
occupying lesion, such as an intrahepatic tumour or an 
infiltrative disorder.
240	
Clinical biochemistry
Overcoming the lack of tissue specificity. Increases 
in the activity of plasma ALP are not specific for liver 
disease. Modest increases occur in pregnancy, during pe-
riods of rapid bone growth in childhood and adolescence, 
and because of disease at other sites, particularly bone 
disease in which there is increased osteoblastic activity. 
While bone disease (hepatic osteodystrophy) may be a 
complication of longstanding cholestatic liver disease, the 
predominant form is osteoporosis, not osteomalacia, and 
the increased ALP activity is not due to the coexistent 
bone disease.
The specificity of the test can be enhanced by mea-
suring specific ALP isoenzymes. Early studies used 
starch or polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis on the 
serum sample followed by specific staining of the gels 
for ALP; agarose gel electrophoresis is now more com-
monly used. In normal serum, two or three distinct 
bands can usually be identified, corresponding to the 
liver, bone and intestinal ALP isoenzymes. The liver 
band moves most rapidly towards the anode, with a 
more diffuse bone band closely behind. When pres-
ent, the intestinal band lies behind the bone band. 
Additional bands are seen during pregnancy (the same 
isoenzyme is also detected occasionally in patients with 
malignancy, and is known as the Regan isoenzyme). In 
subjects with hepatocellular carcinoma, occasionally 
there is an additional, fast-running, band. The tech-
nique is semiquantitative, but it is usually visually ob-
vious which of the isoenzymes is responsible for the 
increase in total activity.
An alternative approach is to repeat the standard ALP 
assay after first heating the serum at 56°C for 15 min. 
The liver and bone isoenzymes are sensitive to this treat-
ment, and if the increased total activity is owing to either 
one of these, it will be reduced to about 40% or 15% of 
the original value, respectively. The placental isoenzyme 
activity remains unaffected by heating. This method is 
not as discriminatory as electrophoretic separation of the 
isoenzymes, but is easier to perform and can be used as a 
rough guide.
In practice, however, when there is doubt about the 
origin of an increased plasma ALP activity, it is custom-
ary to examine the results in relation to other enzymes, 
elevations in the activities of which are more liver spe-
cific. Thus, if the γ-glutamyltransferase (γGT, see below) 
is also elevated, it may be inferred that the increase in 
ALP activity is probably of hepatic origin. In a few situ-
ations, elevation of ALP activity, apparently with hepatic 
specificity, may be seen in patients without overt liver 
disease, particularly those with Hodgkin lymphoma and 
some infections.
One specific situation in which isoenzyme analysis is 
of particular benefit is in patients with benign transient 
hyperphosphatasaemia (see Fig  13.10). First identified 
in children, it is now recognized also in adults. Serum 
ALP activity is typically >1000 U/L, with normal plasma 
activities of the aminotransferases and γGT. It is usually 
associated with recent or intercurrent infection, often of 
the gastrointestinal tract. The mechanism is thought to 
be removal of sialic acid residues from circulating ALP 
by bacterial endotoxin or other substances released by the 
infecting organism. This alters the recognition of ALP by 
clearance receptors, prolonging its half-life in the circu-
lation. The isoenzyme pattern is characteristic, showing 
the presence of two bands for each of the liver and bone 
isoforms. Treatment of the sample with neuraminidase, 
which removes terminal sialic acids from the carbohy-
drate side-chains of ALP, results in a pattern identical to 
that seen in a normal sample treated with neuraminidase. 
The importance of recognizing benign transient hyper-
phosphatasaemia is that invasive investigations such as 
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography are 
unnecessary.
The aminotransferases
These enzymes, previously designated (and still fre-
quently referred to) as ‘transaminases’, catalyse the 
transfer of an amino group from an α-amino acid to an 
α-oxo acid. This is their intracellular function. An in-
crease in their activity in the plasma is simply a marker 
of hepatocyte disruption and, presumably, has no use-
ful function. The two most widely measured for clinical 
purposes are aspartate aminotransferase (AST) and ala-
nine aminotransferase (ALT) both of which have a wide 
tissue distribution. Aspartate aminotransferase is found 
in liver, heart, skeletal muscle, kidney, brain, erythro-
cytes and lung. Alanine aminotransferase has a similar 
tissue distribution, but activities are much lower in ex-
trahepatic tissue so that an increase in plasma ALT is 
more specific for liver disease. In view of this wide tissue 
distribution, it is not surprising that increased activities 
are seen in extrahepatic disease such as rhabdomyolysis, 
where the enzymes are released from damaged muscle 
cells. However, distinction between increased amino-
transferase activities due to liver disease and those due to 
skeletal or cardiac muscle damage can usually be made by 
measurement of creatine kinase or the cardiac-specific 
troponins, respectively.
The increased plasma activities of these enzymes seen in 
patients with liver disease are presumed to originate from 
necrotic or damaged hepatocytes, although actual necrosis 
is not a prerequisite. It should not be assumed that the en-
zyme content of hepatocytes in patients with liver disease 
is necessarily the same as in normal hepatocytes; in patients 
with metastatic liver disease, hepatocyte enzyme concen-
trations may be several times higher than normal.
1  Liver disease
2  Patient
3  Patient (heated) 
4  Liver disease
Anode
Origin
Cathode
B L
α1
FIGURE  13.10  ■  Alkaline phosphatase isoenzymes in benign 
transient hyperphosphatasaemia. Separation of plasma ALP 
isoenzymes on cellulose acetate membrane. The positions of 
bone (B), liver (L) and biliary (α1) isoenzymes are indicated. The 
electrophoretic pattern and heat stability of transient hyper-
phosphatasaemia are illustrated in lanes 2 and 3. (Courtesy of 
Dr S. B. Rosalki).
	
13  Assessment of hepatic function and ­investigation of jaundice	
241
The aminotransferases are sensitive tests of hepatocel-
lular dysfunction. This is particularly well demonstrated 
by the observation that during epidemics of viral hepati-
tis, aminotransferase activities may be markedly elevated 
in asymptomatic individuals with subclinical hepatitis. 
Generally speaking, the specificity of the test increases 
with enzyme activity. Activities above ten times the upper 
limit of the reference range are most frequently due to 
primary hepatocyte damage, so that the hepatic pathol-
ogy will be some form of acute (viral or drug-induced) 
or chronic (such as autoimmune) hepatitis. Occasionally, 
acute cardiac failure or hypovolaemic shock may cause 
AST activities within this range, presumably from a com-
bination of increased hepatic venous pressure, low cardiac 
output and arterial hypoxia. Exceptionally, such elevated 
activities may also be found in obstructive jaundice, par-
ticularly when there is acute biliary tract obstruction or 
where cholangitis supervenes on biliary tract obstruction.
Values below ten times the upper limit of the refer-
ence range are non-specific and no aetiological infer-
ence can be drawn. Importantly, a plasma ALT or AST 
activity within the reference range does not necessarily 
exclude significant hepatocellular damage, as assessed 
histologically in some forms of chronic liver disease (e.g. 
autoimmune hepatitis). In several liver disorders, more 
discrimination can be gained by considering the amino-
transferase activities in relation to the ALP or to each 
other. In general, the higher the AST/ALP ratio, the 
more likely the underlying condition is to be some form 
of hepatitis. Conversely, the lower this ratio, the more it 
is indicative of a cholestatic disorder. Plasma ALT activity 
tends to be only modestly raised in patients with alcoholic 
hepatitis compared with other forms of hepatitis, whereas 
the AST activity is often more markedly elevated. Thus, 
an AST/ALT ratio of >2, in a patient who appears on 
clinical grounds to have a hepatitic illness, strongly sug-
gests that alcohol is involved.
The mitochondrial isoenzyme of AST (mAST). There 
are two forms of AST, one cytosolic and the other mito-
chondrial (mAST). The latter is synthesized under con-
trol of nuclear DNA as a precursor (pre-mAST), which 
is rapidly transferred across the mitochondrial membrane 
and then converted into mature mAST. The mitochon-
drial isoenzyme of AST accounts for about 80% of total 
AST activity within the liver cells. With the development 
of immunochemical methods for measurement of this 
enzyme in serum, there has been considerable interest 
in the use of the mAST/total AST ratio as a marker of 
chronic alcohol consumption. While preliminary studies 
suggested that this test adequately distinguishes between 
those who consume excess alcohol and healthy subjects, 
irrespective of the presence or absence of liver disease, and 
is only elevated in association with chronic abuse, this test 
has not been adopted into routine laboratory practice.
γ-Glutamyltransferase
This is a microsomal enzyme responsible for transfer of 
glutamyl groups from γ-glutamyl peptides to other pep-
tides or amino acids. It may be involved in the transport 
of peptides across cell membranes as γ-glutamyl peptides. 
Although widely distributed throughout most body 
­organs except muscle, the plasma activity is mainly at-
tributable to the liver isoenzyme. γ-Glutamyltransferase 
has poor specificity for liver disease and, especially in a 
patient with jaundice, it adds little to the information 
gained from measurement of AST and ALP. However, 
its measurement can be useful in two particular circum-
stances. First, when the origin of an elevated serum ALP 
is uncertain, a concomitant elevation in γGT suggests 
that the ALP is of hepatic origin. The second relates 
to the controversial area of the relationship of γGT to 
chronic alcohol consumption.
The laboratory tests for chronic alcoholism are dis-
cussed in the next chapter. Here, we attempt to summa-
rize what is accepted about γGT and excessive alcohol 
consumption. In those who consume excess alcohol and 
who have chronic liver disease, the absolute plasma ac-
tivity of γGT is higher than in those without signifi-
cant liver disease, and there is a tendency for activities 
to remain high after abstinence. This suggests that the 
elevated plasma γGT activities in such individuals may 
be due to induction of the enzyme by the alcohol and/or 
because of the liver damage. In contrast, among alcoholic 
patients without liver disease, only about half will have a 
raised γGT and this will usually fall to normal after eight 
weeks of abstinence. The extent of the increase in γGT 
activity above normal is not directly related to either the 
amount of alcohol consumed or the duration of its con-
sumption. It is evident from the above that the efficiency 
of using γGT for screening populations for excessive 
alcohol consumption will be poor. False positive results 
occur in those taking enzyme-inducing drugs (including 
some herbal remedies) and false negative results occur 
in those who do not have liver disease. Nonetheless, the 
finding of a markedly raised γGT (greater than five times 
the upper limit of the reference range) provides good 
reason to enquire diligently about possible alcohol abuse. 
γ-Glutamyltransferase remains the best of the simple 
laboratory screening tests and, depending on the popula-
tion studied, the sensitivity is in the order of 50% and the 
specificity is about 85%.
Glutathione S-transferase (GST)
Isoenzymes of GST are involved in the detoxification 
and conjugation of several electrophilic compounds with 
glutathione. As noted above, bilirubin and bile acids bind 
strongly to GST, which is also involved in the metabolism 
of endogenous compounds such as some of the prosta-
glandins. Various isoenzymes exist; virtually all the plasma 
GST-α activity is of hepatic origin and its measurement 
seems to be a sensitive test of acute hepatocellular dam-
age. It has a half-life in blood of only about 90 min and 
is, therefore, a rapidly responding marker of liver injury. 
However, the currently available immunoassay does not 
lend itself to large-scale routine screening and is there-
fore not widely used in clinical practice.
Plasma proteins
The concentrations of proteins in plasma reflect the bal-
ance between availability of their precursors and their 
242	
Clinical biochemistry
rates of synthesis, release and clearance, as well as their 
volumes of distribution. It is, therefore, not surprising 
that in patients with liver disease, the concentrations are 
very variable. Measurements of some plasma proteins (e.g. 
albumin, coagulation proteins) can provide useful infor-
mation about general hepatic function; measurements of 
others (e.g. α1-antitrypsin, caeruloplasmin) are used in the 
diagnosis of specific conditions affecting the liver.
Albumin
This is the major protein in plasma and it is synthesized 
exclusively by the liver. The liver produces about 12 g of 
albumin each day; of the total body pool of 300 g, about 
60% is in the extravascular pool and 40% in the intravas-
cular pool. The plasma half-life is about 21 days. Albumin 
is responsible for maintaining plasma oncotic pressure 
and binds several hormones, anions, drugs and fatty acids. 
There is no doubt that as chronic liver disease progresses, 
the plasma albumin concentration tends to fall and, in 
this context, it is a major prognostic factor (see p. 248). 
Nonetheless, it must not be assumed that plasma albumin 
concentration is simply an indicator of hepatic synthetic 
function.
The rate of hepatic albumin synthesis falls in the face 
of inadequate protein intake. This is a frequent occur-
rence in patients with advanced liver disease, and par-
ticularly those in whom excessive alcohol consumption 
is implicated. However, even when the rate of synthe-
sis falls, plasma concentrations may remain within the 
reference range because of a compensatory reduction in 
the rate of degradation. Furthermore, hypoalbuminae-
mia may occur in the face of normal, or even increased, 
rates of synthesis when protein ‘leaks’ into lymph, as-
cites or otherwise into the extravascular compartment. 
Hypoalbuminaemia may also be the result of renal loss 
of albumin in the nephrotic syndrome, gastrointestinal 
tract loss in protein losing enteropathy or loss through 
the skin in burns patients.
Prothrombin time and coagulation factors
The prothrombin time (PT) is a test that has become 
widely used in hepatology. Quick’s one-step prothrom-
bin time measures the rate at which prothrombin is con-
verted to thrombin in the presence of thromboplastin, 
calcium, fibrinogen and other coagulation factors (V, VII 
and X). In turn, the thrombin leads to the conversion of 
fibrinogen to fibrin. Prothrombin and factors VII, IX 
and X all require vitamin K to become active. In the UK, 
the use of the PT has been widely replaced by the use of 
the international normalized ratio (INR). This is derived 
by dividing the PT of the patient by that of the control. 
Thus, healthy individuals will have an INR of 1 (<1.2 is 
the accepted normal value), while a patient with a PT of 
120 s where the control is 12 s would have an INR of 10 
(see Chapter 26).
There are two reasons why patients with liver disease 
may have a prolonged PT, each with different diagnos-
tic implications. First, the liver may be so damaged that 
it cannot adequately synthesize the clotting factors that 
require vitamin K for their activation. The half-life of 
factor VII is about 6 h, so that a prolonged INR is a reli-
able indicator of the presence of acute liver failure caused 
by a recent, overwhelming insult to the liver. Second, 
since vitamin K is a fat-soluble vitamin, it may be defi-
cient because of impaired fat absorption when there is 
obstructive jaundice. The latter situation is remediable 
by parenteral administration of vitamin K. Thus, return 
of the INR to the normal range within 18 h may be taken 
as evidence of obstructive jaundice, whereas failure to re-
spond implies severe parenchymal disease.
The concentration of factor V is becoming a widely-
used test in assessing the severity of acute liver failure, 
particularly in continental Europe; low factor V concen-
tration is associated with a poor prognosis.
α-Fetoprotein
Under normal circumstances, the synthesis of this pro-
tein, the fetal equivalent of albumin, virtually ceases 
shortly after birth. However, the protein is synthesized 
in large amounts (and becomes detectable in plasma) in 
about 70% of patients with hepatocellular carcinoma, 
and to lesser degrees in certain other tumours and benign 
liver diseases (see Chapter 42).
α1-Antitrypsin
This protein is the major α1-globulin and responsible for 
90% of plasma tryptic inhibitory capacity. α1-Antitrypsin 
deficiency is a major cause of chronic liver disease in chil-
dren (see Chapter  14) and, less commonly, of chronic 
liver disease presenting in adulthood.
Transferrin
Transferrin is the major circulating iron-binding protein, 
and its concentration correlates with the total iron-binding 
capacity of plasma. In states of iron overload, such as here­
ditary haemochromatosis (see Chapter 14), the concen­
tration is modestly reduced, but the saturation is 55–100% 
compared with the reference range of 30–40%. Plasma 
transferrin has also been suggested to be a more appro-
priate overall indicator of protein synthesis by the liver 
in view of its shorter half-life, as compared with albumin.
Transferrin is a glycoprotein that exists in the circu-
lation in various forms, containing up to six terminal 
sialic acid residues on its carbohydrate side chains. In 
healthy individuals, the trisialo-, tetrasialo- and pen-
tasialo- forms predominate. Alcohol appears to ­inhibit 
the glycosylation of several glycoproteins, includ-
ing transferrin, and in subjects consuming excessive 
amounts of alcohol, plasma transferrin often lacks up 
to four of these sialic acid residues, resulting in asialo- 
and disialotransferrins, which are now collectively 
termed 
­carbohydrate-deficient 
transferrin 
(CDT). 
Consumption of more than 80 g of alcohol/day leads 
to an increase in the plasma CDT concentration, irre-
spective of any underlying liver disease. This returns to 
normal concentrations within two weeks of abstinence. 
Carbohydrate-deficient transferrin measurement has 
been proposed as a marker of excessive alcohol consump-
tion, although it is not in widespread use; sensitivity is 
	
13  Assessment of hepatic function and ­investigation of jaundice	
243
approximately 80% and specificity somewhat higher, 
but results do not reflect the nature or severity of any 
liver disease (see Chapter 14).
Caeruloplasmin
This protein, the principal copper-containing protein in 
the plasma, has oxidase activity including the ferroxidase 
activity essential for the oxidation of Fe(II) to Fe(III). It 
consists of a single polypeptide chain containing six cop-
per atoms, but there is minimal turnover of the copper, 
suggesting that it does not act as a copper transporter in 
the manner that transferrin is the circulating iron car-
rier. In the context of liver disease, it plays an important 
role in the diagnosis of Wilson disease since it is virtu-
ally absent from plasma in this condition.
Acute phase reactants
In response to tissue damage, there is an increase in 
hepatic synthesis of several plasma proteins, notably 
C-reactive protein, α1-antitrypsin, antichymotrypsin, 
fibrinogen and caeruloplasmin. These are an integral 
part of the inflammatory response, which is described in 
greater detail in Chapter 30.
Immunoglobulins
Measurement of immunoglobulins is useful in the dia­
gnosis of several liver disorders and for monitoring 
response to therapy in some. Elevated plasma concen-
trations often indicate an underlying inflammatory pro-
cess. An indication of elevation in the immunoglobulins 
can be obtained by subtracting the plasma albumin con-
centration from the total protein concentration. This 
gives a rough measure of the total globulin fraction, of 
which the immunoglobulins are the major component. 
Concentrations of the individual immunoglobulin types 
(IgG, IgA, IgM) can then be determined by various tech-
niques. This can provide helpful information, because 
different liver disorders are associated with selective el-
evations in the concentrations of the three immunoglob-
ulin types. Thus, the IgG fraction is usually markedly 
elevated in autoimmune hepatitis, IgM in primary bili-
ary cirrhosis, and IgA in alcoholic liver disease. Repeated 
measurement of IgG concentration is also useful in 
monitoring response to therapy in autoimmune hepati-
tis. This topic is discussed in more detail in Chapter 30.
Bile acids
In healthy individuals, the concentrations of plasma bile 
acids (PBAs) are determined by the difference between 
the amount absorbed from the gut and that taken up by 
the liver. The latter is fairly constant and, normally, it 
is the amount absorbed from the gut that determines 
plasma concentrations. Under pathological conditions, 
hepatic blood flow and clearance become the deter-
mining factors. In this situation, measurement of PBA 
may be considered as an endogenous clearance test. 
Accumulation of bile acids in the skin is thought to be 
associated with the development of the pruritis that is a 
relatively common feature of cholestatic liver disease.
Measurement of total plasma bile acids using simple 
automated enzymatic assays has proved to be of value 
in the diagnosis and monitoring of intrahepatic cho-
lestasis of pregnancy. Total PBA measurement has also 
been used in the investigation of pruritis in children and 
adults with cholestatic liver disease, although interfer-
ence in the assay from ursodeoxycholic acid, which may 
be used in treating these conditions, has limited its ap-
plication. Fractionated bile acid analysis using high per-
formance liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry 
is needed for the diagnosis of the rare inborn errors of 
bile acid metabolism (e.g. oxosteroid 5β-reductase defi-
ciency and amidation defects). The role of bile acids in 
carbohydrate and lipid metabolism is currently a subject 
of consid­erable interest.
Quantitative evaluation of liver function
The very limited extent to which standard liver tests give 
any quantitative measurement of hepatic function has al-
ready been discussed. To overcome these deficiencies, sev-
eral tests that measure the efficacy of hepatic clearance of 
certain compounds, exogenous or endogenous, have been 
investigated over the past 20–30 years. To date, none has 
entered routine clinical practice. The main reason is that 
they require administration of the test substance and then 
subsequent collection of blood or other body fluids, some-
times over a protracted period. Despite some simplifica-
tion of these tests, the information gained is seldom seen 
as justifying the necessary expenditure of time and effort.
However, with the advent of liver transplantation as a 
realistic therapeutic option in many forms of liver disease, 
it is becoming increasingly important to obtain more pre-
cise prognoses based on an accurate assessment of liver 
function. Also, many liver diseases are of such chronicity 
that a test that could reliably assess the efficacy of new 
drugs, in terms of their ability to improve liver function, 
would provide a real advance in clinical management of 
these conditions.
Pharmacological basis and practical requirements 
of clearance tests
The concept of ‘clearance’ as a test of hepatic func-
tion is analogous to the more familiar use of clearance 
as an index of renal function. The substance chosen 
should be non-toxic, exclusively eliminated by the liver 
and easily measurable. The principle of these tests is 
as follows:
clearance
hepatic removal arterialplasmaconcentration
hepati
=
/
c removal
plasmaflow
arterialconcentration
hepatic venousp
=
×
−
(
lasmaconcentration)
Thus:
clearance
plasmaflow
arterialconcentration
hepatic venousp
=
×
−
(
lasmaconcentration
arterialplasmaconcentration
)
Clearance is thus a function of plasma (and hence 
blood) flow and the second term in the above equation, 
244	
Clinical biochemistry
known as the hepatic extraction ratio (E). When the ex-
traction ratio approaches 1, the clearance equates to liver 
plasma flow. In healthy subjects, the value of E for in-
docyanine green is about 0.9 and the clearance of this 
substance is, indeed, a good indicator of blood flow. In 
liver disease, however, E may fall to as low as 0.2 and 
the clearance is no longer dependent on blood flow but 
more on the ability of the liver to clear the compound. 
Compounds such as aminopyrine, antipyrine and caffeine 
have extraction ratios of <0.25 in healthy subjects and, 
providing that saturating doses are given, clearance is 
largely independent of blood flow.
Indocyanine green is not conjugated in the liver, al-
though its removal from the plasma depends on hepatic 
function. Ten milligrams per kilogram body weight is 
administered intravenously and samples taken at 3 min 
intervals between 3 and 15 min. The percentage disap-
pearance rate (PDR) is calculated as:
PDR = (
) ×
0 693
100
12
.
/ t
where t1⁄2 is the half-life of indocyanine green. The refer-
ence range is 17–22%; values below this range are con-
sidered abnormal.
Other tests of liver function
Serum tests for hepatic fibrosis
Fibrosis, leading ultimately to cirrhosis, is a characteristic 
feature of progressive chronic liver disease and is respon-
sible for much of the associated functional disturbance 
and portal hypertension. In chronic liver disease, colla-
gen is laid down in the perisinusoidal space (see Fig. 13.3) 
and the space of Disse, to the extent that the fenestrations 
are lost and the sinusoids become capillarized with a true 
basement membrane. Hepatic stellate cells are likely to 
play a determining role in the fibrotic process and, in-
creasingly, therapy is aimed at reversing, or at least in-
hibiting, this process. Until recently, the only method of 
assessing the extent of fibrosis or response to therapy was 
by histological examination of liver tissue but, because the 
fibrosis is often not uniformly distributed throughout the 
liver, there is a risk of sampling error. Transient elastog-
raphy (Fibroscan
®), a technique that measures liver stiff-
ness, correlates with histological staging of fibrosis. A low 
amplitude shear wave is generated from a probe applied to 
the thoracic wall at the level of the right lobe of the liver. 
The velocity of propagation is directly proportional to 
liver stiffness. This estimates existing fibrosis but cannot 
provide any information on whether the fibrotic process is 
historical or ongoing. For this reason, biochemical mark-
ers of fibrogenesis have been sought for many years.
Several biochemical candidates have been proposed 
as markers of fibrosis either in isolation or combined 
together in a scoring system. Some of these incorporate 
standard biochemical tests whilst others involve measure-
ment of compounds involved in the fibrogenic process 
(Table 13.1). The increasing prevalence of liver disease 
due to infection with the hepatitis C virus has provided 
focus to the search for non-invasive markers of clinically 
significant fibrosis.
Collagen metabolites. Quantitatively, types I and III 
collagen are involved in hepatic fibrosis but type IV is 
also important in basement membranes. Measurement 
of the concentration of the amino-terminal procollagen 
type III (PIIINP) in plasma is a non-invasive marker of 
collagen type III metabolism. The PIIINP concentration 
reflects fibrinogenesis (i.e. the rate of ongoing fibrosis) 
rather than the absolute amount of fibrosis present in the 
liver. Nonetheless, PIIINP measurements are of value for 
indicating the development of fibrosis in patients receiv-
ing potentially hepatic fibrogenic drugs such as metho-
trexate. Other approaches, such as measurement of the 
carboxy-terminal cross-linking domain of type IV colla-
gen, are being actively investigated.
Hyaluronate. Hyaluronate is a high molecular weight 
glycosaminoglycan with a structural role in the ex-
tracellular matrix. It is synthesized by hepatic stel-
late cells and cleared by specific uptake by endothelial 
cells. Increased plasma concentrations may be linked 
to endothelial dysfunction that occurs as fibrosis 
progresses.
Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1. Tissue in-
hibitor of metalloproteinase 1 (TIMP-1) is a member of 
the tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases (MMP) fam-
ily. These MMPs are secreted by fibroblasts and Kupffer 
cells and MMP-2 in particular is upregulated by type 
1 collagen: MMP-2 is probably involved in the break-
down of normal extracellular matrix. Tissue inhibitor of 
­metalloproteinase 1, which inhibits MMP-2, may also 
promote cell proliferation and have apoptotic properties. 
It is used in the calculation of the European liver fibrosis 
score (see below).
European liver fibrosis score (ELF). A combination 
of PIIINP, hyaluronate and TIMP-1 has been proposed 
as a better marker of fibrogenesis than the component 
parts on their own. The ELF score is produced from the 
equation below:
ELF
HA
[PIIINP]
= −
+
[
] ×
(
) +
×
+
−
×
7 412
0 681
0 775
1
0
.
ln
.
(ln
.
)
(ln[
]
TIMP
.
)
494
TABLE 13.1  Scoring systems for assessing 
fibrogenesis
Score
Components
PGA index
Prothrombin time, γGT, apolipoprotein 
A1 (± α2-macroglobulin)
Fibro Test
®
Haptoglobin, α2-macroglobulin, 
apolipoprotein A1, γGT, bilirubin, 
(± ALT)
Fibrometer™ 
test
Platelets, prothrombin time, AST, α2-
macroglobulin, hyaluronate, urea, 
age
Hepa Score
®
Bilirubin, γGT, α2-macroglobulin, 
hyaluronate, age, sex
ELF score
PIIINP, hyaluronate, TIMP-1
ALT, alanine aminotransferase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; 
PIIINP, amino-terminal procollagen type III; TIMP-1, Tissue inhibitor 
of metalloproteinase 1.
	
13  Assessment of hepatic function and ­investigation of jaundice	
245
All measurements are expressed as μg/L. Normal 
scores fall between −1.3 and +0.3.
The first major study of 1021 subjects with chronic 
liver disease of various causes showed a sensitivity of 90% 
and specificity of 92% for the presence of hepatic fibrosis. 
Further investigations into potential applications of the 
ELF score are ongoing.
USES OF LIVER FUNCTION TESTS
Differential diagnosis of jaundice
The differential diagnosis of jaundice is an exercise in 
applied physiology and anatomy. Provided the reader 
accepts that there is seldom a single mechanism, the tra-
ditional classification into pre-hepatic, hepatic and post-
hepatic remains useful. In each case, bilirubin is being 
produced faster than it can be cleared.
Pre-hepatic jaundice
In pre-hepatic jaundice, an increased bilirubin load is pre-
sented to the liver and the plasma bilirubin concentration 
reaches a steady state at a higher concentration, typically 
in the range 50–75 μmol/L. A haemolytic process due ei-
ther to fragile red cells (e.g. sickle cell disease, congenital 
spherocytosis) or an autoimmune attack on the red cells 
is usually implicated. The bilirubin is unconjugated and 
bound to albumin and thus does not appear in the urine, 
hence the term ‘acholuric jaundice’ is used to describe 
the jaundice accompanying haemolysis. Since there is 
no liver disease, the liver can conjugate and excrete the 
increased bilirubin load, but the amounts of urinary and 
faecal urobilinogen will be increased. As the haemoglobin 
concentration starts to fall as a result of the haemolytic 
process, the bone marrow will attempt to compensate by 
increasing the output of red cells. The maximum increase 
that the marrow can achieve (about eight times the nor-
mal rate) corresponds to a plasma bilirubin concentration 
of ~75 μmol/L.
If, however, haemolysis occurs at such a rate that com-
pensatory marrow hyperactivity cannot keep pace, then 
the haemoglobin concentration will fall and higher plasma 
bilirubin concentrations may be seen. On the other side 
of the equation, if the liver is damaged, then its ability to 
take up the bilirubin will be limited and concentrations of 
bilirubin >75 μmol/L may occur. Thus, when a patient is 
found to have mild jaundice and there is no bilirubin in 
the urine, examination of the haematological indices will 
usually be sufficient to make the diagnosis of some form 
of haemolytic anaemia, especially as other liver tests will, 
by contrast, be normal. If there is no evidence of hae-
molysis, the cause will usually be Gilbert syndrome (see 
below). Estimation of the conjugated and unconjugated 
fractions becomes of particular importance in determin-
ing if, in a patient already known to have chronic liver 
disease, haemolysis is contributing to deepening jaundice.
Urinary bilirubin and urobilinogen. The presence 
of bilirubin in urine (usually detected by commercially 
available dip-sticks) is always pathological and indicative 
of hepatic or biliary tract disease. Bilirubinuria may pre-
cede hyperbilirubinaemia and, therefore, be a very sensi-
tive test of impending liver damage, for example in the 
early, presymptomatic stage of viral hepatitis.
If bile pigments reach the gut in reduced amounts (as 
in obstructive jaundice), the amount of urobilinogen in 
the urine will decrease accordingly. If no urobilinogen 
can be detected on repeated testing over several days, 
complete biliary tract obstruction, the most common 
cause of which is pancreatic carcinoma, may be assumed. 
Although urine urobilinogen can be assessed qualitatively 
using dipsticks, testing is now rarely performed as there 
are much more reliable and accurate ways of diagnosing 
biliary obstruction.
Hepatic (hepatocellular) jaundice
This type of jaundice occurs in conditions characterized 
by primary damage to the hepatocytes, that is, acute and 
chronic hepatitis of any cause. The excess bilirubin is 
mainly conjugated.
Post-hepatic (cholestatic) jaundice
Cholestasis means failure of biliary secretion. As origi-
nally defined, the term referred to failure at the level of 
the hepatocytes, but in clinical practice it is more broadly 
defined to include obstruction to bile flow occurring any-
where between the biliary canalicular membrane of the 
hepatocyte and the gut. In cholestatic jaundice, the hy-
perbilirubinaemia is due to conjugated bilirubin.
Further investigation. The crucial decision for the clini-
cian to make in a patient with conjugated hyperbilirubinae-
mia is whether or not a surgical approach is appropriate, 
as misdiagnoses can have grave consequences. The role 
of the liver function tests is clear: it is to suggest the most 
appropriate second-line investigation. In general, if the 
plasma aminotransferases are elevated and there is only 
slight increase in ALP activity, the picture is regarded as 
‘hepatitic’. The approach is primarily medical manage-
ment, possibly guided by the result of a liver biopsy and 
other investigations. On the other hand, if the predomi-
nant rise is in ALP, the picture is regarded as ‘cholestatic’ 
and it is important to determine the level at which there 
is failure of bile flow. This is achieved using imaging tech-
niques, for example ultrasound examination, endoscopic 
retrograde cholangiography or magnetic ­resonance chol-
angiography. Obstruction to bile flow outside the liver is 
usually an indication for surgical intervention.
Imaging techniques have become so widely available 
and reliable that the great majority of patients with jaun-
dice of unknown origin will have at least an ultrasound 
or radiological examination irrespective of the liver func-
tion tests. Perhaps only in the primary care setting, if the 
clinical picture and ‘hepatitic’ liver function tests suggest 
acute hepatitis, will imaging not be undertaken.
The inherited hyperbilirubinaemias
The 
inherited 
hyperbilirubinaemias, 
manifested 
mainly in childhood, are considered here because 
246	
Clinical biochemistry
they illustrate specific disturbances of the pathways 
of bile pigment metabolism. Other than the specific 
defect, the liver functions normally and, apart from 
the plasma bilirubin, the results of most of the stan-
dard biochemical liver tests are within their reference 
ranges. Conventionally, these disorders are classified 
as ­conjugated and unconjugated types. Unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia is said to be present when 
<25 μmol/L or <20% of an increased bilirubin con-
centration is in the conjugated form.
Unconjugated types
Crigler–Najjar syndrome. This is an extremely rare 
condition, caused by a complete absence (type 1) or con-
siderable reduction (type 2) of UDP-glucuronosyl trans-
ferase activity with respect to bilirubin glucuronidation. 
It is inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. The 
condition shows considerable heterogeneity. There is a 
failure to conjugate bilirubin and the child becomes very 
deeply jaundiced within the first few days of life, most 
of the plasma bilirubin being in the unconjugated state. 
The unconjugated bilirubin can cross the blood–brain 
barrier and be deposited in the basal ganglia, leading to 
characteristic neurological abnormalities termed kernic-
terus, which can include extrapyramidal-type movement 
disorders, visual defects and hearing problems. In the 
most severe form (type 1), death usually ensues within 
the first year of life, although repeated phototherapy has 
been used successfully to reduce bilirubin concentra-
tions and liver transplantation is now a viable option. In 
Crigler–Najjar syndrome type 2, the activity of UDP-
glucuronosyl transferase can be increased by giving phe-
nobarbital (which induces synthesis of the enzyme) in 
addition to phototherapy. Survival into adulthood is now 
well described.
Gilbert syndrome. This, in contrast to Crigler–Najjar 
syndrome, is a common (occurring in approximately 
7% of the population) and entirely benign condition, 
characterized by recurrent episodes of mild jaundice, 
the plasma bilirubin concentration being <100 μmol/L 
and the only abnormality in the standard liver tests. 
Jaundice tends to be more pronounced when the af-
fected individual is tired, has an intercurrent illness (e.g. 
influenza) or has been fasting. It should be remembered 
that caloric deprivation often occurs during hospital 
admission for any reason, and the resultant jaundice in 
an individual with Gilbert syndrome may be regarded 
as indicating a significant hepatic complication if the 
diagnosis is not made.
Gilbert syndrome is caused by a reduction in the concen-
tration of the isoform of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase, 
UGT-1A, responsible for bilirubin conjugation, owing to 
polymorphisms in the promoter region of the UGT-1A 
gene that reduces its expression. A two base-pair addi-
tion (TA) in the TA(6) TAA element of the UGT-1A pro-
moter sequence, when present in the homozygous state 
(TA(7)/TA(7)), results in an inability to produce sufficient 
UGT-1A to respond to increases in demand for bilirubin 
conjugation. Genotyping for the defect is now available 
as a routine test for the syndrome, and has superseded 
other tests.
Conjugated types
Dubin–Johnson syndrome. This is an uncommon, be-
nign condition inherited in an autosomal recessive manner 
and characterized by decreased biliary canalicular trans-
port of conjugated bilirubin and organic anions. Dubin–
Johnson syndrome is caused by ­mutations in MRP2, the 
gene encoding multidrug resistance-­associated protein 
2, and presents with mild fluctuating jaundice at any age 
from the neonatal period to adult life, usually with normal 
aminotransferase and ALP activities. It is often precipi-
tated by use of the contraceptive pill or during pregnancy 
and, with the increasing availability of mutational analy-
sis, is now frequently revealed during screening of family 
members with the condition. The liver biopsy shows black 
coarse inclusions of an as yet unidentified pigment.
A second characteristic finding in this syndrome is that 
most of the urinary coproporphyrin is type I, whereas in 
unaffected subjects it is mainly type III. The total amount 
of urinary coproporphyrin is normal and the abnormality 
is probably related to a differential excretory capacity for 
the two isomers.
Rotor syndrome. Like Dubin–Johnson syndrome, this 
is an autosomal recessive condition characterized by a 
moderate fluctuating jaundice, few symptoms and hav-
ing a good prognosis. However, several differences from 
Dubin–Johnson syndrome are evident: in particular there 
is no pigment in the liver. The total urine coproporphy-
rin content is high but with a normal ratio of isomers. 
The gene mutation causing this syndrome has not yet 
been identified.
Monitoring response to therapy
Liver biopsy, sophisticated imaging tests and specific 
biochemical tests, outlined in Chapter 14, are helpful 
in establishing a precise diagnosis in liver disease, but 
they have limited utility in repeated appraisal of disease 
progression or monitoring response to treatment over 
short periods. This reflects both their cost (in the case 
of imaging) and safety aspects (in the case of liver bi-
opsy). Herein lies the major role of the standard liver 
function tests.
There are three broad situations in which frequent 
monitoring is useful.
1.	 Documenting the return of ‘normality’ in acute 
conditions and early detection of progression to 
chronicity. For example, following an acute attack 
of viral hepatitis B or C, a variable proportion of 
patients will progress to a chronic carrier state, 
sometimes with progressive liver disease ending in 
cirrhosis and perhaps liver cell cancer. The chronic 
state is defined as the presence of signs of liver dis-
ease and/or abnormal liver tests six months after the 
onset of the acute illness, and heralds the need for 
therapeutic intervention. Monitoring of patients 
with hepatitis A is usually not necessary unless the 
attack is particularly severe. Under such circum-
stances, progressive deterioration in liver tests and 
prolongation of the prothrombin time may herald 
the onset of acute liver failure and necessitate refer-
ral to a specialist unit.
	
13  Assessment of hepatic function and ­investigation of jaundice	
247
2.	 Monitoring response to treatment of chronic condi-
tions. Good examples here are in the immunosuppres-
sive treatment of autoimmune hepatitis and antiviral 
therapy in chronic viral hepatitis; other examples are 
described in Chapter 14. Specifically, monitoring of 
changes in aminotransferase ­acti­vities is a useful (and 
cheap) means of assessing response in autoimmune 
hepatitis (along with measurement of plasma IgG 
concentration), and as an adjunct to detection of the 
reduction in (or clearance of) viral genomic material 
from the blood in chronic viral hepatitis.
3.	 Detecting 
hepatotoxicity 
caused 
by 
drugs. 
Monitoring of liver function tests is undertaken for 
all drugs during clinical trials prior to licensing; any 
abnormalities are taken as evidence of hepatotoxicity 
(see Chapter 14). In some instances, where a drug is 
licensed, but an acceptable risk of toxicity (mild and 
reversible) has been identified, monitoring may be 
recommended as a part of continuing surveillance.
Neonatal jaundice
Healthy full-term babies may be jaundiced from the 2nd to 
the 8th day of life, and premature babies from the 2nd 
to the 10th, or even the 14th day. This so-called ‘physi-
ological’ jaundice seldom exceeds 100 μmol/L and is pre-
dominantly unconjugated, reflecting a combination of 
increased red cell destruction, decreased hepatic uptake 
and reabsorption from the gut. Jaundice detectable on 
the first day of life, or outside the range described above, 
is pathological, as is the finding of conjugated hyperbili-
rubinaemia at any time.
When the concentration of bilirubin is very high 
(>300 μmol/L in full-term infants, but lower in prema-
ture babies), the fat-soluble unconjugated bilirubin may 
cross the blood–brain barrier and cause brain damage 
(kernicterus). While measurement of plasma bilirubin 
is not indicated as routine in jaundiced babies, it does 
become important when the jaundice is deepening so 
that treatment by phototherapy and/or exchange trans-
fusion can be instituted and kernicterus prevented.
The neonatal hepatitis syndrome
This syndrome, of which there are several causes, de-
scribes a neonate usually less than one month old with 
pale stools, dark urine and hepatomegaly, who is failing to 
thrive. In common with adult practice, the major problem 
is to identify those patients that are amenable to effective 
surgical intervention, particularly those having congenital 
biliary atresia (see Chapter 25). It is crucial to confirm that 
the biliary tract is atretic before embarking on surgery.
Tests of bile duct patency. The Rose Bengal dye test 
has proved useful in the past for identifying patients with 
extrahepatic neonatal obstruction. If <10% of an intrave-
nously administered dose is excreted in the stools over a 
72 h period, this is strong evidence for biliary obstruction. 
Currently, technetium-labelled hepatobiliary imaging 
agents such as hydroxyindolediacetic acid (HIDA) are 
more often used than Rose Bengal. In combination with 
liver biopsy, accurate results are achieved in the great ma-
jority of cases.
ABNORMAL LIVER FUNCTION TESTS  
IN ASYMPTOMATIC PATIENTS
With the use of large automated analysers, health screen-
ing programmes and medical examinations for insurance 
purposes, clinical biochemists are increasingly consulted 
about the significance of abnormal liver tests in patients 
who are entirely asymptomatic. While the potential for 
generating needless anxiety is great and not all conditions 
diagnosed are treatable, much evidence suggests that such 
abnormalities should be taken seriously, and that referral 
for a specialist opinion for further investigation is often 
indicated and justifiable.
Bilirubin
Isolated increases in plasma bilirubin usually indicate 
Gilbert syndrome. The concentration is <100 μmol/L and 
usually in the range 20–50 μmol/L. This hyperbilirubinae-
mia is unconjugated and other standard liver function tests 
are normal (see p. 246). Measurement of haemoglobin, re-
ticulocyte count and, if necessary, haptoglobin will elimi-
nate haemolysis as a cause. Genetic testing is available.
Alkaline phosphatase
In young people, an isolated increase in the activity of this 
enzyme is often physiological. Increased activity occurs 
during periods of rapid bone growth and during preg-
nancy. In older females, the finding of isolated raised ALP 
activity of hepatic origin may be the first manifestation 
of primary biliary cirrhosis and estimation of antimito-
chondrial antibody (see Chapter 14) will speed the diag-
nostic process. Alternatively (more commonly in males), 
it may be suggestive of primary sclerosing cholangitis. 
Subclinical malignant liver disease (primary or second-
ary), usually found to be a space-occupying mass within 
the liver, may also produce an isolated rise in plasma al-
kaline phosphatase activity. Benign transient hyperphos-
phatasaemia (see p. 240) is an important condition to 
recognize, as ALP will return to normal over a 6–8-week 
period after any infection has cleared and invasive inves-
tigations can be avoided.
Aminotransferases
In about 60% of patients, isolated increases in the ac-
tivities of these enzymes will be attributable to fatty in-
filtration of the liver associated with obesity, diabetes 
mellitus or excessive alcohol consumption. However, 
they may also be due to certain drugs and herbal rem-
edies. Once coexistent drug administration has been 
excluded, most remaining individuals who have persis-
tently elevated enzyme activities will prove to have some 
form of chronic hepatitis. Many of these, particularly 
subjects born outside the UK or those with a history of 
drug abuse, may have occult chronic viral hepatitis (B 
or C) – although subclinical hepatitis A is also a possi-
bility. Others will have elevated plasma immunoglobulin 
concentrations and high plasma titres of autoantibodies 
(see Chapter 14); on histological examination, cirrhosis 
will often be present. A small proportion will have other 
248	
Clinical biochemistry
conditions such as haemochromatosis, Wilson disease or 
α1-antitrypsin deficiency.
γ-Glutamyltransferase
Marked and persistent elevation in γGT activity may 
be an indicator of unrecognized excessive alcohol con-
sumption, but it is by no means specific and may also be 
found in most subclinical liver diseases, or be a result of 
induction of the enzyme by a number of drugs, compo-
nents of herbal remedies or environmental agents. Some 
non-hepatic conditions, including pancreatic disease, 
hypothyroidism and certain neurological disorders, may 
also give rise to isolated increases in γGT activity. The 
increasing prevalence of obesity, type 2 diabetes mellitus 
and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) has meant 
that an isolated increase in γGT is most commonly a con-
sequence of fat deposition in the liver.
NORMAL LIVER FUNCTION TESTS IN  
THE PRESENCE OF OVERT LIVER DISEASE
Standard liver function tests within the reference range 
do not exclude chronic liver disease. Entirely normal test 
results may be present in patients with ‘inactive’ cirrhosis, 
that is, where there is little or no ongoing liver damage 
or inflammation. Common examples include alcoholic 
cirrhosis after abstention from drinking and autoimmune 
hepatitis that is well controlled on immunosuppressive 
therapy. In the presence of normal standard liver func-
tion tests, signs of portal hypertension (such as oesopha-
geal varices, which are usually indicators of chronic liver 
disease) should also raise the possibility of portal vein 
thrombosis. In this situation, the INR is often modestly 
prolonged.
ROLE OF LIVER FUNCTION TESTS IN  
ASSESSING PROGNOSIS
Orthotopic liver transplantation for liver failure is now 
a well-established form of management in severe acute 
and chronic liver disease. Nonetheless, the operation is 
not without risk and precise timing of the procedure is 
still difficult. Ideally, it should be undertaken only when 
the patient’s life expectancy is less than what might be ex-
pected after the operation. Several models that aim to per-
mit calculation of likely survival without transplantation 
have been developed. Some ‘standard’ liver function tests 
figure prominently among the variables considered in 
these models.
Chronic liver disease
An early system, still widely applied, is the Child–
Turcotte classification, which was later modified by 
Pugh et al. (Table 13.2). This was an entirely empirical 
formula designed primarily to assess the degree of risk 
of liver failure in patients undergoing surgical opera-
tions, but has since been used as a general measure of 
severity of liver disease and hence likely survival. The 
Child–Turcotte–Pugh (CTP) classification has been 
criticized on the grounds that two of the measures (as-
cites and encephalopathy) are subjective, and that the 
patient is assigned one of three scores that do not re-
flect a spectrum of overall impairment of liver function 
and hence the need for transplantation. In addition, a 
‘ceiling effect’ occurs when patients with laboratory val-
ues greater than the defined upper limits are not scored 
as being more ill than those falling within these limits. 
Furthermore, the CTP classification does not take into 
account the terminal stages of liver impairment when 
renal failure supervenes, a complication that indicates a 
very poor outcome.
The need for more robust and objective criteria 
on which to base selection for liver transplantation 
has prompted the recent development of a Model for 
End Stage Liver Disease (MELD) scoring system. 
This prognostic model for cirrhosis draws on the anal-
ysis of prospective datasets using logistic regression 
analysis and receiver operating characteristics, and 
uses serum total bilirubin and creatinine concentra-
tions and INR.
The equation used to calculate the MELD score is:
R =
×
×
(
)+
×
×
9 6
88 4
3 8
17 1
.
ln
.
/
.
ln
.
creatininein mol
L
totalbilirubi
µ
n in mol
L
INR
µ
/
.
ln
.
(
)+
×
(
)+
11 2
6 43
MELD scores derived from many patients in a wide 
range of institutions dealing with the selection of patients 
for liver transplantation, fall within a range of values that 
vary from 6 (less ill) to 40 (gravely ill). The scores are 
used to decide whether an individual needs an urgent 
liver transplant within the next three months, with pa-
tients that have a MELD score of >16 being prioritized 
for transplantation.
TABLE 13.2  Pugh’s modification of Child’s classification for assessing the severity of liver disease
Clinical and biochemical measurements
1
2
3
Ascites
Absent
Slight
Moderate
Encephalopathy (grade)
None
1 and 2
3 and 4
Bilirubin (μmol/L)
<25
25–40
>40
Albumin (g/L)
>35
28–35
<28
International normalized ratio (INR)
<1.7
1.71–2.3
>2.3
The disease is considered mild in patients scoring 5 or 6 points (Grade A), moderate in those with 7–9 points (Grade B) and severe in those 
with 10–15 points (Grade C).
(From Pugh R N H, Murray-Lyon I M, Dawson J L et al. 1973 Transection of the oesophagus for bleeding oesophageal varices. British Journal 
of Surgery 60:646–50, with permission).
	
13  Assessment of hepatic function and ­investigation of jaundice	
249
Acute liver failure
Liver transplantation for acute liver failure is now rou-
tinely performed but, again, laboratory investigations 
are important in assessing the likelihood of survival 
without transplantation. For example, in patients with 
paracetamol-induced acute liver failure, an arterial hy-
drogen ion concentration of >50 nmol/L (pH <7.3) 
or, if this feature is absent, the combination of grade 3 
encephalopathy, an INR >6.5 and serum creatinine of 
>300 μmol/L, indicate a very slight chance of spontane-
ous recovery and represent a strong indication to proceed 
to transplantation.
CONCLUSION
There are three categories of liver function tests. These 
are: the standard tests, for example plasma bilirubin and 
albumin concentrations and the activities of various en-
zymes; clearance tests, and tests used in the management 
of specific liver diseases.
In general, the standard liver function tests are poor 
indicators of hepatic function and seldom provide a 
specific diagnosis; it is important not to over-interpret 
their results. They may, however, provide a guide to 
further investigations that may give a specific diagno-
sis, for example imaging by isotopes, ultrasound or ra-
diography or histological examination of liver biopsy 
material. The standard liver function tests can be of 
value prognostically and in screening for liver disease, 
and are vital in the monitoring of liver disease and its 
response to treatment.
Tests for specific liver disease, for example plasma α-
fetoprotein, copper and caeruloplasmin, can be diagnos-
tic and are also used in management.
Further reading
Clermont RJ, Chalmers TC. The transaminase tests in liver disease. 
Medicine 1967;46:197–207. 
The classic paper on the subject of aminotransferases as a test of liver function.
Ferraris R, Colombatti G, Fiorentini MT et  al. Diagnostic value of 
serum bile acids and routine liver function tests in hepatobiliary 
diseases. Sensitivity, specificity and predictive value. Dig Dis Sci 
1983;28:129–36.
Gressner AM, Gao CF, Gressner OA. Non-invasive biomarkers for 
monitoring the fibrogenic process in liver: a short survey. World J 
Gastroenterol 2009;15:2433–40.
Hannuksela ML, Liisanantti MK, Nissinen AE et  al. Biochemical 
markers of alcoholism. Clin Chem Lab Med 2007;45:953–61.
Hulcrantz R, Glaumann H, Lindberg G et al. Liver investigation in 149 
asymptomatic patients with moderately elevated activities of serum 
aminotransferases. Scand J Gastroenterol 1986;21:109–13. 
An important study discussing the significance of liver function test 
abnormalities detected in asymptomatic individuals.
Kamath PS, Weisner RH, Malinchoc M et al. A model to predict survival 
in patients with end-stage liver disease. Hepatology 2001;33:464–70.
Kaplan MM. Serum alkaline phosphatase – another piece is added to the 
puzzle. Hepatology 1986;6:526–8. 
Describes the history of the use of serum alkaline phosphatase.
Kunde SS, Lazenby AJ, Clements RH et al. Spectrum of NAFLD and 
diagnostic implications of the proposed new normal range for serum 
ALT in obese women. Hepatology 2005;42:650–6.
Moussavian SM, Becker RC, Piedmeyer JL et  al. Serum gamma-
glutamyl transpeptidase and chronic alcoholism: influence of alcohol 
ingestion and liver disease. Dig Dis Sci 1985;30:211–4.
O’Grady J, Alexander GJM, Hayllar K et al. Early indicators of prognosis 
in fulminant hepatic failure. Gastroenterology 1989;97:439–45.
Use of liver tests to assess prognosis in fulminant hepatic failure.
Penn R, Worthington DJ. Is gamma-glutamyltransferase a misleading 
test? Br Med J 1983;286:531–4.
Pugh RNH, Murray-Lyon IM, Dawson JL et  al. Transection of the 
oesophagus for bleeding oesophageal varices. Br J Surg 1973;60:646–50. 
Description of the Pugh modification of Child’s classification of the 
severity of cirrhosis.
Rappaport AM, Borowy ZJ, Laugheed WM et  al. Subdivision of 
hexagonal liver lobules into a structural and functional unit: role in 
hepatic physiology and pathology. Anat Rec 1954;119:11–34. 
Classic paper on the relationship between structure and function in the liver.
Trauner M, Boyer JL. Bile salt transporters: molecular characterization, 
function, and regulation. Physiol Rev 2003;83:633–71.
250
CLASSIFICATION OF LIVER DISEASE
Liver disease is best classified according to its presumed 
aetiology (Box 14.1). This is then qualified by the patho-
logical state of the liver where known or inferred: usu-
ally cirrhosis, inflammation (i.e. hepatitis) or cholestasis. 
Thus, terms such as alcoholic cirrhosis, viral hepatitis 
or cholestasis of pregnancy all conform to this classifi-
cation. Some idea of the severity of the disease is given 
by the terms ‘compensated’ and ‘decompensated’. The 
term ‘compensated’ implies that, although the liver has 
been damaged it can, because of its large functional re-
serve, still function adequately. On the other hand, the 
term ‘decompensated’ implies that the liver is failing in 
some vital function. The terms are not precisely defined, 
but the development of ascites with or without peripheral 
oedema, jaundice or hepatic encephalopathy, in a patient 
known to have liver disease, would all be regarded as signs 
of decompensation. Finally, the presumed evolution of 
the disease in time is given by the terms fulminant, acute, 
subacute or chronic. In chronic liver disease, additional 
terminology often employed to provide an indication of 
severity, especially when assessing histological changes in 
the liver, includes the terms active or inactive and mild, 
moderate or severe.
ACUTE HEPATITIS AND ITS SEQUELAE
The term ‘hepatitis’ indicates that there is hepatic inflam-
mation, for which there are many causes: viral infections, 
drugs and toxins (including alcohol) are common, while 
C H A P T E R  1 4
Acute and chronic liver disease
Adrian Bomford  •  Roy A. Sherwood
CHAPTER OUTLINE
CLASSIFICATION OF LIVER DISEASE  250
ACUTE HEPATITIS AND ITS SEQUELAE  250
Differential diagnosis  251
Acute viral hepatitis  251
ACUTE LIVER FAILURE  253
Laboratory features  253
Laboratory criteria for liver 
transplantation  253
CHRONIC HEPATITIS  254
Differential diagnosis of chronic 
hepatitis  254
PRIMARY BILIARY CIRRHOSIS  256
PRIMARY SCLEROSING  
CHOLANGITIS  256
ALCOHOLIC LIVER DISEASE  257
Ethanol metabolism  257
Liver pathology in alcoholic liver 
disease  257
Use of laboratory tests in clinical 
practice  258
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 258
THE CONCEPT OF CIRRHOSIS  259
Hepatic encephalopathy  259
Vascular disturbances in cirrhosis  259
Ascites  259
Acute kidney injury  260
Sex hormones and their binding 
proteins  261
Glucose intolerance  263
DRUGS AND THE LIVER  263
NEOPLASTIC DISEASE OF THE LIVER  
AND BILIARY TRACT  264
Hepatocellular carcinoma and 
α-fetoprotein  264
PARENTERAL NUTRITION  264
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS  264
INHERITED METABOLIC DISORDERS INVOLVING 
THE LIVER  265
Iron overload and hereditary 
haemochromatosis  265
Wilson disease  266
α1-Antitrypsin deficiency  268
The hepatic porphyrias  268
Cystic fibrosis  268
Other inherited metabolic diseases  269
LIVER TRANSPLANTATION  270
Preoperative assessment  271
The immediate postoperative  
period  271
Intermediate follow-up  271
Long-term monitoring  271
CONCLUSION  272
	
14  Acute and chronic liver disease	
251
autoimmune causes are infrequently encountered in the 
primary care setting, but in a tertiary centre make up a 
substantial proportion of patients. The standard ‘liver 
function tests’ (LFTs) are useful to determine that hepa-
titis is present, how severe it is, to document the progres-
sion of the disease and to assess the response to therapy. 
However, their role in identifying the aetiology of the 
inflammation is limited.
When the patient presents with an acute hepatitis, the 
liver function tests characteristically show the so-called 
‘hepatitic’ picture:
•	 a pronounced rise in plasma aspartate or alanine 
aminotransferase (AST, ALT) activity, often to 
>1000 U/L
•	 a modest (less than twice the upper limit of the ref-
erence range) increase in plasma alkaline phospha-
tase (ALP) activity
•	 bilirubinuria and, in more severe cases, hyperbilirubi-
naemia, which is clinically detectable as jaundice when 
the total plasma bilirubin rises to >40–50 μmol/L.
As a broad generalization, plasma activities of the ami-
notransferases reflect the severity of the disease. Certainly, 
patients who progress to fulminant hepatitis usually have 
exceptionally high plasma activities, with elevations of 
20–40 times the upper reference limit. However, the 
relationship is not strictly quantitative, for lower activi-
ties (2–3 times the upper reference limit) can be found in 
individuals with severe hepatic necroinflammatory activ-
ity on histological examination of liver biopsy material.
Differential diagnosis
There are two aspects to this part of the diagnostic pro-
cess. The first is to distinguish between viral hepatitis 
and other, non-viral, causes of a hepatitic illness and 
then, within each group, to identify the causative agent. 
Generally speaking, the standard LFTs are not helpful in 
separating viral from non-viral causes, and further sero-
logical testing, radiological imaging or histological ex-
amination will be required.
Plasma aminotransferase activities are not usually 
grossly raised in alcoholic hepatitis; in this condition, a ratio 
of AST:ALT of >2 is characteristic, while in hepatitis due 
to other agents the ratio is usually <2. In fulminant hepati-
tis, aminotransferase activities may be close to the reference 
ranges by the time the patient reaches hospital, empha-
sizing that results of LFTs can change rapidly with time 
and depend on the particular clinical course that ensues. 
Generally speaking, acute infection with hepatitis B virus is 
more severe than that caused by hepatitis A, and biochemi-
cal abnormalities are more protracted. Raised plasma IgM 
concentration and atypical lymphocytes are more charac-
teristic of type A, but the standard LFTs do not permit dis-
tinction between the different types of viral hepatitis.
BOX 14.1	
Classification of liver disease according to aetiology
Viral
•	 Hepatitis A, B, C, D and E
•	 Epstein–Barr virus
•	 Cytomegalovirus
•	 Herpes simplex
•	 ‘Exotic viruses’
Genetic/metabolic
•	 Haemochromatosis
•	 Wilson disease
•	 Hereditary hyperbilirubinaemias
•	 α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
•	 Cystic fibrosis
•	 Hepatic porphyria
•	 Amyloid
Bacterial/spirochaetal
•	 Leptospirosis
•	 Tuberculosis
•	 Pyogenic liver abscess
Protozoal
•	 Kala-azar (visceral leishmaniasis)
•	 Amoebiasis
•	 Malaria
Toxic/drug induced
•	 Alcohol
•	 Drugs
•	 Poisons
Cryptogenic
Biliary tract disease/obstruction
•	 Tumours
•	 Strictures
•	 Gallstones
•	 Biliary atresia
Miscellaneous
•	 Polycystic liver disease
•	 Congenital hepatic fibrosis
•	 Sarcoid
•	 Liver disease in pregnancy
Autoimmune
•	 Autoimmune hepatitis
•	 Primary biliary cirrhosis
•	 Primary sclerosing cholangitis
Vascular
•	 Budd–Chiari syndrome
•	 Portal vein thrombosis
•	 Veno-occlusive disease
Neoplastic
•	 Primary
•	 Malignant
•	 Benign
•	 Secondary
Helminthic
•	 Ascariasis
•	 Toxocariasis
•	 Clonorchis
•	 Schistosomiasis
252	
Clinical biochemistry
Acute viral hepatitis
The specific diagnosis is established by serological tests 
for the hepatitis viruses (Table 14.1). The extent to which 
individual patients require biochemical and serological 
investigation depends on the clinical situation. For ex-
ample, in children, a clinical diagnosis can be established 
with reasonable certainty if the clinical features are com-
patible with hepatitis A (infectious hepatitis), particularly 
if the physician knows of local occurrence. In adults, par-
ticularly where there has been no contact with infectious 
hepatitis, LFTs should be performed together with ap-
propriate serology.
After a variable incubation period (the duration of 
which depends on the type of virus and the viral load), 
there is usually a rise in plasma aminotransferase activi-
ties, although some infants can be infected without any 
disturbance of LFTs. In many cases, particularly among 
young children, an elevated AST or ALT is the only in-
dication of the hepatitic process and the patient remains 
asymptomatic. When symptoms do develop, they are 
coincident with the maximal aminotransferase activities. 
Taking infection with the hepatitis A virus as an example, 
the patient begins to feel unwell and lethargic and may 
become anorexic, with transient diarrhoea being fre-
quent. Pyrexia can develop and the liver is found to be 
enlarged and tender. The urine may become dark (owing 
to bilirubinuria), the stools pale, and in more severe cases, 
jaundice becomes evident a few days later. Symptoms 
tend to resolve with the onset of jaundice, which usually 
subsides over a few days. Following infection with this 
virus, the patient may, despite being asymptomatic, en-
ter a cholestatic phase. This is heralded by rising plasma 
activities of ALP and γ-glutamyltransferase (γGT) that 
can persist for many weeks and may cause considerable 
diagnostic confusion. Particularly in the older patient, it 
is an indication for ultrasound examination to rule out 
obstruction of the biliary tract. The jaundice usually be-
gins to resolve before aminotransferase activities return 
to the reference range, but it has been a frequent obser-
vation that bilirubin may disappear from the urine while 
the patient remains clinically jaundiced. The explanation 
for this situation lies in the development of ‘bili-albumin’ 
(see p. 239).
Outcome of acute viral hepatitis
There are three main possible outcomes of acute viral 
hepatitis, each with its own characteristic progression of 
clinical features and pattern of LFTs.
Complete resolution. As noted above, the plasma ami-
notransferase activities start to rise before the onset of 
jaundice and often before hepatomegaly is clinically de-
tectable. Activities begin to fall coincidentally with the 
onset of jaundice and symptoms, and return to normal 
(AST before ALT) at the same time as, or shortly before, 
the plasma bilirubin concentration. This is the natural 
history in the great majority of patients and, unless jaun-
dice develops, many patients will be unaware that they 
have had an acute hepatitis.
Progression to chronic liver disease. This mode of 
progression is limited to viral hepatitis types B and C, but 
a relapsing course for hepatitis A is well described and 
there are occasional reports of type A triggering autoim-
mune hepatitis in susceptible individuals. Persistence of 
symptoms, signs and/or abnormal liver tests (particularly 
aminotransferase activity in the range of 2–10 times the 
upper reference limit) for more than six months consti-
tutes, by definition, chronic hepatitis (see below). The 
accompanying changes in viral serology are complex and 
will not be considered in the present discussion.
Progression to acute liver failure. Very rarely (in <1% 
of patients), any type of viral hepatitis may pursue a ful-
minant course. This course of events is characterized 
by grossly elevated plasma aminotransferase activities, 
TABLE 14.1  Summary of differential diagnosis of acute viral hepatitis caused by  
true hepatotropic viruses
Nomenclature
Type of virus
Incubation 
period
Spread
Progression 
to chronic 
liver disease
Other features
Serological 
diagnosis
HAV
Picornavirus (RNA)
1–6 weeks
Faeco-oral
No
Raised IgM, 
atypical 
lymphocytes
IgM class 
anti-HAV
HBV
Hepadnavirus 
(DNA)
6 weeks– 
6 months
Parenteral
Yes
 
HBsAg and IgM 
class anti-HBc
HCV
Flavivirus (RNA)
2–26 weeks
Parenteral
Yes
Raised IgG 
and γGT; 
polyphasic 
AST/ALT 
changes
Anti-HCV 
antibodies; 
detection of 
HCV-RNA by 
PCR
HDV (Delta)
RNA, HBV-
dependent viroid
Uncertain
Mainly 
parenteral
Yes
 
IgM class 
anti-HDV
HEV
Calicivirus (RNA)
5–10 weeks
Faeco-oral
No
The major 
cause of 
enteric NANB
Anti-HEV (not 
yet routinely 
available)
HAV, hepatitis A virus; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HDV, hepatitis D virus; HEV, hepatitis E virus; NANB, non-A, non-B; PCR, polymerase chain 
reaction; for other ­abbreviations, refer to text.
	
14  Acute and chronic liver disease	
253
an increasingly prolonged prothrombin time (PT) or 
­international normalized ratio (INR) and the develop-
ment of hepatic encephalopathy, which may occasionally 
develop before jaundice becomes a prominent feature. 
The prognosis is poor. The syndrome of acute liver fail-
ure (ALF), one cause of which is acute viral hepatitis, is 
described in more detail below.
ACUTE LIVER FAILURE
Acute liver failure implies the development of severe he-
patic dysfunction within six months of the first onset of 
liver disease and in the absence of any pre-existing liver 
disease. Hepatic encephalopathy and a prolonged and 
persistent increase in PT are the characteristic features, 
and where these occur within eight weeks of the first 
symptom, the condition is known as fulminant hepatic 
failure (FHF). In those who survive, there are no long-
term hepatic sequelae. The commonest cause in the UK 
is paracetamol overdose (Chapter 40) followed by viral 
hepatitis types B and E; ALF due to hepatitis C virus is ex-
tremely rare. Rarer causes include adverse drug reactions, 
other viruses, Amanita mushroom poisoning, Wilson dis-
ease, secondary hepatic malignancy, lymphoma and rec-
reational drugs.
Laboratory features
Laboratory investigation is aimed at determining the 
cause of the ALF as well as assessing its consequences 
and complications (which are very similar irrespective 
of the aetiology). Measurement of the blood concentra-
tion of paracetamol is important, particularly in view of 
the beneficial effect of treatment by N-acetylcysteine 
infusion. The serology of viral causes is complicated 
because the hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) may 
become undetectable before the patient reaches hos-
pital. In general, with ALF due to causes other than 
paracetamol overdose, it is usually too late for spe-
cific treatment for the condition (e.g. d-penicillamine 
for Wilson disease) to be effective and management is 
by general supportive measures and, if feasible, liver 
transplantation.
The standard LFTs show a grossly hepatitic picture at 
the time of onset of the encephalopathy. Jaundice is deep 
and progressive and plasma aminotransferase activities of 
several thousand U/L are usually found, although these 
may have fallen considerably by the time the patient is 
sent to a referral centre. A rare cause of FHF is massive 
metastatic tumour infiltration. This is characterized by 
hepatomegaly (in contrast to the reduced-size liver found 
with most other causes of FHF) and a much more chole-
static picture – such that the AST:ALP ratio is <4 rather 
than the converse, as in most other cases.
Coagulation defects are a consistent finding. Plasma 
concentrations of fibrinogen are decreased as are those 
of factors II, V, VII, IX and X. These are reflected in a 
prolonged PT or INR which, in the UK, is used as the 
main measure of severity of disease and is the most widely 
used parameter for following progress. Hypoglycaemia, 
owing to a combination of impaired gluconeogenesis and 
glycogen breakdown and synthesis, is such a consistent 
finding that glucose infusion is a routine part of manage-
ment, particularly during transfer to a referral centre. 
Where paracetamol is involved, it may interfere with 
blood glucose estimation, resulting in erroneously high 
values. Acute kidney injury is a frequent and ominous 
complication that occurs in at least 50% of patients with 
FHF, particularly with paracetamol poisoning. In about 
one-half of patients, the renal lesion is acute tubular ne-
crosis, and in the remainder it is ‘functional’ renal injury 
(see p. 261).
Laboratory criteria for liver transplantation
Currently, with the best supportive care, 30–50% of 
­patients with fulminant hepatic failure will survive; the 
figures are rather better for those with paracetamol 
overdose and rather poorer for those with viral hepa-
titis, particularly those classified as non-A–E, or drug 
reactions. This poor prognosis has led to the introduc-
tion of liver transplantation as a therapeutic option. 
It is clearly important to reserve this option for those 
with the worst prognosis and who are most unlikely to 
recover with supportive treatment. With this in mind, 
a number of laboratory-based criteria have been iden-
tified to ascertain the likelihood of death. The major 
adverse factors are an arterial hydrogen ion concentra-
tion >50 nmol/L (pH <7.3), and progression to grade 
III coma (see p. 259) with an INR of >10 and plasma 
creatinine concentration >300 μmol/L. Recently, there 
has been considerable interest in the measurement of 
plasma factor V concentration. If the ratio of factor V 
to factor VIII is very low, the chance of survival without 
transplantation is very small.
CHRONIC HEPATITIS
Chronic hepatitis is usually defined as a condition in 
which clinical or biochemical features of liver disease 
persist for more than six months. However, it has be-
come clear that many patients can have the condition 
for much longer periods before it manifests itself in this 
way. Indeed, occasionally, such individuals may present 
with what at first appears to be an acute hepatitis that, 
on further investigation, proves to be an acute exacerba-
tion of a previously asymptomatic chronic process (see 
below). On histological grounds, the condition was pre-
viously classified into two categories: chronic persistent 
hepatitis (CPH), defined as inflammation confined to 
the portal tracts with no necrosis of hepatocytes, and 
chronic active hepatitis (CAH) characterized by inflam-
matory cells spilling out into the hepatic parenchyma 
and damaging periportal hepatocytes in a hallmark pat-
tern described as ‘piecemeal necrosis’. Chronic per-
sistent hepatitis was believed to be a benign condition 
of little clinical significance, with a good prognosis. 
Chronic active hepatitis, in contrast, was envisaged as 
a disorder with a more serious prognosis, which fre-
quently progressed to cirrhosis, with the inflammatory 
activity often continuing even after cirrhosis developed 
(so-called ‘active cirrhosis’).
254	
Clinical biochemistry
Although CPH and CAH were purely histological 
descriptions of the morphological changes seen in pa-
tients with chronic liver disease, they were embraced by 
hepatologists and gastroenterologists as clinical entities. 
However, during the 1970s and 1980s, it was increasingly 
recognized that the associated changes could be found 
in patients with several quite distinct causes of chronic 
hepatitis (Table 14.2). Somewhat surprisingly, rather than 
questioning the validity of CPH and CAH as distinct syn-
dromes, this led to expansion of the list of diseases con-
sidered to be capable of causing them. By the 1990s, the 
previously accepted view that CPH was associated with a 
good prognosis was being challenged, because it became 
apparent that CPH and CAH are changes at either end 
of a spectrum of morphological changes seen in chronic 
hepatitis, and that transitions between them can and do 
occur during flares of disease activity and periods of re-
mission, regardless of the aetiology of the process.
Other criteria for CPH and CAH were also found 
to be untenable. A requirement for markedly elevated 
plasma aminotransferase activities for diagnosis of CAH 
could not be upheld because it was recognized that these 
enzymes are poor correlates of histologically assessed 
activity in chronic liver disease, and that mild elevations 
of aminotransferases do not exclude severe disease. The 
temporal criterion for duration of disease of at least six 
months (to distinguish chronic from acute liver disease) 
also proved difficult to apply because it is often not pos-
sible to define the time of onset and, as noted above, 
patients presenting with acute hepatitis who had clear 
evidence of chronic liver disease were being identified.
Current recommendations for defining and describ-
ing chronic hepatitis are that the terms CAH and CPH 
should be abandoned in favour of precise morphologi-
cal descriptions, graded for necroinflammatory activity 
and staged for degree of fibrosis. While the term ‘piece-
meal necrosis’ may be retained, the terms ‘periportal 
hepatitis’ or (preferably) ‘interface hepatitis’ should be 
used to describe the changes previously associated with 
CAH. Description of the changes previously associated 
with CPH should employ terms such as mild or moder-
ate portal or periportal hepatitis (as appropriate) without 
significant necrosis. All of these terms should be qualified 
by aetiological designations (e.g. autoimmune hepatitis, 
chronic hepatitis B, C, D etc.), wherever possible and 
practicable.
Laboratory investigation plays a crucial role in the 
differential diagnosis and management of chronic hepa-
titis (see Table 14.2), although histological examination 
of liver biopsy material is usually required to assist in 
assessing severity and providing additional aetiologi-
cal information. Typically, chronicity is defined as per-
sistence of a hepatitic pattern of abnormal LFTs over 
several months. The plasma aminotransferase activities 
are usually elevated to 2–10 times the upper reference 
limits. Plasma alkaline phosphatase is often normal or 
only slightly raised, although higher values may be seen 
in patients where cirrhosis has developed with associated 
distortion of the hepatic architecture. Plasma bilirubin 
concentration is often also normal or mildly elevated 
but, in severe cases, there can be a profound hyperbiliru-
binaemia with jaundice. The PT/INR and other markers 
of coagulation are often mildly abnormal, and the plasma 
albumin concentration may be at the lower end of the 
normal range, reflecting decreased hepatic synthetic 
function. Marked hypoalbuminaemia is, however, a late 
feature associated with advanced cirrhosis. Depending 
on the aetiology of the chronic hepatitis, plasma immu-
noglobulin concentrations may also be elevated, some-
times quite markedly (see below).
The above abnormalities may be a sequel to an acute 
hepatitis, in which case the aminotransferase activities 
may have risen to 10–20 times the upper reference limits 
before falling back to the somewhat lower values more 
characteristic of chronic progression. However, a clini-
cally evident acute phase may not have been apparent es-
pecially if the patient did not develop jaundice. Indeed, 
chronic hepatitis is not infrequently diagnosed inciden-
tally during routine health screening or investigation 
of some other condition. Notably, profound fatigue is a 
common feature of all forms of chronic hepatitis, and the 
latter should, therefore, be considered in the differential 
diagnosis of chronic fatigue syndromes.
Differential diagnosis of chronic hepatitis
Viral hepatitis types B and C
The specific diagnosis is based on virological tests. The 
detection in serum of the hepatitis B surface antigen 
(HBsAg) indicates that the patient is infected with the 
TABLE 14.2  Differential diagnosis of chronic 
hepatitis
Type
Laboratory tests
Comments
Viral
 
 
  type B
HBsAg
 
  type C
Anti-HCV; HCV-
RNA by PCR
Has characteristic 
histological 
features
Alcoholic
Blood alcohol, 
γGT, MCV, 
desialylated 
transferrin
Laboratory 
tests are 
supplementary 
to clinical history
Drugs
May develop 
autoantibodies
Oxyphenisatin, 
methyldopa, 
isoniazid, 
dantrolene etc.
α1-Antitrypsin 
(AT) 
deficiency
Low α1-AT 
concentration; 
typical 
phenotype 
(PiZZ
a)
Characteristic 
eosinophilic 
globules on 
histology
Wilson 
disease
Low 
caeruloplasmin, 
high tissue 
copper and 
urinary copper 
concentration
Low ALP activity; 
low AST/
ALT activity 
for degree of 
inflammation
Autoimmune
 
 
  type 1
Anti-SMA and/or 
ANA
Markedly raised γ-
globulin and IgG
  type 2
Anti-LKM 
antibodies
 
aFor explanation, see α1-Antitrypsin deficiency on p. 268. ANA, 
­antinuclear antibody; LKM, liver-kidney microsomal antibody; 
MCV, mean corpuscular volume; SMA, smooth muscle antibody.
	
14  Acute and chronic liver disease	
255
hepatitis B virus (HBV). Clinical information and the re-
sults of LFTs can be useful in deciding whether the infec-
tion is acute, but this can be confirmed by the appearance 
of IgM antibodies against the HBV core antigen (HBc). 
The gradual disappearance of HBsAg, with sequential 
detection of IgG antibodies to HBc and antibodies to sur-
face antigen (HBsAb) indicates clearance of the virus, an 
event that occurs in the majority of adults (90%) acutely 
infected with it. Other markers of viraemia are derived 
from different components of the virus, including hepa-
titis B ‘e’ antigen (HBeAg) and HBV DNA, and these 
disappear with viral clearance. The decline in HBe anti-
genaemia is accompanied by the appearance of antibodies 
to the ‘e’ antigen (HBeAb) and is known as seroconver-
sion. In contrast to infection acquired in adulthood, peri-
natal infection becomes chronic in 95% of patients, with 
the virus persisting into adult life. Chronic infection is 
associated with a number of outcomes. Many individu-
als are asymptomatic, with the virus detected incidentally 
and a serological profile in which HBsAg and HBeAb are 
detected and HbeAg is negative. Although such people 
frequently have normal liver function tests, and have long 
been termed ‘healthy carriers’ and been considered to be 
of low infectivity, it has become clear that a significant 
proportion have marked histological damage on liver bi-
opsy and detectable circulating HBV DNA. Others have 
clear evidence of cirrhosis and, in such individuals, there is 
a 5% annual risk of developing hepatocellular carcinoma.
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infections are identified ini-
tially by detection of antibodies (anti-HCV) to the virus 
and chronic infections confirmed by seropositivity for the 
viral RNA (HCV-RNA).
Antiviral therapy for chronic hepatitis B and C, us-
ing interferons, with or without other antiviral agents 
to inhibit viral replication, is now well established, and 
comprehensive guidelines for treatment exist. Thus, 
tests for genomic material of both viruses (HBV-DNA 
and HCV-RNA, respectively) are usually performed, 
initially to assess the viral load before treatment and 
subsequently to monitor the patient’s response to treat-
ment. Plasma aminotransferase activities are also usu-
ally monitored as an adjunct to the above, since they 
are cheap to perform on a frequent basis and a return 
to normal values suggests at least some response to 
treatment. In the case of HBV, successful treatment 
is heralded by a change from HBeAg to HBeAb posi-
tivity and this event is accompanied by an acute hepa-
titic illness, the so-called ‘hepatitic flare’ (Fig.  14.1). 
Hypothyroidism is a side effect of interferon therapy, 
particularly in patients with chronic hepatitis C, and 
thyroid function tests should be monitored before 
treatment and at 3-monthly intervals.
Procedures for the handling of potentially danger-
ous and infectious samples are not the concern of this 
chapter, but it is worth noting that as many as 1–2% of 
inner city populations may be carriers of either HBV or 
HCV. The majority of these will have no symptoms of 
liver disease and their blood samples may be referred 
to the laboratory for causes unrelated to liver disease. 
Caution should therefore be exercised in the handling 
of all blood products in view of the possibility of occult 
hepatitis viral infections.
Alcohol
In perhaps 10% of patients with alcoholic liver disease, 
the histological features of interface hepatitis, similar to 
those in other forms of moderate/severe chronic hepatitis 
can be observed. There is evidence that some such cases 
may be related to coexistent hepatitis C virus infection or 
other underlying causes. The problem that this presents 
for differential diagnosis is discussed in detail under the 
heading of alcoholic liver disease.
Wilson disease
Chronic hepatitis is a rare presentation of this rare disease 
(see p. 267), but is of considerable importance because treat-
ment can be instituted and further liver damage avoided. 
Generally, the plasma activities of aminotransferases are 
low in comparison with the extent of histological activity. 
The diagnostic work-up is considered in detail below, but 
the initial screening procedures include measurement of 
plasma copper and caeruloplasmin concentrations and oc-
ular slit-lamp examination for Kayser–Fleischer rings. The 
diagnosis must be considered in all patients with chronic 
hepatitis, particularly those in the younger age groups.
α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
This is another rare cause of chronic hepatitis (see p. 266). 
Plasma α1-antitrypsin concentrations are usually low but, 
occasionally, because of active inflammation, they may be 
within the reference range. It is therefore essential that 
the α1-antitrypsin phenotype is determined, particularly 
in younger patients.
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH)
This is a rare cause of chronic hepatitis. However, it is 
one of the few causes of chronic liver disease in which 
Interferon
9 mU/day
800
600
400
ALT
200
ALT (IU/L)
50
50
0
5
–5
10
15
20
25
30
35
Negative
Weeks
200
400
800
1600
3200
Viral DNA
Polymerase (cpm)
Normal
HBs Ag
HBe Ag
DNA Polymerase
HBsAb
HBe Ab
FIGURE 14.1  ■  Changes in ALT activity in a patient with chronic 
hepatitis B virus infection successfully treated with interferon. 
Note the hepatitis response heralding clearance of HBsAg and 
appearance of the antibody. Clearance of the virus is also indi-
cated by a decrease in viral DNA polymerase activity.
256	
Clinical biochemistry
drug treatment is highly effective in the great majority of 
patients, and accurate diagnosis is essential. This is estab-
lished partly by careful exclusion of the other causes listed 
above and partly by the finding of a suggestive pattern of 
biochemical, immunological and histological abnormali-
ties. The biochemical liver tests show a hepatitic pattern 
(see above), but plasma aminotransferase activities are 
often only moderately elevated and bilirubin concentra-
tions are frequently normal. Typically, there is a marked 
hypergammaglobulinaemia with selective elevation of 
the IgG concentration (which can be as high as 100 g/L). 
Approximately 80% of AIH patients will also have sig-
nificant titres (>1:40) of organ non-specific autoantibod-
ies (smooth muscle antibody (SMA), antinuclear antibody 
(ANA) or anti-liver-kidney microsomal (LKM) antibod-
ies). Standard treatment involves immunosuppressive 
therapy with prednisolone and the steroid-sparing agent 
azathioprine.
Monitoring response to therapy. Plasma aminotrans-
ferase activities do not correlate well with histologically 
assessed disease activity in AIH. However, such tests, 
together with plasma IgG concentrations, are cheap 
and can be repeated more easily than liver biopsy, so are 
used routinely to monitor response to immunosuppres-
sive therapy. Some 80–95% of AIH patients respond to 
the standard therapy of prednisolone and azathioprine, 
with aminotransferase activities and IgG concentrations 
falling to at least 50% below their initial values within 
three months. Dosages are titrated against the amino-
transferase and IgG values, being progressively reduced 
to maintenance doses as these parameters fall towards 
the normal range that, in most patients, is achieved 
within one year of starting ­treatment. However, this 
‘biochemical remission’ does not represent a complete 
response. It usually requires at least a further year of 
treatment before complete histological remission is 
achieved. Current recommendations are that treatment 
should be continued for at least two years (preferably 
four), with regular monitoring of aminotransferase ac-
tivities and IgG concentrations; before any attempt is 
made to withdraw treatment, histological remission 
should be confirmed. Withdrawal of all immunosup-
pression is rarely achieved, possibly because it is not 
routinely attempted, but gradual reduction in the dose 
of prednisolone to very low levels, or complete with-
drawal, is feasible so that immunosuppression can be 
maintained with azathioprine alone. If complete with-
drawal of immunosuppressive treatment is achieved, the 
patient should be monitored indefinitely, because even a 
complete histological response does not represent a true 
‘cure’ and there is a lifelong risk of relapse of the disease. 
The latter is heralded by a rise in aminotransferase ac-
tivities and IgG concentrations. Importantly, interpreta-
tion of biochemical test results should not focus solely 
on the upper reference limits for the various parameters 
but should take account of what may be normal for the 
individual patient. By definition, half of the normal pop-
ulation will have values below the geometric means of 
the reference ranges and, for such individuals, a rise in 
a parameter to (or just above) the upper reference limit 
may represent a doubling of their normal value.
PRIMARY BILIARY CIRRHOSIS (PBC)
This is a chronic cholestatic condition of unknown 
cause in which there is destruction of septal and inter-
lobular bile ducts. Females are affected far more fre-
quently than males. Most patients present with pruritus, 
jaundice or non-specific symptoms including tiredness 
and ­hepatic pain. However, an increasing number are 
detected incidentally when abnormal liver tests, particu-
larly an increased activity of alkaline phosphatase, are 
detected during opportunistic screening. Although PBC 
is considered to be an autoimmune liver disease, and 
twin and family studies suggest that there is a signifi-
cant genetic component, it is clearly a complex disease 
and little progress has been made in defining the genes 
responsible.
Biochemical liver function tests reveal a ­characteristic 
cholestatic picture with, as the disease progresses, in-
creasing plasma alkaline phosphatase (ALP) (of biliary 
origin), increasing bilirubin concentration and falling 
albumin. The plasma concentrations of both pentam-
eric and monomeric IgM are frequently raised (cf. AIH). 
The most specific serological tests are those for anti­
mitochondrial antibodies (AMA), which are detectable in 
about 95% of patients. Antimitochondrial antibodies 
recognize several distinct autoantigens, but the most 
characteristic for PBC are the M2 antibodies that react 
with epitopes on the E2 components of the pyruvate 
dehydrogenase complex (PDC-E2), the branched chain 
oxoacid dehydrogenase (BCOADH-E2) and the oxoglu-
tarate dehydrogenase complexes. Laboratory tests, par-
ticularly the plasma bilirubin concentration, are used in 
assessing prognosis (see p. 248).
PRIMARY SCLEROSING CHOLANGITIS (PSC)
This is a progressive disease characterized by diffuse in-
flammation and fibrosis of the extrahepatic and/or intra-
hepatic biliary system, which leads to obliteration of the 
intrahepatic ducts and, eventually, biliary cirrhosis (see 
below). It is diagnosed on the basis of characteristic chol-
angiographic appearances together with compatible clini-
cal, biochemical and histological features, and exclusion 
of several other conditions known to cause secondary 
sclerosing cholangitis, such as biliary calculi and previous 
biliary tract surgery. Men are affected more often than 
women and, again, although considered an autoimmune 
disease, the disease is genetically complex and remains 
poorly characterized.
With the advent of endoscopic retrograde pancreatog-
raphy (ERCP), PSC began to be diagnosed earlier in its 
natural history, particularly following the initial finding 
of persistently abnormal LFTs in patients with inflam-
matory bowel disease, which coexists with PSC in more 
than 50% of cases. In the early stages, there is usually 
a minor elevation of plasma aminotransferase activities 
and moderate elevation of ALP, which progresses, over 
several years, to a very severe cholestatic condition with 
deep jaundice. By this stage, plasma ALP activity often 
reaches more than ten times the upper reference limit. 
Death from liver failure ultimately results unless a liver 
	
14  Acute and chronic liver disease	
257
transplant can be performed. However, the disease has 
been known to recur in the grafted liver. Rapid clinical 
deterioration with a progressive cholestatic picture may 
indicate the development of cholangiocarcinoma, a com-
plication with a lifetime risk of 10–15% in this condition. 
CA19-9 concentrations may be elevated when a cholan-
giocarcinoma has developed but this is not a specific find-
ing as CA19-9 is also increased in other cholestatic liver 
diseases. Copper retention appears to be a general fea-
ture of chronic cholestatic conditions: in PSC most pa-
tients will have raised hepatic copper concentrations (of a 
similar order to that seen in Wilson disease and primary 
biliary cirrhosis) and urinary copper concentrations are 
typically raised. However, in contrast to Wilson disease, 
the plasma caeruloplasmin and copper concentrations 
will remain within the reference range (see p. 267).
ALCOHOLIC LIVER DISEASE
Excessive alcohol (ethanol) consumption is by far the 
commonest cause of liver disease in the Western world, 
although it often exists as part of a wider spectrum of 
social, psychological and pathological effects of alcohol-
related damage. Most current evidence suggests that 
alcohol itself is the primary cause of the liver damage, 
although associated malnutrition may be a contributory 
factor. Considering that there is an enormous variation 
in the amount of alcohol drunk by different individuals, 
the time course over which it is consumed and individual 
susceptibility to tissue injury, it is not surprising that the 
adverse effects on the liver vary widely.
Ethanol metabolism
Alcohol is absorbed from the stomach and small bowel. 
Absorption is most efficient when there is no other food 
(particularly carbohydrate) in the gut and when its con-
centration in the ingested fluid is of the order of 20%.
The liver is exposed to the highest concentration 
of alcohol in blood, owing to the blood supply by the 
hepatic portal vein, and is responsible for more than 
95% of its metabolism. The concentrations attained af-
ter ingestion of a standard amount of ethanol depend, 
among other things, on sex, weight, previous exposure 
to alcohol, the type of alcoholic beverage and rate of 
gastric emptying. Ethanol is oxidized to acetaldehyde 
mainly by the cytosolic enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase, 
but also, particularly at high concentrations, by the 
cytochrome P450 system. Acetaldehyde is particularly 
toxic. It is metabolized by aldehyde dehydrogenase in 
the mitochondria to acetate, which is, in turn, oxidized 
by peripheral tissues to carbon dioxide and water. Both 
enzyme systems can be induced by alcohol. The intoxi-
cating and metabolic effects are mediated directly by 
ethanol but it is likely that acetaldehyde is an important 
factor in causing tissue damage through the formation 
of adducts that in turn lead to functional impairment 
of hepatic proteins. The metabolism of ethanol also 
predisposes to various metabolic problems includ-
ing hypoglycaemia and non-respiratory acidosis (see 
Chapter 40).
Liver pathology in alcoholic liver disease
Three patterns of histological change in liver tissue 
have been described in association with ethanol inges-
tion, ­although there is considerable overlap and all three 
­features can be present on occasions. Fatty liver (steatosis) 
appears to be a response to excessive alcohol consumption 
in all individuals. It is considered to be a reversible fea-
ture, resolving with abstinence, and does not progress to 
chronic liver disease provided abstinence is maintained. 
In alcoholic hepatitis, the appearances are of steatosis but 
also sometimes with features of interface hepatitis. This 
is a serious condition with a marked propensity to prog-
ress to fibrosis and cirrhosis – the third and final stage 
of chronic alcoholic liver disease. Additional morpho-
logical changes may be seen in patients who have other 
coexisting disorders. For example, people with hereditary 
haemochromatosis or chronic hepatitis C may be at in-
creased risk of developing liver disease from alcohol, and 
porphyria cutanea tarda is often associated with excessive 
alcohol consumption.
Biochemical abnormalities
Alcoholic steatosis. Biochemical changes are minimal 
and consist of subclinical hyperbilirubinaemia and a 
very mild elevation of plasma aminotransferase activi-
ties. Very occasionally, a cholestatic syndrome develops, 
but associated alcoholic pancreatitis leading to biliary 
obstruction should be considered if jaundice is marked. 
Episodes of delirium tremens and alcoholic myopathy 
may give markedly raised plasma aminotransferase ac-
tivities. Plasma γGT activity is elevated in the major-
ity of patients (although it is not a specific finding), but 
usually reflects enzyme induction rather than hepatic 
injury.
Alcoholic hepatitis. There is a wide spectrum of 
severity associated with this histological diagnosis, 
ranging from the classic syndrome of deep prolonged 
jaundice, hepatic failure, fever and leukocytosis through 
to a complete absence of symptoms and physical signs. 
Alcoholic hepatitis generally occurs after heavy bouts 
of drinking and when subjects have been drinking heav-
ily for several years. The laboratory tests reveal anae-
mia, usually with a leukocytosis and, consistently raised 
aminotransferase activities. However, the AST values 
are seldom above ten times the upper reference limit 
and ALT values are usually lower. This results in an 
AST:ALT ratio of >2, and a value below this in subjects 
with hepatitis suggests that alcohol is not a major aetio-
logical factor.
Alcoholism and haemochromatosis. Iron overload 
is common in alcoholic liver disease, occurring in per-
haps 50% of patients (see p. 265). Occasionally, this may 
progress to a similar degree to that seen in hereditary 
haemochromatosis, and the patient may have similar ab-
normalities in biochemical parameters of iron status and 
endocrine function. More commonly, it appears that ex-
cessive alcohol consumption leads to the unmasking of 
haemochromatosis in patients with this genetic disease.
258	
Clinical biochemistry
Porphyria cutanea tarda. As with haemochromatosis, 
this genetically determined condition, comprising bul-
lous skin lesions on exposure to sunlight, liver disease 
and iron overload, is often brought to medical attention 
by excessive alcohol consumption. The underlying bio-
chemical defect is a deficiency of uroporphyrinogen de-
carboxylase (see Chapter 28).
Use of laboratory tests in clinical practice
Biochemical tests of alcohol intake and its misuse fall into 
three categories:
•	 measurement of alcohol or its metabolites, 
e.g. ­ethanol, ethyl glucuronide, ethyl sulphate, 
5-­hydroxytryptophol
•	 assessment of the effect of alcohol on protein me-
tabolism, i.e. carbohydrate deficient transferrin
•	 assessment of the extent of liver damage associated 
with alcohol misuse by measurement of plasma en-
zymes.
Alcohol and metabolites
Saturation of the normal pathways of alcohol metabo-
lism results in the induction of minor pathways with the 
formation of metabolites with high specificity for excess 
alcohol intake: glucuronidation leading to ethyl gluc-
uronide (EtG) formation; sulphation to ethyl sulphate 
(EtS) formation, and incorporation into 5-hydroxytryp-
tamine to form 5-hydroxytryptophol. Ethanol in blood 
or urine remains detectable only for 24–36 h, even after 
ingestion of significant amounts, so false negative results 
may be obtained in subjects misusing alcohol if they 
can abstain for 1–2  days prior to testing. The urinary 
5-hydroxytryptophol:5-hydroxyindole acetic acid ratio 
has close to 100% specificity for excess alcohol con-
sumption, but mass spectrometry is required for its mea-
surement and the test has not been adopted routinely. 
Recently, interest has grown in the use of EtG and EtS 
measurements as these metabolites have high specificity 
for alcohol misuse and can be detected in urine up to 
72–90 h after significant intake. A commercial immuno-
assay exists for EtG, but the combined measurement of 
EtG and EtS requires mass spectrometry. Many work-
ers favour the latter approach because of reports of both 
false positive and negative EtG results in the presence of 
a urinary infection with bacteria capable of either remov-
ing the glucuronide or glucuronidating ethanol in vitro. 
Ethyl glucuronide and EtS do, however, offer the poten-
tial for detection of ‘binge’ drinkers that has been notori-
ously difficult to achieve in the past.
Effects of alcohol on protein metabolism
Carbohydrate deficient transferrin (CDT) is defined 
as the asialo- and disialo- forms of transferrin that usu-
ally account for <1.6% of the total transferrin found in 
plasma. The formation of CDT is directly proportional 
to alcohol intake: ethanol (or its metabolites) appears to 
inhibit the enzymes responsible for addition of the car-
bohydrate side-chains and induce sialidase that removes 
the terminal sialic acid residues from the side-chains. 
The percentage CDT is independent of the extent of 
any ­alcohol-related liver damage except in patients with 
severe cholestatic liver disease, where reduced clearance 
may cause a falsely high result. Hepatic failure can cause 
analytical difficulties in CDT measurement because of 
low total transferrin concentrations from reduced syn-
thesis. As the plasma half-life of CDT is 10–14  days, 
a raised percentage of CDT is strongly suggestive of 
chronic excessive alcohol consumption with sensitivity 
and specificity both approaching 85%. Measurement of 
serum immunoglobulin concentrations may also be help-
ful because alcoholic liver disease is often associated with 
a selective increase in IgA (cf. AIH and PBC).
Plasma enzymes
Alcoholic steatosis can cause an increase in the amino-
transferases or γ-GT that is reversible with abstinence, 
although the degree of increase correlates poorly with the 
extent of liver damage assessed histologically. Progression 
to cirrhosis is usually accompanied by abnormal plasma 
enzyme activities often suggesting intrahepatic cholesta-
sis, although in some patients with established cirrhosis 
who abstain from further alcohol intake, these may re-
vert to normal. For a more detailed discussion, including 
the role of the measurement of mitochondrial AST, see 
Chapter 13.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
This comprises a spectrum of conditions ranging from 
simple hepatic steatosis (excessive accumulation of fat 
in hepatocytes) to end-stage chronic liver disease: these 
conditions are clearly associated with the epidemic of 
obesity and diabetes recognized in Western populations. 
Previously thought to be a rare and relatively benign 
condition, developing mainly in middle-aged females in 
association with obesity, insulin resistance and hypertri-
glyceridaemia, NAFLD is emerging as one of the com-
monest causes of chronic liver disease. Steatosis is an 
adaptive response of the liver to insulin resistance. When 
this is accompanied by endogenous insults such as oxi-
dative and free radical damage, mitochondrial dysfunc-
tion and endotoxaemia, themselves resulting in part from 
excessive amounts of fat in liver cells, an inflammatory 
condition termed non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) 
is induced in susceptible individuals. Typical histologi-
cal features include micro- and macrovesicular steatosis, 
mild to moderate portal and lobular inflammation (often 
with small clusters of polymorphs), liver cell ballooning 
and perisinusoidal fibrosis. Mallory’s hyaline (typically as-
sociated with alcoholic liver disease) may also be present. 
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis can induce fibrosis and, in 
some individuals, this process will result in cirrhosis with 
all the attendant complications including hepatocellular 
carcinoma. Unfortunately, it is not possible at present to 
predict which individuals will experience a progressive 
course. Liver function tests are mildly or moderately ab-
normal in most patients at presentation, but longitudinal 
studies indicate that progression of fibrosis can occur de-
spite return to normal of aminotransferase activities in 
response to weight loss.
	
14  Acute and chronic liver disease	
259
THE CONCEPT OF CIRRHOSIS
Cirrhosis is not a clinical diagnosis, but a pathological 
­description of the liver in which there is:
•	 diffuse hepatic fibrosis
•	 nodular regeneration
•	 a disturbance of the normal hepatic architecture, 
that is, a distortion of the normal relationship of the 
portal tracts to the central veins (see Chapter 13).
It is the end result of chronic liver diseases that are 
usually associated with recurrent episodes of necrosis, cell 
death and attempts by the liver to regenerate. Liver func-
tion is disturbed, not only because of the cirrhosis per se, 
which has little effect on standard LFTs, but because of 
continuing immunologically mediated liver cell damage, 
the capillarization of the sinusoids due to fibrosis (see 
Chapter 13) and, on occasions, because of the effects of 
the initiating agent such as alcohol. Efforts to make a di-
agnosis of cirrhosis on any grounds other than histologi-
cal are unreliable.
A great part of clinical hepatology is taken up with the 
diagnosis and management of the complications of cir-
rhosis: hepatic encephalopathy, ascites and the hepatore-
nal syndrome, infections, primary hepatic malignancy 
and endocrine dysfunction.
Hepatic encephalopathy
This is seen in patients with advanced cirrhosis, and a 
precipitating factor such as administration of a sedative, 
a large protein intake (including blood from variceal 
haemorrhage), infection or electrolyte imbalance can 
usually be identified. It is particularly frequent in subjects 
who have undergone a portocaval shunt for treatment of 
portal hypertension. As with the encephalopathy associ-
ated with acute liver failure, the severity of the condition 
is graded from I–IV:
I – alert but with asterixis (‘hepatic flap’), inversion 
of sleep rhythm
II – confused, disorientated, slow mentation, 
inappropriate behaviour
III – restless, aggressive, sleepy, uncommunicative
IV – coma.
The diagnosis is essentially a clinical one and, al-
though characteristic electroencephalographic appear-
ances are described, these are not used diagnostically. 
Similarly, the blood ammonia concentration is usually 
raised but correlates only poorly with the degree of 
encephalopathy.
Vascular disturbances in cirrhosis
Cirrhosis is characterized by the development of sys-
temic vasodilatation, which results in a decrease in ef-
fective arterial blood volume, low systemic vascular 
resistance and a hyperdynamic circulation with high 
cardiac output. The mechanism underlying these 
changes is not known with certainty, but may involve 
increased vascular synthesis of nitric oxide because of 
increased activity of inducible nitric oxide synthase, as 
well as increased production of prostacyclin and other 
vasodilators such as glucagon, substance P and calcito-
nin gene-related peptide. In response to vasodilatation, 
several homoeostatic systems are triggered, including an 
increase in renal sympathetic activity, activation of the 
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system and increased 
production of antidiuretic hormone (ADH). In some 
patients, vascular resistance and effective arterial blood 
volume are restored, but in others, particularly when 
cirrhosis is complicated by severe portal hypertension, 
water retention and vasoconstriction are insufficient 
to restore circulating blood volume and these subjects 
present with hypotension and a ­hyperdynamic circula-
tion, together with high plasma concentrations of re-
nin, noradrenaline (norepinephrine) and ADH. These 
hormones have a profound effect on renal vasculature, 
causing progressive vasoconstriction and a reduction 
in plasma flow and glomerular filtration, resulting in 
marked salt and water retention. These changes have a 
central role in the development of ascites.
Ascites
Ascites, the excessive accumulation of extracellular fluid 
in the peritoneal cavity (over 30 L in some patients), is 
usually a late complication of cirrhosis. Two key factors 
underlie its development, namely portal hypertension 
operating at the level of the sinusoids, and sodium and 
water retention. Portal hypertension occurs as cirrho-
sis develops because of progressive collagen deposition 
within the space of Disse and nodule formation, result-
ing in disruption of the vascular architecture of the liver. 
Increased resistance to portal flow and increased hydro-
static pressure within the sinusoids favour transudation 
of tissue fluid into the peritoneal cavity. Portal hyper-
tension is a critical permissive factor in the development 
of ascites. The second key factor in the development of 
ascites is, as described above, salt and water retention 
with enhanced sodium reabsorption occurring in both 
the proximal and distal tubules of the kidneys. In some 
patients with ascites, normal concentrations of aldoste-
rone are found, leading to the suggestion that enhanced 
renal sensitivity to the hormone underlies the increased 
distal tubular sodium reabsorption. The role of hypo-
albuminaemia in the development of ascites in patients 
with liver disease is controversial. Some consider this to 
have a permissive role in localizing the fluid collection to 
the peritoneal space, while others consider that plasma 
albumin concentration has little influence on ascites for-
mation. Instead, they ­suggest that the oncotic pressure 
gradient across the ­sinusoids is low (because albumin 
crosses the fenestrations) so ascites develops only when 
trans-sinusoidal filtration exceeds the drainage capacity 
of the lymphatic system, as occurs in patients with portal 
hypertension.
Ascites usually develops in patients with advanced, 
decompensated disease, but the tendency to retain salt 
is present before ascites actually develops and a sudden 
increase in dietary salt intake may lead to the generation 
of ascites that clears spontaneously when the salt intake 
is restricted. Excess water retention leading to hypona-
traemia is frequent and is attributable to the mechanisms 
described above. There are, however, several liver and 
260	
Clinical biochemistry
non-liver diseases other than cirrhosis (Box  14.2) that 
can lead to the formation of ascites, and the establish-
ment of a precise diagnosis is important for its correct 
management.
If the standard LFTs are abnormal in a patient with as-
cites, then it is likely that one of the liver diseases listed in 
Box 14.2 is responsible and it is often already known that 
a patient who develops ascites has cirrhosis. However, pa-
tients with liver disease can develop ascites for reasons 
other than cirrhosis. For example, patients with alcoholic 
cirrhosis may develop tuberculous ascites, pancreatic as-
cites or ‘malignant’ ascites if hepatocellular carcinoma 
supervenes. Cardiac causes can usually be diagnosed con-
fidently on clinical grounds, but the other causes may be 
difficult to distinguish and laboratory investigations have 
an important role to play. Ascitic fluid should be aspi-
rated using an 18-gauge needle and syringe (a so-called 
‘diagnostic tap’) for analysis. The investigations and their 
interpretation are shown in Table 14.3. It should be rec-
ognized that sodium retention is not a diagnostic feature 
of cirrhotic ascites: equally intense sodium retention can 
occur in malignant ascites.
The figures for ascitic protein given in Table 14.3 are 
given only as guidelines. Exceptions are frequent and 
clinical utility is limited, but as the changes become more 
extreme, so their diagnostic specificity increases. Thus, 
a protein concentration <10 g/L is not infrequent in 
uncomplicated cirrhosis, but virtually rules out malignant 
disease. Conversely, protein concentrations >35 g/L are 
the rule in malignant ascites and are unusual in uncom-
plicated cirrhosis.
Several tests have been proposed to increase the 
specificity of total ascitic protein measurement in dif-
ferentiating between cirrhotic and malignant ascites. 
These include calculation of the plasma to ascites albu-
min gradient and measurement of ascitic lactate dehy-
drogenase activity or ascitic cholesterol concentration 
(Fig. 14.2). Adenosine deaminase activity in ascites of 
>60 U/L is particularly sensitive and specific for tuber-
culous ascites.
Monitoring treatment of ascites
Ascites due to cirrhosis is usually managed by a com-
bination of dietary salt restriction and diuretic therapy, 
though paracentesis with albumin infusion is now being 
used more widely. The aim should be to achieve a net 
fluid loss of 500 mL/24 h until the ascites clears. Plasma 
urea, creatinine, sodium and potassium concentrations 
should be checked daily at the start of treatment. A ris-
ing plasma urea or creatinine and falling plasma sodium 
concentration (<130 mmol/L) indicate impending acute 
kidney injury and should prompt a reduction of diuretic 
treatment. Diuretics should not be used when plasma so-
dium is <125 mmol/L. Plasma creatinine concentration 
is the more useful test, as impaired urea synthesis in pa-
tients with cirrhosis makes the plasma urea a less sensitive 
indicator of renal function. Plasma potassium needs care-
ful monitoring if furosemide is used because of the risk 
of hypokalaemia, which may precipitate encephalopathy. 
So, too, can hyperkalaemia, which may occur with spi-
ronolactone if renal impairment supervenes.
Acute kidney injury
The onset of acute kidney injury (AKI) is indicated by 
rising plasma concentrations of creatinine and urea 
and usually, but not always, a urinary output falling to 
<300 mL/24 h. A particularly dangerous complication, 
as already mentioned, is hyperkalaemia. Such develop-
ments are likely to precipitate encephalopathy in pa-
tients with liver disease. The major clinical problem in 
such patients is an idiopathic form of AKI that is widely 
known as the ‘hepatorenal syndrome’ (see below) and 
usually associated with advanced liver disease, ascites 
and encephalopathy. This should not be confused with 
BOX 14.2	
Hepatic and non-hepatic causes of 
ascites
Primary hepatic disease
•	 Cirrhosis (of any type)
•	 Budd–Chiari syndrome (thrombosis of the hepatic 
veins)
•	 Acute and subacute liver failure
•	 Portal vein thrombosis – rarely, and late in natural 
history
Non-hepatic disease
•	 Abdominal malignancy
•	 Cardiac failure
•	 Constrictive pericarditis
•	 Nephrotic syndrome
•	 Peritonitis (especially tuberculous)
•	 Pancreatic disease
•	 Protein–calorie malnutrition
•	 Hypothyroidism (rarely)
TABLE 14.3  Differential diagnosis of ascites based on inspection and laboratory tests
 
Direct 
inspection
Protein content 
(g/L)
Cells
Bacteria
Uncomplicated cirrhosis
Clear
<25
<500/mm
3 (mononuclear cells)
None
Intra-abdominal malignancy
Clear
>25
Malignant cells (and red blood cells)
None
Tuberculous peritonitis
Turbid
>25
b
White blood cells (mainly lymphocytes)
Acid-fast bacilli
Abdominal lymphoma
Chylous
a
See notes below
c
None
None
aChylous ascites probably represents escape of splanchnic lymph into ascites.
bConcentrations may be lower when cirrhotic ascites is complicated by tuberculosis.
cThe characteristic laboratory feature is a high concentration of triglycerides.
	
14  Acute and chronic liver disease	
261
several other situations in which renal disease and liver 
disease coexist: polycystic disease, infections such as lep-
tospirosis, circulatory failure and the immune complex 
glomerulonephritis associated with hepatitis B virus 
infection or the presence of cryoglobulins in hepati-
tis C infection. Acute kidney injury may also develop 
when cirrhotic patients are fluid depleted, and follow-
ing surgery to relieve obstructive jaundice. The latter 
syndrome is caused by acute tubular necrosis, but the 
mechanism is unknown.
The hepatorenal syndrome (HRS)
This condition is also known as functional renal fail-
ure (FRF). The characteristic feature is that the kidneys 
are normal when examined histologically, that is, there 
is disturbance of function but not of structure; specifi-
cally, the usual appearances of acute tubular necrosis 
are not present. Furthermore, the impairment is pro-
gressive and not reversed by fluid repletion, suggesting 
that this is not simply a pre-renal disorder. The precise 
pathogenesis is unknown, but underlying factors in-
clude those detailed in the earlier section on vascular 
abnormalities in cirrhosis, which lead to intense renal 
vasoconstriction resulting in decreased renal blood flow 
and a reduced glomerular filtration rate. Functional re-
nal failure occurs classically in patients with advanced 
chronic liver disease, but may also occur in severe acute 
liver disease.
In patients known to have advanced cirrhosis, the 
condition can be diagnosed by simple laboratory tests 
and clinical observation. Reduced urine flow and rising 
plasma concentrations of urea and creatinine are com-
mon to all forms of AKI, but the characteristic feature of 
FRF, which distinguishes it from acute tubular necrosis, 
is the dramatic degree of sodium retention (Table 14.4). 
The urinary sodium concentration is usually <12 mmol/L 
and often <5 mmol/L. The urine:plasma osmolality is 
usually >1, and this contrasts with patients with acute 
tubular necrosis, in whom the urinary sodium concentra-
tion is invariably >12 mmol/L and often >20 mmol/L, 
and the urine/plasma osmolality is about 1. Infusion of 
terlipressin, a non-selective agonist of V1 vasopressin re-
ceptors, together with albumin, reverses FRF in ~75% 
of patients.
Sex hormones and their binding proteins
Men with cirrhosis are frequently impotent, infertile 
and feminized (i.e. they may have gynaecomastia, a fe-
male distribution of body hair and testicular atrophy). 
Workers in the USA, where alcohol is responsible for 
a very high percentage of all chronic liver disease, have 
tended to attribute these symptoms to the alcohol rather 
than the chronic liver disease. In the UK, where at least 
50% of patients with cirrhosis have non-alcohol related 
disease, sexual dysfunction is still frequently seen and 
it seems most likely that alcohol may act both on its 
own and in concert with chronic liver disease to cause 
this disorder. The biochemical and endocrine changes 
FIGURE 14.2  ■  Plasma ascites albumin gradient and ascitic fluid concentration of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and cholesterol in pa-
tients with cirrhosis (CIR) and peritoneal carcinomatosis (PCA). Reproduced with permission from Arroyo V et al. Ascites, renal failure and 
electrolyte disorders in cirrhosis. Pathogenesis, diagnosis, and treatment. In: McIntyre N et al. (eds). Oxford Textbook of Clinical Hepatology. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1991.
TABLE 14.4  Differential diagnosis of renal 
­impairment in cirrhosis
 
Prerenal 
disease
Functional 
renal 
failure
Acute 
tubular 
necrosis
Urinary sodium 
concentration 
(mmol/L)
<12
<12
>12
Urine:plasma 
osmolality
>1.15
1.1–1.15
<1.1
Response 
to volume 
expansion
Yes
No
No
It must be emphasized that although these tests are typical, 
exceptions do occur, particularly in patients who have been 
recently treated with diuretics.
262	
Clinical biochemistry
that accompany chronic liver disease are now well 
recognized but they correlate poorly with the ­clinical 
symptoms.
This section describes the changes in endocrine tests 
that are found in patients with liver disease of various 
causes and severity, but it is important to note that the 
changes described are not necessarily the cause of symp-
toms. The discussion below refers mainly to men; the ef-
fect of liver disease on sexual function in women has been 
less well studied.
Physiology and biochemistry
This topic is discussed in detail in Chapter  23 but a 
summary is presented here for convenience. The ma-
jor circulating androgen is testosterone secreted by the 
testicular Leydig cells (0.17–0.35 mmol/24 h) under the 
control of luteinizing hormone (LH). The androgenic 
effect of androstenedione, and other adrenal androgens 
such as dehydroepiandrosterone, is probably attrib-
utable to their peripheral conversion to testosterone. 
Testosterone can be metabolized to its more active me-
tabolite dihydrotestosterone (DHT) by 5α-reduction, or 
to oestrogens (by aromatization) or can be degraded in 
the liver, which is responsible for clearing about 50% of 
testosterone during the first pass in males. Oestrogens 
also circulate in men, the most potent being oestradiol 
(strictly 17β-oestradiol, but often abbreviated to E2), 
which is derived from aromatization of testosterone. 
Testosterone and 17β-oestradiol circulate bound to al-
bumin (low affinity, unsaturable binding) and sex hor-
mone-binding globulin (SHBG, high affinity, saturable 
binding). Only a small amount of each hormone exists 
in the unbound state and this is presumed to be the bio-
logically active fraction. Spermatogenesis is under the 
control of follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), although 
LH is also required, acting indirectly on the seminifer-
ous tubules by stimulating testosterone secretion by the 
adjacent Leydig cells.
Changes in men with cirrhosis
The plasma total testosterone concentration is at the 
lower limit of the reference range in most men with 
well-compensated liver disease and falls as the disease 
progresses. The oestradiol concentration, on the other 
hand, is usually at the upper limit of the reference range 
and rises as the disease progresses, and the ratio of oes-
tradiol to testosterone is thus elevated. Because SHBG 
concentrations are invariably also raised and the affinity 
of SHBG for testosterone is considerably greater than 
that for oestradiol, the ratio of free oestrogen to free tes-
tosterone is even greater. The low testosterone concen-
trations are attributable to reduced testicular production 
and occur despite a decrease in metabolic clearance rate 
caused by the high SHBG concentrations. The elevated 
oestrogen concentrations are not due to impaired hepatic 
clearance as originally thought; increased production, 
probably due to enhanced peripheral aromatization, ap-
pears to be the most likely mechanism.
In the presence of low testosterone concentra-
tions, a compensatory increase in pituitary secretion of 
luteinizing hormone (LH) would be expected, but this 
does not always occur, implying that a primary testicular 
defect is often complicated by hypothalamic–pituitary 
dysfunction. As the disease progresses, LH concentra-
tions tend to fall. Thus, the characteristic abnormalities 
may be represented as a spectrum (Table 14.5). Similar, 
but less pronounced changes occur in postmenopausal 
women with chronic liver disease. Three-quarters of 
men with cirrhosis have oligospermia and this is associ-
ated with normal plasma concentrations of FSH. The 
absence of a compensatory rise in FSH has been attrib-
uted to a hypothalamic defect that is characteristic of 
patients with cirrhosis. Absence of testicular atrophy, a 
normal LH or a normal LH or FSH response to clo-
mifene or gonadotrophin releasing hormone predict re-
covery of sexual function in alcoholic men who abstain 
from further drinking.
Hypogonadism is a prominent feature in men with 
hereditary haemochromatosis. Unlike the situation with 
other types of cirrhosis, such as that due to alcohol, impo-
tence may occur very early in the disease (and even before 
the cirrhosis develops). It is probably due to a combina-
tion of hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism, concurrent 
hepatic cirrhosis and diabetic autonomic neuropathy. 
The pituitary dysfunction, which is probably the most 
important factor, is caused by selective iron deposition 
in the gonadotrophin-secreting cells. Plasma concentra-
tions of LH (and prolactin) are subnormal in the majority 
of men with clinical hypogonadism associated with liver 
disease.
Changes in liver function during pregnancy
Abnormalities (occasionally marked) in the LFTs may 
occur during normal pregnancy. These have been attrib-
uted, not unreasonably, to changes in the hormonal en-
vironment and there is good experimental evidence that 
oestrogens are involved. Thus, similar abnormalities are 
also seen in women taking the contraceptive pill or other 
oestrogenic preparations.
The most pronounced change is a tendency towards 
cholestasis in the last trimester – intrahepatic cho-
lestasis of pregnancy. The plasma activities of γGT 
and ALP rise in late pregnancy but the latter is at-
tributable mainly to placental ALP. In a small percent-
age of women, however, this tendency is exaggerated 
and symptoms of jaundice and/or pruritus develop. 
Although different names are given depending on the 
TABLE 14.5  Changes in plasma sex hormone 
concentrations in men with chronic liver 
­disease in relation to its severity
 
Well 
compensated 
cirrhosis
Poorly 
compensated 
cirrhosis
Testosterone (T)
Low/normal
Low
17β-oestradiol (E2)
High/normal
High
SHBG
High
High
Total E2/T ratio
High
Very high
LH
Normal
Low
	
14  Acute and chronic liver disease	
263
predominant symptom, they probably form part of a 
spectrum. Signs and symptoms disappear within a few 
days, or even hours, of delivery but recur with varying 
degrees of severity in subsequent pregnancies or on ex-
posure to oestrogen containing preparations. Female 
relatives of patients with intrahepatic cholestasis of 
pregnancy are at an increased risk of developing the 
same syndrome. Plasma total bile acid concentration is 
typically increased 5–10-fold and this may sometimes 
be the only abnormality.
Severe liver disease leading to acute liver failure is a 
rare complication of pregnancy. Although these condi-
tions probably represent a clinicopathological continuum, 
the clinical features and timing during pregnancy, results 
of laboratory tests and maternal and fetal outcomes al-
low differentiation between acute fatty liver of pregnancy, 
the ‘haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low platelets’ 
(HELLP) syndrome and liver impairment in eclamp-
sia and hyperemesis gravidarum. Liver rupture is a rare 
complication of fatty liver and the HELLP syndrome, 
with high mortality. With the widespread introduction of 
testing for viral hepatitis in pregnancy and biochemical 
screening, it is now clear that abnormal LFTs can occur 
in up to 3% of pregnancies. Details of appropriate inves-
tigations and management of liver disease in pregnancy 
are available in specialized texts.
Not surprisingly, the excretory defect in patients with 
the Dubin–Johnson syndrome (Chapter 13) is worsened 
by oestrogens, and such patients often first present with, 
or suffer from, increasing jaundice during pregnancy or 
on first exposure to the contraceptive pill. Pregnancy and 
the contraceptive pill are also associated with the devel-
opment of benign liver tumours and increased blood co-
agulability leading to hepatic vein thrombosis, but both 
of these complications are very rare.
Changes in hormonal profiles during or after preg-
nancy can also precipitate, or exacerbate pre-existing AIH 
in women. Occasionally, this rare condition presents for 
the first time during the second or third trimesters of 
pregnancy or in the immediate postpartum period. More 
frequently, patients with pre-existing AIH, who have 
been in treatment-induced remission, experience flares of 
their disease during or after pregnancy. These flares are 
unpredictable and AIH patients who become pregnant, 
therefore, require more frequent monitoring of their serum 
aminotransferase activities during pregnancy and for up 
to six months after delivery, so that their immunosuppres-
sive therapy can be increased (or reintroduced) at an early 
stage to avoid the development of subacute liver failure, 
which carries a high risk for both mother and fetus. The 
mechanisms underlying these effects of hormonal changes 
on the activity of this disease are not well understood, 
but it is known that hormones have profound effects on 
the immune system. Thus, high oestrogen and prolactin 
concentrations promote mainly a cell-mediated response, 
while low oestrogen and high progesterone concentra-
tions favour an antibody-mediated pathway.
Glucose intolerance
Most patients with hepatic cirrhosis exhibit intolerance 
to glucose. This is probably due to insulin resistance at 
the level of peripheral glucose uptake and glycogen syn-
thesis by muscle. The fasting plasma concentration of in-
sulin is increased because of a combination of decreased 
hepatic extraction, enhanced secretion and portosystemic 
shunting.
Hypoglycaemia, presumably because of the vast 
functional hepatic reserve, is rare in liver disease, being 
virtually confined to patients with acute liver failure, ga-
lactosaemia, fructosaemia or, even more rarely, primary 
hepatic malignancy. Hypoglycaemia can occur in acute 
liver failure and can be severe and persistent; for this rea-
son such patients should be routinely maintained on a 
glucose infusion, particularly if they are being transferred 
between hospitals.
In patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and liver 
disease who require treatment with oral hypoglycae-
mics, biguanides are best avoided because of the danger 
of lactic acidosis. Most sulfonylureas are metabolized in 
the liver, and those with a long plasma half-life should 
be avoided in patients with liver disease because of the 
risk of hypoglycaemia owing to accumulation of the 
drug.
DRUGS AND THE LIVER
Biochemical tests play a crucial role in the recognition 
and monitoring of adverse effects of therapeutic drugs. 
An International Consensus Meeting has clarified the 
terminology best used for reporting and recognizing 
such reactions, and for inferring causality by the tempo-
ral relationship between drug administration and puta-
tive hepatic dysfunction. It should be emphasized here 
that this discussion is not about patients with liver dis-
ease, but patients with other conditions who develop 
some form of liver dysfunction during or after treatment. 
Table 14.6 lists the definitions and gives some classic ex-
amples. In the absence of histological evidence, the term 
‘drug-­induced liver injury’ is preferred to ‘hepatitis’ or 
TABLE 14.6  Agreed criteria for classification of drug-induced liver damage
 
Laboratory test
ALT/ALP ratio (R)
Examples
Acute
Chronic
Hepatocellular
ALT >2 × ULN
R >2
Paracetamol, isoniazid
Methyldopa, dantrolene
Cholestatic
ALP >2 × ULN
R <2
Anabolic steroids
Phenothiazines
Mixed
ALT and ALP >2 × ULN
2 < R <5
Chlorpromazine
Ajmaline
ULN, upper limit of normal (reference) range.
264	
Clinical biochemistry
‘cirrhosis’. Almost all the pathological conditions de-
scribed in this chapter can be caused by drugs, chemicals 
or toxins. The reader is referred to standard texts for a 
detailed list of possible associations between liver disease 
and xenobiotics.
NEOPLASTIC DISEASE OF THE LIVER  
AND BILIARY TRACT
As with those in other organs, liver tumours are classi-
fied as benign or malignant and the latter are subclassified 
as primary (relatively rare) or secondary (relatively com-
mon). Benign liver tumours are of little clinical signifi-
cance other than as a very occasional association with the 
use of oral contraceptive preparations and their increas-
ing incidental detection during ultrasound or comput-
erized tomography (CT) imaging. The extent to which 
incidentally detected space-occupying lesions of the liver 
should be further investigated is difficult and controver-
sial: most will be benign and of no clinical significance. 
They should be investigated, however, because of the 
devastating consequences of missing the occasional ma-
lignant tumour that, when detected early, may be ame-
nable to surgical resection. In general, LFTs are normal 
in subjects with benign lesions, so there is little doubt that 
further investigation should be undertaken if LFTs are 
abnormal in any respect.
In the West, most malignant disease of the liver in-
volves metastatic deposits from primary tumours of the 
gut, pancreas, lung or breast. Abnormal LFTs do not 
provide any specific information about the primary site 
of a tumour metastasizing to the liver. On the other 
hand, metastases will seldom be of sufficient size to be 
detectable by imaging in individuals with normal LFTs. 
Measurement of carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) is 
of little diagnostic use, but serial measurement after 
resection of a primary colorectal tumour may provide 
early evidence of disease recurrence, particularly in the 
liver.
Hepatocellular carcinoma and  
α-fetoprotein
Primary liver cancer is relatively uncommon in the West 
but has been increasing due, in part, to the increased 
prevalence of chronic hepatitis C. However, worldwide, 
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the common-
est and most rapidly progressive malignant neoplasms. In 
more than 75% of patients, it arises as a complication of 
hepatic cirrhosis. Hepatocellular carcinoma is one of the 
few tumours for which a serological marker, α-fetoprotein 
(AFP), is clinically useful and widely available, although 
the sensitivity of AFP is only of the order of 80% as not 
all tumours secrete this protein. The reference range 
for AFP is usually quoted as <10 μg/L, while values of 
up to 10
7 μg/L are seen in patients with HCC. Values 
>500 μg/L, in an appropriate clinical setting, are virtually 
diagnostic of HCC, but there is a ‘grey area’ between 10 
and 500 μg/L, where similar values can be seen in patients 
with uncomplicated chronic liver disease associated with 
hepatic regeneration.
Unfortunately, many patients with small and poten-
tially resectable tumours fall into this ‘grey area’ and, 
consequently, several attempts to improve the specificity 
of the test have been made. A steady increase in AFP con-
centration within the ‘grey area’ is particularly suggestive 
of malignant change. Also, there is good evidence that a 
high percentage of AFP originating from malignant cells 
is hyperfucosylated, and a routine test for this fraction 
may become available in the future. Apart from its use in 
diagnosis of HCC, AFP concentration is widely used to 
monitor response to therapy, since the concentration falls 
and rises in relation to the tumour mass.
A rare type of HCC, the fibrolamellar variant, is char-
acterized by occurrence in adolescence, absence of AFP 
and a rather better prognosis than other types of HCC. 
The plasma unsaturated B12 binding protein (UBBP) and 
neurotensin concentrations are usually grossly elevated. 
The diagnosis is, however, made on histological grounds, 
although measurement of UBBP and neurotensin can be 
used to monitor treatment.
PARENTERAL NUTRITION
Abnormalities of LFTs are frequently noted in pa-
tients receiving parenteral nutrition (PN) and usually 
arise during or after the second week of therapy. An 
increase in ALP and aminotransferases to more than 
twice the upper limit of the reference range occurs 
in up to 50% of patients, but few actually develop 
clinical jaundice. The underlying histological lesion 
is usually steatosis, and there seems little doubt that 
over-­provision of calories and infusate imbalance (par-
ticularly when glucose alone rather than glucose and 
fat is used as the energy source) are involved. Much 
anxiety has been expressed about the hepatotoxicity of 
fat emulsions, but this only occurs if very high concen-
trations are used.
The possibility that changes in LFTs might be at-
tributable to a specific complication of the condition 
for which the PN is being used must be borne in mind. 
An additional complication of PN is the development 
of both gallstone disease and acalculous cholecystitis. In 
neonates, particularly when premature, the development 
of PN-related liver disease may limit its use. In such chil-
dren, the hepatic lesion ranges from mild cholestasis as-
sociated with steatosis to severe cholestasis, cirrhosis and 
liver failure.
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
Extrahepatic bacteraemia is frequently associated with 
abnormal LFTs and, particularly in the young, jaundice. 
The picture is usually one of cholestasis, although in cer-
tain specific instances, for example in the toxic shock syn-
drome (due to Staphylococcus aureus infection), the picture 
may be more hepatitic.
Spontaneous bacterial peritonitis may occur in sub-
jects with ascites and liver disease, in the absence of any 
	
14  Acute and chronic liver disease	
265
apparent intra-abdominal source. The condition may 
be clinically silent, the only manifestations being onset 
of encephalopathy, deterioration in renal function and 
worsening LFTs. Rapid detection is essential and diag-
nosis is based on measurement of the polymorphonuclear 
leukocyte count in ascites and Gram stain of a centrifuged 
pellet (Table 14.7). The bacterial culture of ascites should 
be performed by directly injecting freshly drawn ascites 
into blood culture bottles at the bedside, because trans-
porting ascites to the microbiology laboratory results in 
a significant reduction in the success of identifying the 
infecting organism. The responsible organism is usually 
Escherichia coli or other gut-related organisms and, less 
frequently, pneumococci.
INHERITED METABOLIC DISORDERS  
INVOLVING THE LIVER
Iron overload and hereditary 
haemochromatosis
Iron is a toxic metal, and whole body iron balance is 
tightly regulated at the level of the duodenal mucosa by 
controlling the amount of iron absorbed from the diet. 
Iron excretion is limited, and in the absence of a regulated 
pathway of iron loss, positive iron balance leads to in-
creased tissue concentrations. The term haemochroma-
tosis refers to the group of genetic disorders in which, as 
a result of excessive absorption of dietary iron and long-
term positive iron balance, iron deposition causes tissue 
damage, particularly to the liver, pancreas, heart, anterior 
pituitary and joints. Haemosiderosis implies iron over-
load without tissue damage, often an early stage of iron 
accumulation, while secondary haemochromatosis occurs 
in conditions requiring multiple blood transfusions and 
in some other haematological disorders.
Although previously considered a single gene disorder, 
it is now known that haemochromatosis can be caused by 
mutations in several genes that appear to have different 
functions in iron metabolism. The most common form of 
haemochromatosis, found almost exclusively in people of 
northern European descent, is caused by homozygosity 
for a low penetrant mutation, C282Y, in the hereditary 
haemochromatosis gene, HFE. This condition affects 
mainly men and is characterized by the insidious accu-
mulation of iron, with the onset of symptoms and signs 
of iron overload delayed until the fourth or fifth decades 
of life. Heterozygotes for the C282Y mutation do not 
develop iron overload, although minor abnormalities in 
plasma iron and ferritin concentrations occur in approxi-
mately 15% of such individuals. Adult onset haemochro-
matosis is very rarely associated with mutations in TfR2, 
the gene encoding transferrin receptor 2, a cell surface 
glycoprotein involved in iron transport and uptake by 
cells including hepatocytes.
A contrasting group of disorders, in which the iron 
loading process is very rapid, presenting by the second or 
third decades and affecting males and females equally, is 
known as juvenile haemochromatosis. Although liver dis-
ease is invariably present, usually as cirrhosis, the clinical 
presentation in this form of genetic iron overload is with 
cardiac and endocrine failure. Juvenile haemochromato-
sis is caused by mutations in HJV and HAMP, genes that 
encode, respectively, hemojuvelin and hepcidin. The iron 
loading process resulting from the digenic inheritance of 
mutations in HFE and TfR2, genes normally associated 
with adult onset haemochromatosis, can be so rapid as to 
lead to the phenotype of juvenile haemochromatosis. The 
recent identification of the iron regulatory hormone hep-
cidin provides a link between HFE, TfR2 and HJV, since 
mutations in these genes, and in HAMP itself, cause loss 
of hepcidin production by the liver. This peptide acts by 
inhibiting dietary iron absorption and iron release from 
recycling and storage sites. All these forms of iron over-
load are characterized by hepcidin deficiency and it ap-
pears that the proteins encoded by HFE, TfR2 and HJV 
function as sensors of iron status on the hepatocyte mem-
brane acting upstream of HAMP. Genotyping for muta-
tions in HFE is now an essential part of diagnosis and 
screening for haemochromatosis. Mutations in the other 
genes are so rare that routine genetic analysis for these is 
not undertaken. A further variant of haemochromatosis 
is associated with mutations in ferroportin, a gene that en-
codes the hepcidin receptor.
The penetrance of the homozygous C282Y genotype 
in HFE-related haemochromatosis, defined in terms of 
severe iron overload with tissue damage manifesting as 
cirrhosis and type 1 diabetes, is low, probably in the or-
der of ~1–2%. Biochemical penetrance, defined as an in-
crease in transferrin saturation of >60% and a minimally 
raised plasma ferritin concentration, probably occurs 
in 20–50% of homozygous individuals. Other undeter-
mined genetic loci and possibly environmental factors are 
likely to determine penetrance, but these are currently 
uncharacterized.
A clinical diagnosis of haemochromatosis in a se-
verely iron loaded subject may be made on the basis 
of signs of liver disease, glycosuria and a slate-grey ap-
pearance of the skin, but confirmation of the diagnosis 
is entirely dependent on genetic and laboratory tests. 
The crucial investigations are plasma iron and ferritin 
concentration and transferrin saturation. In a patient 
TABLE 14.7  Relation of clinical signs and ascitic 
fluid content in patients with ascites
 
Clinical 
signs of 
peritonitis
Ascitic fluid analysis
PMN 
count
Gram 
stain
Culture
Normal/sterile
None
<250
−
Negative
‘Bacterascites’
None
<250
±
Positive
Culture-negative 
neutrocytic 
or ‘probable’ 
peritonitis
Yes
>500
 
Negative
‘Silent 
peritonitis’
Minimal
a
>500
±
Positive
Spontaneous 
bacterial 
peritonitis
Yes
>250
±
Positive
aSome patients have fever or abdominal pain but without signs of 
peritonism. PMN, polymorphonuclear leukocytes.
(Rolando N, Wyke R J. Gut 1991: S25–8).
266	
Clinical biochemistry
with full gene penetrance, the fasting plasma iron con-
centration is usually >40 μmol/L (reference range 10–
30 μmol/L) and transferrin is usually >60% saturated. 
Plasma ferritin concentration, which is approximately 
proportional to the iron excess, is usually >1000 μg/L 
(upper limit of reference range 200–300 μg/L) and 
starts to rise when hepatic iron stores exceed twice the 
reference range.
If these tests suggest iron overload and liver func-
tion tests are abnormal, a liver biopsy should be under-
taken to assess the degree of liver damage. Histological 
staining for iron (using Perls stain) gives a semiquan-
titative assessment of the degree of iron overload, but 
the amount of iron in a biopsy can also be quantitated 
directly by inductively coupled mass spectrophotom-
etry (ICP-MS). The reference range is up to about 
20 μmol/g dry liver weight and >40 μmol/g dry liver 
weight is found in patients with haemochromatosis. In 
less severe disease, when the patient is <40 years of age, 
plasma ferritin is <1000 μg/L, LFTs are normal and ge-
notyping confirms the homozygous C282Y mutation, 
then liver biopsy is not indicated as cirrhosis is unlikely 
to have developed.
Treatment involves weekly venesection until the pa-
tient starts to develop iron deficiency anaemia and the 
plasma ferritin concentration falls to ~50 μg/L. Since 
500 mL of blood contains about 250 mg of iron, the to-
tal body iron at the time of diagnosis can be calculated 
from the total volume removed. In an iron loaded indi-
vidual, it is usually in the order of 10–25 g compared with 
less than 4 g in the normal individual. The same figures 
can be obtained from knowledge of the plasma ferritin 
concentration, which can also be used to monitor the 
progress of treatment (1 μg/L of ferritin is equivalent to 
approximately 8 mg of iron). Unless cirrhosis has already 
occurred, phlebotomy is successful in preventing pro-
gressive liver disease. The high risk of development of 
hepatocellular carcinoma remains in treated patients with 
cirrhosis. It is also important to screen the patient’s rela-
tives for haemochromatosis by HFE genotyping so that 
treatment can be instituted if appropriate before liver 
damage occurs. Plasma ferritin and transferrin saturation 
are the most sensitive biochemical tests for presymptom-
atic detection in population studies.
Wilson disease
Wilson disease is an autosomal recessively inherited 
disease of copper metabolism with a worldwide preva-
lence of about 1:30 000 and a carrier rate of 1:90. It leads 
to excessive deposition of copper in the liver, kidneys, 
brain, eyes and other tissues. Like haemochromatosis, 
it is treatable and thus has an importance in liver dis-
ease out of proportion to its rarity. Liver disease is the 
most prominent aspect in about 40% of patients, the re-
mainder exhibiting neurological, psychiatric or haema-
tological complications. The hepatic manifestations vary 
widely from asymptomatic development of cirrhosis to 
an acute onset, often accompanied by haemolysis and ev-
idence of renal tubular dysfunction, which may progress 
to fulminant hepatic failure. In such patients, the finding 
of a very low serum alkaline phosphatase activity may be 
a useful pointer to Wilson disease: the transient marked 
hypercupraemia is thought to lead to incorporation of 
copper instead of zinc into the active sites of ALP, re-
ducing its activity. Accumulation of copper in the eyes is 
associated with the appearance of Kayser–Fleischer rings 
in the cornea (detectable by slit-lamp examination), al-
though these may not always be present. In the brain, the 
copper deposition leads to neurological symptoms (see 
Chapter 36).
The defect in Wilson disease is attributed to mutations 
in the ATP7B gene on chromosome 13 (at the 13q14.3 
locus), which cause failure of ATPase-dependent copper 
excretion. To date, more than 200 mutations have been 
identified, and most patients are compound heterozy-
gotes. However, in some patients with classic Wilson dis-
ease, no mutations in the ATP7B gene have been found. 
Nonetheless, progress of the disease can be effectively 
arrested by treatment (see below) and, therefore, all first-
degree relatives of patients with Wilson disease should 
be screened, initially by biochemical testing, to identify 
asymp­tomatic siblings who might benefit from early 
therapeutic intervention.
Among those presenting with chronic liver disease, 
the elevation of aminotransferases is said to be inap-
propriately low for the degree of hepatic inflammation 
and ALP is often within the reference range, or low in 
patients where zinc depletion has occurred. There may 
be a low-grade haemolytic anaemia leading to mild hy-
perbilirubinaemia, with an increased risk of pigment 
gallstones. Copper deposition may lead to renal tubular 
dysfunction with loss of potassium, glucose, amino acids 
and phosphate.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis, or exclusion, of Wilson disease is of cru-
cial importance to patients and their relatives. It is seldom 
as straightforward as it may appear in standard texts. If 
there is any doubt about the diagnosis, advice should be 
sought from a specialist centre. The following are charac-
teristic laboratory features (see Table 14.8).
1.	 A low plasma caeruloplasmin concentration. More 
than 90% of patients have values below the refer-
ence range of 200–400 mg/L. The only exception 
is when there is very ‘active’ liver disease, when 
values may be within the lower part of the refer-
ence range. About 10% of asymptomatic carriers 
will also exhibit a low plasma caeruloplasmin con-
centration. Caeruloplasmin synthesis is induced 
by steroids and plasma concentrations are higher 
in women using the oral contraceptive pill or hor-
mone replacement therapy.
2.	 A low plasma copper concentration. This is usu-
ally below the lower limit of the reference range, 
but similar values can be found in association with 
other disorders and it therefore lacks diagnostic 
specificity. Approximately 90% (10–25 μmol/L) 
of plasma copper is irreversibly bound to cae-
ruloplasmin. The remainder (<2 μmol/L), termed 
‘free’ copper, is loosely bound to albumin and to 
amino acids. A ‘free’ plasma copper concentration 
>7 μmol/L is virtually diagnostic of Wilson ­disease, 
	
14  Acute and chronic liver disease	
267
but such values are found in only ~50% of pa-
tients. Normal total plasma copper ­concentrations 
can often be seen in patients with acute hepatocyte 
damage owing to release of copper trapped in the 
liver.
3.	 A high tissue copper concentration. It is clearly im-
portant that the diagnosis of Wilson disease is en-
tertained before liver biopsy is undertaken so that 
an adequate sample may be taken for estimation of 
liver copper concentration. It is worth taking two 
cores to ensure that enough material is available, 
one for routine histology and one for tissue copper 
estimation, to reduce the risk of a falsely low value 
due to sampling error. Liver copper concentrations 
can, however, be raised in cholestatic liver diseases 
other than Wilson disease, reducing the specificity 
of the test.
The combination of a very low plasma copper con-
centration with a very high tissue copper concentra-
tion is diagnostic of Wilson disease, especially when 
Kayser–Fleischer rings are detected. However, not 
infrequently, either a liver biopsy is contraindicated 
because of severe coagulopathy or tissue concentra-
tions are not high enough to be diagnostic, so other 
confirmatory tests may be required. The most reliable 
of these (and the simplest to perform) is the penicil-
lamine challenge test. This involves collection of two 
24 h urine samples for copper estimation before and 
after administration of d-penicillamine. This is given 
as two oral 500 mg doses, one at the start and one in 
the middle of the second 24 h period. A 10–20-fold 
increase in the 24 h urinary copper excretion after 
penicillamine administration is virtually diagnostic of 
Wilson disease. Advances in DNA sequencing tech-
niques have meant that molecular diagnosis is becom-
ing more readily available and is particularly helpful in 
diagnosing asymptomatic siblings once a family muta-
tion in the ATP7B gene has been identified.
Long-term management of hepatic Wilson 
disease
Wilson disease is treated with penicillamine, which leads 
to a gradual improvement in standard LFTs. The ra-
tionale for the use of penicillamine was to increase uri-
nary copper excretion and thereby reduce body copper. 
Despite the undoubted efficacy of the drug in Wilson 
disease, it now appears that liver copper concentrations 
do not change significantly and that the mechanism of ac-
tion of penicillamine is considerably more complex than 
originally thought.
Penicillamine therapy is associated with a number of 
adverse drug reactions, including skin rashes, protein-
uria, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia. It is particularly 
important to test the urine for protein during penicilla-
mine treatment, because the drug can precipitate a num-
ber of immunologically mediated conditions including a 
form of nephrotic syndrome and Goodpasture syndrome. 
Treatment must be life-long, and even short interrup-
tions may precipitate fatal hepatic failure. Trientine 
hydrochloride is an effective second-line treatment in 
patients who are intolerant of penicillamine. Since some 
may find penicillamine tablets unpleasant or inconve-
nient to take, and some children will never have had, or 
will not be able to remember having had, any symptoms 
of the disease, compliance may be a problem. Zinc has 
been used as monotherapy in children with Wilson dis-
ease; it acts as an inducer of gut mucosal metallothionein, 
which binds copper and leads to excretion in the stools. 
The best indication that an effective dose is being taken is 
said to be that the plasma copper concentration remains 
low. The use of zinc monotherapy in adults is controver-
sial and in any event should only be introduced following 
treatment with either penicillamine or trientine for some 
years. Life-long monitoring with liver function tests and 
urinary copper measurements is mandatory in Wilson 
disease.
TABLE 14.8  Typical laboratory findings in Wilson disease and other conditions in which  
Wilson disease may enter the differential diagnosis
Test (reference range)
Wilson disease
Acute 
hepatic 
necrosis
a
Chronic 
cholestasis
b
Indian 
childhood 
cirrhosis
Chronic 
liver 
disease
Fulminant 
hepatic 
failure
Asymptomatic
Liver function tests
Mildly 
abnormal
Grossly 
deranged
Normal
Grossly 
deranged
Cholestatic
Mildly 
abnormal
Plasma copper
 
 
 
 
 
 
  total (10–30 μmol/L)
Variable
>30
Variable
>15
>25
>25
  free (<2 μmol/L)
>10
>10
>2
<2
<2
<2
Plasma caeruloplasmin 
(200–400 mg/L)
<200
<200 but 
may be 
normal
<270
100–270
200–400
200–400
Urinary copper
 
 
 
 
 
 
  basal 
(0.25–0.75 μmol/24 h)
>2
>15
>1
<15
>1
>0.75
  penicillamine 
stimulated
>20-fold 
increase
>10-fold 
increase
 
 
 
 
Hepatic copper(1 μmol/g 
dry weight)
4–20
20–40
1–4
<1
2–1 5
1–4
aAny severe hepatitic illness.
bConditions such as primary biliary cirrhosis and sclerosing cholangitis.
268	
Clinical biochemistry
Indian childhood cirrhosis
This condition, which affects young children, was 
thought to be confined to the Indian subcontinent. The 
liver is grossly fibrotic and concentrations of tissue cop-
per are in the same range as those seen in Wilson disease 
(see Table  14.8). Variants are now seen in other geo-
graphical areas and it appears that different mechanisms 
can lead to the same end-stage chronic liver disease. 
The Indian subcontinent variety is probably a childhood 
cirrhosis that requires a high environmental exposure 
to copper for full expression, as supplied by excess di-
etary copper (from milk stored in copper vessels). In the 
USA, a cholestatic process seems to underlie a similar 
form of cirrhosis with high concentrations of tissue cop-
per. A genetically deleterious excretory defect is likely to 
be present. Arsenic ingestion has also been implicated. 
Penicillamine may be effective if given before decom-
pensation develops.
α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
Deficiency of this glycoprotein, which is an enzyme that 
acts as an anti-proteinase predominantly inhibiting elas-
tase, is associated with both pulmonary and liver disease. 
The condition is inherited co-dominantly and, in the clas-
sic form of the disease, histological examination of liver 
biopsy specimens reveals characteristic PAS-positive, 
diastase-resistant globules within the portal tracts. These 
globules represent accumulation of the defective protein 
within the endoplasmic reticulum. The mechanism of 
liver cell damage, which often progresses to cirrhosis, is 
ill understood.
The gene encoding α1-antitrypsin (α1-AT) is located 
on chromosome 14 (at 14q32.1). More than 90 genetic 
variants have been described, most of which are exceed-
ingly rare and are associated with production of normal 
amounts of functional enzyme. The different variants 
(phenotypes) can be identified by their mobility on iso-
electric focusing. The conventional nomenclature de-
scribes the various phenotypes by the letters ‘Pi’ (protease 
inhibitor) followed by an alphabetical code relating to 
their mobilities. The commonest (normal) phenotype is 
designated ‘M’ (medium) and is further subdivided into 
at least eight subtypes (M1, M2, M3 etc.). Of the muta-
tions that result in α1AT deficiencies, the two commonest 
are designated ‘S’ (slow) and ‘Z’ (ultraslow), with ho-
mozygotes being described as PiSS or PiZZ, compound 
heterozygotes with defective phenotypes as PiSZ, and 
heterozygotes as, for example, PiMS or PiMZ. The S 
phenotype is mainly associated with lung disease, while 
the Z phenotype is strongly associated with both lung 
and liver disease. Other rare phenotypes are also asso-
ciated with liver disease (Siiyama, MMalton, PiKing) (see also 
Chapter 43).
Individuals with defective phenotypes may present (or 
be identified incidentally) at any time from infancy to 
old age. The most important period is during the first 
few weeks of life, with about 25% of cases of the neona-
tal hepatitis syndrome being due to this condition. The 
­association with liver disease is very variable. Some chil-
dren, particularly those who do not develop symptoms 
in infancy, may never develop liver disease, while others 
may progress rapidly to cirrhosis and death from liver 
failure. The Z allele causes a Glu342Lys substitution in 
the protein that results in the formation of polymers that 
are retained in the endoplasmic reticulum of hepato-
cytes. These polymers are degraded via several pathways, 
including the ubiquitin–proteasome and the autophagy–
lysosome systems. There is significant interindividual 
variation in the capacity of these systems, which might 
account for the variation in the extent of liver disease 
in affected individuals. The accumulation of polymers 
of α1-AT in the liver means that only 10–15% of the 
α1-AT molecules produced reach the circulation. This 
forms the basis for the initial screening test as plasma 
α1-AT concentrations are low (typically 0.1–0.2 g/L, nor-
mal 1.0–2.0 g/L). α1-Antitrypsin is a positive acute phase 
reactant and upregulation of α1-AT synthesis during an 
inflammatory response or acute hepatocellular damage 
can cause release of the accumulated polymers, increas-
ing plasma concentrations to within the reference range. 
Strategies for investigation of possible α1-AT deficiency 
in these situations should include phenotyping and/or 
genotyping.
The hepatic porphyrias
These are so called because the major organ in which ex-
cessive production of the porphyrins or their precursors 
takes place is the liver (see Chapter  28). However, the 
four types (acute intermittent porphyria, hereditary cop-
roporphyria, variegate porphyria and 5-aminolaevulinic 
acid dehydratase deficiency porphyria (Doss) porphyria) 
do not have any hepatic manifestations other than the 
occasional mild rise in plasma aminotransferase activity 
and an increased incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma 
in patients with acute intermittent porphyria. Porphyria 
cutanea tarda has already been described (p.  258). 
Asymptomatic porphyrinuria (mainly due to copro-
porphyrin) is common in many acute liver diseases and 
hepatic tumours. In erythropoietic porphyria, the liver 
plays a minimal role in protoporphyrin overproduction, 
but hepatic complications may occasionally arise: these 
comprise gallstones and cirrhosis associated with massive 
protoporphyrin deposition.
Cystic fibrosis
A wide spectrum of hepatobiliary complications of cys-
tic fibrosis is becoming increasingly recognized as larger 
numbers of children survive to adulthood as a result of 
improvements in the treatment of the pulmonary com-
plications of the disorder. In infancy, cystic fibrosis may 
present as neonatal cholestasis, often in association with 
meconium ileus. Older children may develop a fatty liver 
syndrome, but the major problem is a focal biliary cirrho-
sis that progresses to a generalized cirrhosis with all the 
complications as described previously. Extrahepatic bili-
ary disease, with stricture of the distal common bile duct, 
is also frequent, although this, of itself, is probably not 
directly involved in the pathogenesis of the liver disease. 
Laboratory investigation is important in the diagnosis of 
	
14  Acute and chronic liver disease	
269
this condition (see Chapter 25), but the LFTs are entirely 
non-specific and serve no more than to indicate that liver 
abnormalities are present. Liver function tests have been 
used to monitor response to therapy with ursodeoxycho-
lic acid.
Other inherited metabolic diseases
Diagnosis, management and genetic counselling in chil-
dren with inborn errors of metabolism form a large part 
of paediatric hepatology. The disorders also illustrate 
many aspects of applied intermediary metabolism. Most 
are rare and few laboratories will develop wide experi-
ence. Here, the more common types are described briefly, 
with more detailed accounts in the Further reading list at 
the end of the chapter.
Tyrosinaemia
This is an autosomal recessive condition, of which there 
are two types. Type I is due to deficiency of fumarylace-
toacetate hydrolase (Fig. 14.3) and is the only genetically 
mediated disorder of amino acid metabolism that has so 
far been identified as a significant cause of liver disease. 
Type II is due to deficiency of tyrosine aminotransferase 
and is not associated with liver damage.
Type I tyrosinaemia usually presents at the age of 
2–6  months with vomiting, diarrhoea, oedema, asci-
tes, hepatosplenomegaly, hypoglycaemia and failure to 
thrive. There is a marked bleeding diathesis owing to 
prothrombin deficiency. Other characteristic features 
include systemic acidosis and renal tubular dysfunc-
tion leading to hypophosphataemic rickets. Rapid and 
accurate diagnosis is essential since dietary restric-
tion of phenylalanine, tyrosine and methionine may 
improve the prognosis in this otherwise fatal disease. 
A more chronic form of the disease may present later 
in childhood with cirrhosis and a high incidence of 
hepatocellular carcinoma, although AFP concentra-
tions may be grossly elevated even in the absence of 
a tumour.
The characteristic laboratory findings are a marked 
amino acidaemia, with tyrosine, phenylalanine and me-
thionine concentrations being particularly elevated. 
There is also moderate derangement of LFTs, a raised 
INR and a markedly raised AFP. However, the diagnos-
tic finding is the presence of succinylacetone in urine 
(or amniotic fluid, for prenatal diagnosis), usually with 
elevated urinary 5-aminolaevulinate (owing to the inhi-
bition of porphobilinogen synthetase by the succinyl­
acetone). Liver transplantation is being increasingly used 
in both forms of the disease. Treatment with nitisinone 
may be beneficial in slowing progression of the condition 
(see Chapter 24).
Galactosaemia
Galactose is generated by intestinal hydrolysis of lactose 
and is converted in the liver to glucose. Classic galacto-
saemia (see Chapter 24) is an autosomal recessive con-
dition that is due to deficiency of the enzyme galactose 
1-phosphate uridyltransferase (GALT), resulting in ac-
cumulation of galactose, galactitol (via an aldoreductase) 
and galactose 1-phosphate in all body tissues (Fig. 14.4). 
The disease usually becomes evident soon after birth 
when milk is introduced into the diet. It varies widely 
in severity but, in the majority, the LFTs are grossly de-
ranged, with elevated plasma aminotransferases and a 
raised INR, indicating hepatocellular necrosis. There is a 
severe unconjugated jaundice due to haemolytic anaemia, 
accompanied by amino aciduria and proteinuria, indicat-
ing renal damage. Often, the condition rapidly progresses 
to liver failure, with bleeding and ascites. The mecha-
nisms underlying the liver damage are poorly understood, 
but may be related to cellular ATP depletion owing to 
accumulation of galactose 1-phosphate in cells, which 
may restrict the availability of phosphate for formation 
of high-energy bonds. A less acute presentation may be 
with a chronic liver disease, cataracts and learning dif-
ficulties. Children with this condition have an increased 
risk of septicaemia.
Galactosaemia should be suspected if sugars other than 
glucose are detected in urine. In this context, it should 
be noted that conventional urine stick tests detect only 
glucose and not other reducing sugars. The diagnosis 
requires the demonstration of low or absent GALT en-
zyme activity in erythrocytes and confirmation by genetic 
testing (see Chapter 24). Treatment is by withdrawal of 
lactose and galactose from the diet, which can be moni-
tored by measurement of galactose-1-phosphate in blood 
samples.
FIGURE 14.3  ■  Intermediary metabolism of tyrosine. Classic ty-
rosinaemia (type I or tyrosinosis) is caused by a defect in fu-
marylacetoacetate hydrolase activity, but defects in other parts 
of the pathway are also recognized including alkaptonuria, in 
which there is deficiency of homogentisic acid oxidase. There 
are increases of all precursors (including tyrosine) in the urine, 
but the diagnostic test is for succinylacetone which, by reacting 
with sulphydryl groups, may in part be responsible for the tis-
sue damage.
270	
Clinical biochemistry
Fructose intolerance
Three genetic defects in fructose intolerance have been 
identified: essential fructosaemia (hepatic fructokinase 
deficiency), hereditary fructose intolerance (fructose 
1-phosphatase deficiency), and fructose 1,6-diphosphatase 
deficiency. All three are relatively benign conditions 
if fructose intake is avoided or substantially reduced. 
However, with high fructose intake, both hereditary 
fructose intolerance and fructose 1,6-diphosphatase 
deficiency can lead to severe liver and kidney damage. 
The mechanisms involved are not well understood but, 
by analogy with galactosaemia, the hepatic injury may 
be due to intracellular accumulation of phosphorylated 
sugars reducing availability of phosphate for ATP forma-
tion. The liver damage is reflected in grossly deranged 
LFTs, with markedly elevated aminotransferase activities, 
a conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia, hypoalbuminaemia 
and a raised INR, accompanied by hypokalaemia, hypo-
phosphataemia, profound hypoglycaemia and thrombo-
cytopenia. The renal damage leads to aminoaciduria and 
proteinuria.
Fructose 1,6-diphosphatase deficiency usually has less 
severe effects on the liver. Plasma aminotransferase ac-
tivities tend to be mildly or moderately elevated and the 
bilirubin concentration is only mildly raised. The promi-
nent features are hypoglycaemia, lactic acidaemia, ami-
noacidaemia (particularly alanine and glutamine) and a 
marked ketoacidosis. Diagnoses for all three conditions 
require demonstration of the deficiency of the particular 
enzyme in liver biopsy specimens, or genetic testing.
The sphingolipidoses and Niemann–Pick  
disease type C
The 
sphingolipidoses 
are 
recessively 
inherited 
­lysosomal disorders in which there is a deficiency of a 
specific lysosomal hydrolytic enzyme and consequent 
deposition of complex lipids in various tissues. Type C 
Niemann–Pick disease is a relatively common inher-
ited cause of liver disease in the UK. In most patients, 
the disease presents with a fatal neonatal hepatitis, but 
among those who survive, the liver disease becomes 
less prominent but death from progressive neurological 
damage is inevitable.
Glycogen storage diseases
There are 11 distinct types that comprise this group of 
autosomal recessive diseases, in which enzyme defects 
result in deficient mobilization of glycogen, deposition 
of abnormal forms in tissues and very variable progno-
sis. Types V and VII do not cause liver disease. In the 
remainder, which can affect the liver, clinical features are 
usually apparent in childhood and include gross hepa-
tomegaly associated with hypoglycaemic attacks and 
growth failure. Descriptions of the biochemical lesions, 
specific clinical features and treatment of all the glyco-
gen storage diseases are beyond the scope of this chapter 
and the reader is referred to specialist texts. Only type IV 
is consistently associated with cirrhosis. Liver function 
tests are abnormal in most types, particularly types III 
and IV, but jaundice is very rare. Hypoglycaemia is com-
mon to all and hyperuricaemia is prominent in types I, 
III and IX. Among those that affect the liver, the specific 
diagnoses in types II, III, IV and VI can be established 
by demonstrating the enzyme deficiencies in leukocytes, 
but liver biopsies are required for type I. Management 
revolves around dietary measures to maintain blood 
glucose concentrations. Liver transplantation is appro-
priate in some types, particularly types I and III, which 
can progress to hepatic adenomata and hepatocellular 
carcinoma.
LIVER TRANSPLANTATION
Liver transplantation is a rapidly expanding part of clini-
cal hepatology. Improvement in survival figures over the 
last decade has largely been due to better defined indica-
tions, improvement in immunosuppressive regimens and 
organ preservation and improved surgical techniques. 
The main indication is end-stage chronic liver disease 
but, as already mentioned, the procedure is being in-
creasingly used for acute liver failure and, in children, 
for treatment of certain inherited metabolic defects. 
Although the procedure is now routine in many centres, 
extensive preoperative assessment is still required and 
major complications are common. In any event, a liver 
transplantation programme will impose a heavy load on 
a clinical pathology laboratory. It is beyond the scope of 
this chapter to discuss all the problems that may arise, but 
they are summarized below.
FIGURE 14.4  ■  Metabolism of galactose. The usual lesion in clas-
sic galactosaemia is a decreased activity of galactose 1-phosphate 
uridyltransferase, but the other enzymes listed may also be 
involved in some cases. Note that the epimerase activity is 
normal in most affected individuals so that even on a galactose-
free diet, galactosaemic individuals generate enough galactose 
for normal development.
	
14  Acute and chronic liver disease	
271
Preoperative assessment
Selection of patients who are likely to benefit from a liver 
graft requires careful clinical judgement based both on 
the prognosis and on the quality of life with regard to the 
primary illness. The criteria are complex and depend on 
the aetiology of the liver failure and whether it is acute 
or is a consequence of chronic liver disease. The over-
all condition of the patient to withstand such a major 
surgical procedure needs to be carefully assessed. Thus, 
haemodynamic and respiratory status, patency of major 
blood vessels and concomitant diseases are essential con-
siderations. The potential effects of the immunosuppres-
sive drug therapy (to prevent graft rejection) on disease 
recurrence (e.g. in patients transplanted for malignant 
disorders or viral hepatitis), or on other complications 
such as pre-­existing renal disease also need to be con-
sidered. ABO blood group compatibility is required but, 
in contrast to other solid organ grafting, pre-transplant 
tissue typing of recipients for human leukocyte antigen 
(HLA) matching is not essential, except with combined 
transplants (e.g. liver and kidney), because the liver ap-
pears to be an ‘immunologically privileged’ organ, and 
donor-recipient incompatibility leading to hyperacute 
rejection is a rare event (see below).
The immediate postoperative period
The quality of the functioning of the graft immediately 
after transplantation is a major determinant of the future 
clinical course and is consequently of great importance. 
Primary non-function of the graft, that is, a liver that 
does not appear to work satisfactorily from the outset, 
is usually due to the poor quality of the donor organ. 
Hyperacute rejection has been described but is a very rare 
cause of immediate graft failure. Its differentiation from 
primary non-function is difficult, but may be suspected if 
the graft appears to function during the first 6–24 h only 
to then fail.
The standard LFTs have little value during the im-
mediate postoperative period because the patient’s 
blood will have been extensively diluted by multiple 
transfusions during the operation. Plasma aminotrans-
ferase activities on the second post-operative day are 
more reliable and are almost always elevated. This 
represents so-called ‘preservation injury’ to the donor 
organ acquired during its removal from the donor, and 
subsequent preservation and transportation prior to 
transplantation. Thereafter, a progressive fall in the 
aminotransferase activities indicates good graft func-
tion, while persistently high values suggest that the 
graft will not function well. Other parameters that are 
essential for monitoring graft function postoperatively 
are the blood hydrogen ion concentration (pH), glucose 
and coagulation factors. Hyperglycaemia is almost al-
ways present during the very early postoperative phase 
but, with normal graft function, the blood glucose usu-
ally normalizes over the following 24–48 h. Persistence 
of the hyperglycaemia, despite increasing doses of insu-
lin, indicates poor graft function.
Acute cellular rejection occurs in 50–70% of pa-
tients during the first three weeks after transplantation, 
and requires rapid diagnosis and adjustment of im-
munosuppressive treatment to preserve the graft. It is 
manifest by an often abrupt increase in plasma ami-
notransferase activities and bilirubin concentrations. 
An increasing plasma bilirubin concentration seems 
to be the more sensitive indicator, but rising amino-
transferases appear to be more specific. However, liver 
histology is required to confirm acute rejection. Some 
degree of renal impairment is often evident during the 
first 2–3 days, even if not present before the operation. 
Serious derangement of the biochemical liver tests, 
particularly in conjunction with evidence of a coagu-
lopathy, is highly suggestive of interruption to the vas-
cular supply to the graft.
Intermediate follow-up
Frequent monitoring of LFTs is required during the 
months after a liver transplant to detect signs of late 
acute or chronic rejection, along with frequent micro-
biological surveillance for evidence of infections. Late 
acute rejection (occurring >1 month post-transplanta-
tion) is diagnosed as for early acute rejection. Chronic 
rejection is suspected if the LFTs were previously more 
or less normal but then begin to become deranged. In 
this situation, the aminotransferases and INR may be 
only mildly elevated, but there is a progressive increase 
in the serum bilirubin and other cholestatic indicators. 
These changes can also be seen in fungal, bacterial 
and viral infections, to which the immunosuppressed 
patient is particularly susceptible, but can usually be 
differentiated from rejection episodes on clinical and 
histological criteria together with microbiological 
investigations.
Patients are generally metabolically unstable for some 
months after transplantation and require careful adjust-
ment of their immunosuppression. The principal im-
munosuppressive drugs currently used are ciclosporin, 
tacrolimus, mycophenolate mofetil and sirolimus, alone 
or in various combinations, sometimes with glucocor-
ticoids and/or azathioprine. Several of these agents are 
nephrotoxic and potentially neurotoxic at high doses. 
Their metabolism is affected by a number of factors, 
including graft function, other drugs (e.g. antibiotics) 
that may be required and individual pharmacogenetic 
variability in their metabolism that can affect the blood 
concentrations at given doses. Thus, frequent monitor-
ing (initially, two or three times per week) of the concen-
trations of these drugs in the blood is required during 
the months following transplantation in order to main-
tain them within the fairly narrow therapeutic ranges 
that provide adequate immunosuppression with minimal 
toxicity.
Long-term monitoring
From the laboratory standpoint, long-term monitoring 
of liver transplant recipients is relatively straightfor-
ward, unless complications arise. Because of the tenu-
ous arterial supply of the common bile duct, biliary 
tract complications are frequent, but the laboratory 
features are no different from those seen in patients 
272	
Clinical biochemistry
with other forms of biliary disease. By one year, most 
patients are well stabilized and require only three-
monthly check-ups with routine LFTs, tests of renal 
function and haematological investigations. By this 
time also, they are usually well established on their 
maintenance immunosuppressive regimens and much 
less frequent monitoring of their blood drug concen-
trations is required.
Late graft loss, occurring more than one year after 
transplantation, is relatively rare and, today, many such 
patients can be rescued with a second transplant. The 
commonest causes of late graft failure are uncontrol-
lable chronic rejection and recurrence of the primary 
disease. Thus, in patients transplanted for chronic viral 
hepatitis C, there is almost universal reinfection of the 
graft and consideration needs to be given to pre- and 
post-transplant antiviral therapy. In the case of patients 
transplanted for chronic hepatitis B, reinfection can be 
successfully prevented with regular immunoglobulin 
administration. The use of newly introduced antiviral 
agents is also under investigation. In those transplanted 
for hepatic malignancies, tumour recurrence is not in-
frequent and, as in other solid organ transplantation, 
there is an increased risk of non-hepatic malignan-
cies, particularly lymphomas, arising either de novo or 
through reactivation by immunosuppression of extra-
hepatic tumours that have previously been apparently 
successfully treated. Additionally, as the numbers of 
long-term survivors rises, recurrence of PBC and AIH 
(in those transplanted for these conditions) is being seen 
with increasing frequency.
CONCLUSION
Liver disease is best classified according to its aetiol-
ogy, qualified by the nature of the resulting pathological 
change. There are many aetiological factors, including 
­viruses and other infective agents, drugs and toxins, met-
abolic diseases and autoimmune processes. The range of 
pathological responses is limited; the most frequent are 
hepatitis, cirrhosis and cholestasis.
Hepatitis can be acute or chronic: chronic hepatitis 
can lead to cirrhosis and cholestasis can be a feature of 
both acute and chronic liver disease. Liver disease fre-
quently has extrahepatic manifestations, reflecting the 
central role of the liver in metabolism.
Liver transplantation is increasingly being em-
ployed in the management of many hitherto fatal liver 
diseases.
Further reading
Bircher J, Benhamou JP, McIntyre N et al. editors. Oxford textbook of 
clinical hepatology. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 1999. 
A comprehensive reference book.
Criteria for drug-induced liver disorders. Report of an International 
Consensus Meeting. J Hepatol 1990;11:272–6. 
Provides a classification of drug-induced hepatic dysfunction and for the 
inference of causality in this common clinical problem.
Gleeson D, Heneghan MA. British Society of Gastroenterology guidelines 
for management of autoimmune hepatitis. Gut 2011;60:1611–29. 
Recent management guidelines.
Hannuksela ML, Liisanantti MK, Nissinen AE et  al. Biochemical 
markers of alcoholism. Clin Chem Lab Med 2007;45:953–61. 
Overview of surrogate markers of alcoholism.
Joshi D, Heneghan MA, Norris SM et al. Management and outcome of 
Liver disease in pregnancy. Lancet 2010;375:594–605. 
Authoritative study of pregnancy in autoimmune hepatitis.
LaRusso NF, Shneider BL, Black D et al. Primary sclerosing cholangitis: 
summary of a workshop. Hepatology 2006;44:746–64. 
Overview of the pathogenesis and management of primary sclerosing 
cholangitis.
(Chairs) Ludwig J, McFarlane IG, Rakela J. International Working 
Party Report: Terminology of chronic hepatitis. Am J Gastroenterol 
1995;90:181–9. 
Detailed recommendations on terminology of chronic hepatitis, which 
have been adopted and are now used internationally.
McFarlane IG, Heneghan MA. Autoimmunity and the female liver. 
Hepatol Res 2004;28:171–6. 
Comprehensive review of what is known about hormonal effects on the 
immune system and how these relate to development of autoimmune liver 
disease in women.
McFarlane I, Bomford A, Sherwood R. Liver disease and laboratory 
medicine. London: ACB Venture Publications; 2000. 
A comprehensive account of the use of biochemical, immunological and 
other laboratory tests in the diagnosis and management of liver disease.
Merion RM. Current status and future of liver transplantation. Semin 
Liver Dis 2010;30:411–21. 
Review of liver transplantation from a medical perspective.
Mitchell GA, Grompe M, Lambert M et  al. Hypertyrosinaemia. In: 
Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WS et al. editors. The metabolic and 
molecular bases of inherited disease. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-
Hill; 2001. p. 1777–805. 
A detailed account of tyrosinaemia; other chapters in this book cover other 
metabolic diseases that affect the liver, for example galactosaemia, glycogen 
storage disease etc.
Moore KP, Aithal GP. Guidelines on the management of ascites in 
cirrhosis. Gut 2006;55(Suppl. VI):vi1–12. 
Review of the pathogenesis and management of a major complication of 
cirrhosis.
Mowat AP. Liver disorders in childhood. 3rd ed. London: Butterworth; 1994. 
The standard work on paediatric liver disease.
Pietrangelo A. Molecular insights into the pathogenesis of hereditary 
haemochromatosis. Gut 2006;55:564–8. 
Overview of the expanding pool of genes that cause haemochromatosis.
Tilg H, Hotamiligil GS. Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease: cytokine-
adipokine interplay and regulation of insulin resistance. Gastroenterology 
2006;131:934–45. 
Review of the pathogenesis of non-alcoholic fatty liver disease.
Walsham NE, Sherwood RA. Ethyl glucuronide. Ann Clin Biochem 
2012;49:110–7. 
Review of use of this marker to detect recent heavy alcohol use.
273
C H A P T E R  1 5
Glucose metabolism and the 
­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus
David B. Wile  •  John P.H. Wilding
CHAPTER OUTLINE
PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF 
­GLUCOSE HOMOEOSTASIS  273
Introduction: the maintenance of 
normoglycaemia  273
Normal glucose metabolism  274
Insulin  278
Insulin-like growth factors and their  
receptors  281
CLASSIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS OF DIABETES 
MELLITUS  282
Introduction  282
Definitions  282
Type 1 diabetes mellitus  283
Type 2 diabetes mellitus  286
Gestational diabetes mellitus  291
Maturity onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY)  292
Secondary diabetes  293
ENDOCRINE ASSOCIATIONS WITH 
DIABETES  295
DIABETES, NUTRITION AND GROWTH  296
MECHANISMS OF DIABETIC TISSUE 
DAMAGE  296
Introduction  296
Pathogenesis  296
Other aspects of diabetic tissue damage  297
CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH  
INADEQUATELY ­CONTROLLED DIABETES 
MELLITUS  298
BIOCHEMICAL MEASUREMENTS IN DIABETES 
MELLITUS  299
Glucose measurements  299
Testing for ketones  299
Oral glucose tolerance test  300
Tests of recent glycaemic control  300
Screening for diabetes  301
Tests for insulin resistance  301
Research investigations  303
CONCLUSION  303
PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY  
OF GLUCOSE HOMOEOSTASIS
Introduction: the maintenance  
of normoglycaemia
Blood glucose concentrations are maintained within very 
close limits in healthy people. Any given individual has a 
very strictly maintained postabsorptive (e.g. fasted over-
night) blood glucose concentration of 4.5–5.2 mmol/L, 
with intraindividual coefficients of variation (CV) of 
only 1–2%. Interindividual CV (assuming similar times 
since previous meal, levels of activity, composition of 
previous meal etc.) is less than 5%, so that a fasting 
glucose of 6.0 mmol/L is usually 4–5 standard devia-
tions away from the mean in most populations. Glucose 
concentrations in healthy people increase after meals, 
but typical meals will not raise blood glucose above 
8–10 mmol/L and normoglycaemia is usually restored 
within 2–4 h. Falls in glucose concentration may be pro-
duced by severe, sudden unaccustomed exercise or pro-
longed fasting (or both), by the pathological conditions 
discussed in Chapter 17 and by pharmacological means, 
but are not typically encountered in healthy adults on a 
daily basis.
The strictness of glucoregulation is remarkable when 
compared with the relative laxity of regulation of the 
concentrations of other circulating metabolic fuels such 
as ketone bodies and non-esterified fatty acids (NEFA, 
also known as free fatty acids, FFA). The reason for strict 
avoidance of low blood glucose concentrations is readily 
apparent in terms of the avoidance of the neurological 
and other consequences of hypoglycaemia, and it may be 
no accident that of all the hormones known to influence 
blood glucose concentration, insulin is the only one able 
to lower it. The threshold for the onset of detectable neu-
roglycopaenia is of the order of 3.0–3.5 mmol/L, and it is 
thus appropriate that counter-regulatory mechanisms are 
set to respond to maintain glycaemia comfortably above 
this level.
The reason for the strict avoidance of hyperglycaemia 
is less immediately apparent. Symptoms of hyperglycaemia 
are florid (in subjects used to relative normoglycaemia) at 
blood glucose concentrations of >12–13 mmol/L and 
274	
Clinical biochemistry
may become apparent at concentrations <10 mmol/L. 
Such concentrations may be seen, for example follow-
ing a myocardial infarction, so-called ‘stress hypergly-
caemia’ owing to the effect of catecholamine release, and 
are usually transient. Stress hyperglycaemia also occurs 
when plasma cytokine concentrations rise, for example 
in sepsis, with an increase in oxidative metabolism. (The 
severe metabolic consequences of hyperglycaemia at 
concentrations usually >20 mmol/L are discussed in the 
section on diabetic emergencies in Chapter 16.) In con-
trast, mild hyperglycaemia (glucose 6–9 mmol/L) is usu-
ally asymptomatic. The only obvious teleological value of 
preventing mild hyperglycaemia is the avoidance of the 
consequences of chronic hyperglycaemia, usually referred 
to as ‘long-term diabetic complications’ or ‘diabetic tissue 
damage’ (p. 296 and 322), and the increased susceptibility 
to infection that may occur acutely.
The mechanisms for regulation of normoglycaemia 
are summarized in Box  15.1, which lists the counter-
regulatory mechanisms responsible for preventing 
hypoglycaemia, and Figure  15.1, which outlines the 
main sites of insulin action relevant to prevention of 
hyperglycaemia.
Normal glucose metabolism
Circulating glucose derives from three main sources:
•	 the gut, as the result of hydrolysis or hepatic conver-
sion of a variety of ingested carbohydrates
•	 hepatic 
and 
some 
other 
glycogen 
stores 
(glycoge­nolysis)
•	 new synthesis from precursors (gluconeogenesis). 
Gluconeogenesis takes place in the liver (~75–
90%) and kidneys (~10–25%) from glucogenic 
amino acids, especially alanine, and from glycerol, 
lactate and pyruvate. Principally it involves the 
synthesis of a 6-carbon compound from various 
3-carbon skeletons. Partial oxidative metabolism 
in tissues like adipocytes and muscle provides lac-
tate and pyruvate but they can also be donated by 
red blood cells, in which anaerobic metabolism 
occurs in the absence of the enzymes of the Krebs 
(tricarboxylic acid) cycle. Triacylglycerol (triglyc-
eride) released from adipocytes during lipolysis 
provides glycerol.
Regulation of gluconeogenesis can be via changes in 
the amount of substrate arriving at the liver or by the 
amount that the liver itself extracts, as well as by regu-
lation within the liver. This process is subject to direct 
hormonal modulation by insulin, glucagon and catechol-
amines and indirectly by other hormones.
Hepatic glucose output is ~2.0 mg/kg body weight/
min in the resting postabsorptive state, or 200–300 g 
during the average 24 h period (varying with the 
availability of glucose from food and with the body’s 
requirements during exercise). Plasma glucose concen-
tration is determined by the balance between glucose 
influx into the circulation (principally from food and 
hepatic glucose production) and peripheral glucose 
clearance.
Glucose is stored as glycogen, a 70 kg man typi-
cally having a total of 700–1000 g (hydrated) glyco-
gen. Most of this is in the skeletal muscle (400–600 g), 
and liver (60–125 g), with lesser amounts in other tis-
sues. Glycogen is synthesized from both glucose and 
the gluconeogenic substrates (see above). Glycogen 
is a polymeric storage form of glucose. Extension of 
the polymer by the addition of glucose 6-phosphate 
subunits is catalysed by glycogen synthase, which is 
the main regulatory enzyme for glycogen ­synthesis. 
This enzyme is itself subject to regulation by a 
­dephosphorylation/phosphorylation cycle controlled 
by a cyclic AMP dependent protein kinase. Glycogen 
in skeletal muscle can provide fuel for muscle but does 
not provide a source of glucose for release into the 
circulation.
Glucose provides approximately 40–60% (on a typi-
cal diet in the developed world) of the total fuel ex-
pended by the body during a 24 h period. It provides 
almost all the energy for the central nervous system (es-
pecially in well-nourished subjects, although sustained 
fasting allows cerebral ketone body utilization). During 
high-intensity exercise and during the 4–6 h postpran-
dial period, glucose is the predominant fuel for the 
whole body. Glucose is the most efficient fuel for oxi-
dation in terms of the liberation of energy (112.2 kcal 
or 6 moles ATP per mole of oxygen consumed). Many 
tissues can use ketone bodies, fatty acids or glucose for 
their basal metabolism, switching between these dif-
ferent fuels depending upon their availability in the 
circulation.
Glucose is fully oxidized to carbon dioxide and wa-
ter in skeletal muscle, the brain and the liver. The brain 
accounts for most of the glucose oxidized in the fasting 
BOX 15.1	
Mechanisms preventing/reversing hypoglycaemia
Adrenergic/sympathetic response
•	 Promotes glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis and increased 
glucose output by the liver; reduces glucose clearance by 
skeletal muscle and adipose tissue
•	 Promotes lipolysis to provide alternative fuel source(s)
•	 Inhibits insulin secretion
‘Counter-regulatory hormones’
•	 Glucagon: promotes glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis 
and thus increased glucose output by the liver. May 
­increase hepatic ketone body production
•	 Cortisol: promotes glycogenolysis, gluconeogenesis and 
increased glucose output by the liver; reduces glucose 
clearance by skeletal muscle and adipose tissue
•	 Growth hormone: promotes hepatic glycogenolysis and 
increased hepatic glucose output; promotes ­lipolysis
Other mechanisms
•	 Insulin secretion inhibited
•	 Feelings of hunger promote eating
•	 Hypoglycaemia per se stimulates hepatic glucose ­output
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
275
state (100–125 g/24 h). In the resting, fasted state, 
­skeletal muscle takes up 10–20% of hepatic glucose 
output: this is not all oxidized but can be converted 
to lactate, pyruvate, glycerol or the carbon skeletons 
of amino acids, much of which subsequently return 
to the liver and act as precursors for gluconeogenesis. 
Fatty acids (or their partial oxidation products, ketone 
bodies) are the prime fuel of resting muscle, heart and 
liver. Other tissues such as red blood cells, skin, adi-
pose ­tissue and the renal medulla derive energy from 
glycolysis to lactate and pyruvate, even in the resting 
state. Glycolysis to lactate is an anaerobic process to 
which many cells may resort when faced with hypoxia, 
for example skeletal muscle during high-intensity ex-
ercise. The brain can adapt to the utilization of ­ketone 
bodies as a source of fuel during a prolonged fast, 
but this is far from being an instantaneous process, 
and the more immediate response depends upon in-
creasing glucose supply as a result of the action of the 
counter-­regulatory hormones glucagon, cortisol, cat-
echolamines and growth hormone. Although each can 
achieve the objective of restoration of blood glucose 
supply to the brain, the mechanism for each differs. 
Adrenaline (epinephrine) and glucagon are the ‘rapid 
response’ team, activating hepatic glucose formation via 
glycogen phosphorylation, whilst growth hormone and 
cortisol are the ‘back up’ team inducing the enzymes 
responsible for gluconeogenesis. Catecholamines can 
additionally increase circulating non-esterified fatty 
acid concentrations by upregulating lipolysis so muscle 
uptake of glucose falls, leaving more glucose for the 
brain to use.
In contrast, if the counter-regulatory hormones are 
present in excess and there is also a relative deficiency 
of insulin then hyperglycaemia results; infections and 
trauma are common causes of increased secretion of 
catecholamines.
Glucose transporters
Glucose is a hydrophilic molecule that is unable directly 
to penetrate the lipid bilayer of cells: its uptake into cells 
is therefore achieved by an energy-independent process 
of facilitated diffusion down its concentration gradient, 
mediated by a family of glucose transporter proteins 
(GLUTs) composed of at least 12 membrane spanning 
helices with a larger intracellular loop connecting the 
sixth and seventh helices. These transporters allow up-
take of glucose into cells from the interstitial fluid into 
which glucose diffuses from the bloodstream and, by 
virtue of differences in kinetics, tissue and subcellular 
expression profiles, and substrate specificities, mediate 
specific functions such as glucose sensing (GLUT2) 
and insulin-dependent glucose uptake (GLUT4) 
(Table 15.1).
The 14 facultative glucose transporters recognized to 
date are classified into those having high glucose affin-
ity (class I comprising GLUTs 1–4), high fructose affinity 
Ketogenesis
Liver
Adipose tissue
NEFA
Ketone
bodies
Ketone bodies
Blood
glucose
Glucose
Glycogen
Glycogen
Oxidation
Gluconeogenic
precursors
Gluconeogenesis
1
5
9
6
4
3
2
8
7
Muscle
FIGURE 15.1  ■ The principal antihyperglycaemic actions of insulin. Insulin 
 reduces the production of gluconeogenic precursors such 
as glycerol, alanine and lactate, 
 reduces activity of hepatic gluconeogenic enzymes and 
 increases hepatic glycogenolysis to 
glucose. These effects contribute to 
 reduced hepatic glucose output. Insulin 
 increases cellular glucose uptake mediated by 
­insulin-sensitive glucose transporters (GLUT4) and 
 reduces competition for glucose oxidation by alternative fuels (‘Randle effect’). 
The reduction of competing fuels involves 
 inhibition of NEFA release from adipose tissue and 
 reduced hepatic ketogenesis. 
 Insulin promotes glucose storage as glycogen.
276	
Clinical biochemistry
(class II, e.g. GLUT5) and novel transporters whose 
physiology is not yet fully understood (GLUTs 6–14). 
The different functions of the class I GLUTs are partly 
predictable from their differing Km values. Glucose trans-
porters 1, 3 and 4 have Km values of ~2–5 mmol/L but 
GLUT2 has a Km of ~25 mmol/L. This permits high 
rates of glucose entry into essential cells (e.g. in the cen-
tral nervous system (CNS), which is relatively protected 
from neuroglycopaenia by the low Km of its GLUT3 
transporters). Pancreatic β-Cells are able to sense incre-
ments in blood glucose over a range considerably exceed-
ing normal values via the high Km GLUT2 transporter 
protein.
Certain glucose transporters (GLUT1 and GLUT3) 
are present on cell surfaces at all times. In contrast, 
GLUT4 is stored in the cytoplasm when insulin is not 
present; it responds to insulin by moving from intracel-
lular stores to cell membranes, thereby increasing total 
transporter number (typically 6–10-fold). When insulin 
concentrations decline, GLUT4 is removed from cell 
membranes by endocytosis and rapidly recycled back 
to its intracellular storage compartments. Erythrocytes 
are insulin non-responsive because they possess only 
GLUT1. Many cells can express a variety of different 
GLUT transporters, and the expression of GLUT recep-
tors changes with circumstances: for example liver cells 
express more GLUT1 and GLUT3 during starvation. 
Dysfunction of the insulin-regulated GLUT4 transloca-
tion process appears to play a part in the insulin resistance 
syndrome, and mutations of several transporters (e.g. 
GLUT1, GLUT2) have been associated with inherited 
metabolic diseases of carbohydrate metabolism.
Tissue glucose uptake via GLUT transporters in-
volves facilitated diffusion down a concentration gra-
dient, the intracellular concentration of glucose being 
very low because of its active metabolism by phos-
phorylating enzymes (hexokinases and glucokinases). 
In resting, postabsorptive subjects, ~70% of the body’s 
glucose metabolism occurs independently of the ac-
tion of insulin. However, these insulin-independent 
mechanisms cannot maintain normoglycaemia for very 
long without insulin orchestrating the response to food 
and integrating the balance between fatty acid, ketone 
body and glucose metabolism. Insulin-independent 
(as well as insulin-­dependent) glucose clearance is 
impaired in subjects with type 2 diabetes and also in 
normoglycaemic subjects with a family history of 
diabetes. This ­suggests that abnormalities in insulin-­
independent glucose disposal manifest at a very early 
stage of ­disease development. This phenomenon of 
‘glucose resistance’ appears to be quantitatively impor-
tant: in normal subjects, as much as half an intravenous 
glucose load is cleared by non-insulin-mediated glu-
cose disposal. Although polymorphisms of GLUT4 do 
not appear to be any more common among patients 
with type 2 diabetes than in the normal population, 
there is evidence that targeting and trafficking of this 
glucose transporter may be abnormal in both skel-
etal muscle and adipose tissue in this condition. The 
insulin-­sensitizing agents metformin and the thiazoli-
dinediones appear to increase cell surface expression of 
GLUT4, as does physical exercise.
The ability to move glucose against a concentration 
gradient, necessary in the special circumstances of the 
renal tubules and intestinal epithelium, is conferred by 
a family of sodium-dependent glucose cotransporters. 
Sodium-dependent glucose cotransporter 1 (SGLT1) 
is present in the gut, where it is responsible for absorp-
tion of glucose and galactose from the diet. Mutations of 
SGLT1 are associated with the glucose–galactose malab-
sorption syndrome that may cause fatal infantile diarrhoea 
unless these sugars are removed from the diet. Sodium-
dependent cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) is a low affinity high 
capacity transporter that is present in the S1 segment of 
the proximal renal tubules and is responsible for 90% of 
renal glucose reabsorption, the remaining glucose being 
reabsorbed by the high affinity but low capacity SGLT1 
transporter found in the S3 segment; reduced function 
mutations of SGLT2 are associated with renal glycos-
uria. Drugs that block SGLT2 (thus increasing urinary 
glucose loss) have recently been licensed in the UK as 
glucose-lowering agents.
TABLE 15.1  Characteristics of some glucose transporters
Transporter
Tissues
Kinetics
Transport type
Facilitative glucose transporters
GLUT1
Ubiquitous: e.g. erythrocyte, 
placenta, colon, kidneys
Low Km (1–2 mmol/L)
Facilitated diffusion
GLUT2
Liver, small intestine, kidneys, 
β-Cells
High Km (~25 mmol/L), high Vmax
Facilitated diffusion; 
bidirectional
GLUT3
Ubiquitous: e.g. brain, placenta, 
kidneys
Low Km (1–2 mmol/L), low Vmax 
(6–7 mmol/L)
Facilitated diffusion
GLUT4
Skeletal muscle, adipocytes, heart
Km 2–10 mmol/L
Facilitated diffusion, insulin 
responsive
GLUT5
Jejunum
 
Facilitated diffusion of fructose
Na
+-glucose cotransporters (SGLTs)
Move glucose against 
concentration gradient
Active transport, symport using 
Na
+ gradient generated by 
K
+,Na
+-ATP pump
SGLT1
Intestine, renal tubules
High affinity (Km ~0.4 mmol/L), 
low capacity
Intestinal glucose/galactose 
absorption. Some renal 
glucose reabsorption
SGLT2
Renal tubules
Low affinity (Km ~2.0 mmol/L), 
high capacity
Most renal glucose reabsorption
Km, substrate concentration at half the maximum velocity (Vmax).
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
277
The fate of intracellular glucose and its role 
in diabetes
Some of the principal intracellular metabolic pathways 
for glucose, together with their rate-limiting enzymes, 
are schematically illustrated in Figure  15.2, with the 
pathways labelled a–k.
In order to trap glucose within cells (since all the 
GLUTs are potentially bidirectional), glucose is phos-
phorylated on entry by a family of hexokinases (a). 
Hexokinase types I–III are widely expressed and have 
low Km, but hexokinase type IV (also called glucokinase, 
and predominantly expressed in liver and the β-Cells of 
the islets of Langerhans) has a much higher Km (up to 
15 mmol/L), permitting it to function as a glucose sen-
sor over (and beyond) the physiological range of blood 
­glucose. Since glucokinase is also the rate-­limiting step 
in glucose metabolism, it thus ­becomes the ultimate de-
terminant of the rate of insulin secretion from β-Cells.
Loss of function mutations of glucokinase are respon-
sible for one form of maturity onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY 2, which represents approximately 30% of all 
cases of MODY). Patients present with mildly elevated 
blood glucose concentrations owing to apparent eleva-
tion of the set point for blood glucose concentrations. 
For reasons that are not totally clear, patients with this 
condition appear to be at very low risk for the develop-
ment of diabetic complications and are rarely symptom-
atic. Although a good response is typically obtained with 
augmentation of the insulin response by sulfonylurea 
therapy, this is often not necessary. Although glucokinase 
might be a potential candidate gene in type 2 diabetes 
(and a treatment target, given that activating mutations 
can cause hypoglycaemia in man), mutations appear to 
be no more common among people with type 2 diabetes 
than in the general population.
Dephosphorylation of glucose (the reverse reaction) 
is catalysed by glucose 6-phosphatase (b). This process 
is necessary for the export of glucose (from gluconeo-
genesis) by hepatic and renal cells in hypo-insulinaemic 
situations. Deficiency of this enzyme (or of the associated 
glucose 6-phosphate transport protein) is the cause of 
glycogen storage disease type 1 (von Gierke disease), and 
its overactivity is a feature of the increased and relatively 
insulin-insensitive hepatic glucose production typical of 
type 2 diabetes. The insulin sensitizing agents metformin 
and the thiazolidinediones appear to reduce the activity 
of glucose 6-phosphatase, although it is not clear whether 
these are direct effects or are mediated through some 
other upstream action.
Having entered the cell and undergone phosphoryla-
tion, glucose undergoes one of four distinct metabolic 
fates. It may be:
•	 metabolized aerobically to yield energy
•	 metabolized anaerobically to yield energy
•	 used to synthesize other molecules (glycerol and 
the carbon skeletons of certain non-essential amino 
acids)
•	 stored as glycogen.
The dominant flux along each pathway will depend on 
the tissue (e.g. gluconeogenesis can take place in the liver 
and kidneys, glycogen storage in liver and muscle, glyc-
erol generation in adipose tissue) and on the prevailing 
metabolic circumstances such as cellular ATP require-
ments (requiring glycolysis), ‘housekeeping’ requirements 
(e.g. plasma membrane stability in erythrocytes), oxygen 
availability (determining whether glycolysis is anaerobic 
(yielding lactate) or aerobic (yielding pyruvate, which can 
be converted to acetyl-CoA and enters the tricarboxylic 
acid cycle) and alternative substrate availability (e.g. fatty 
acids or ketone bodies in the fasting state). Some of these 
pathways, and in particular the rate of glucose oxidation, 
Glycerol
Glycogen
Glucose 6-phosphate
Glucose
Lactate
Pyruvate
Fructose 1,6-bisphosphate
Glycoproteins,
peptidoglycans,
glycolipids
Acetyl-CoA
6-Phosphoglutarate
Alanine
FFA
ATP, H2O, CO2
Glycogen synthase (i)
Glycogen phosphorylase (h)
GFAT (k)
Hexokinase/glucokinase (a)
Glucose 6-phosphatase (b)
G6PDH (j)
LDH (e)
LDH (f)
PDH (d)
(g)
PFK (c)
FIGURE 15.2  ■  Intracellular metabolic pathways for glucose. FFA, free fatty acids; G6PDH, glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase; 
GFAT, glutamine:fructose 6-phosphate amidotransferase; LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase. Broken 
lines indicate pathways from which intermediates have been omitted for clarity. Lower case letters refer to reactions, which are 
discussed in the text.
278	
Clinical biochemistry
have been shown to be abnormal in subjects with type 2 
diabetes and also in their non-diabetic relatives.
Glucose oxidation proceeds via the action of the rate-
limiting enzyme phosphofructokinase (c) through various 
intermediates to pyruvate. Pyruvate may cross the mito-
chondrial membrane to enter the tricarboxylic acid cycle 
via the mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) 
enzyme complex (d) (releasing a net 38 molecules of ATP 
per molecule of glucose) or may remain in the cytosol 
and be converted anaerobically to lactate via the bidirec-
tional enzyme lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) (e) (yielding 
only a net two molecules of ATP per molecule of glu-
cose). Pyruvate dehydrogenase in muscle is stimulated by 
exercise and in most tissues by insulin, but this stimu-
lation is reduced in diabetes. Pyruvate dehydrogenase is 
inactivated by phosphorylation, catalysed by PDH kinase 
(which is over expressed in insulin resistance). As a result, 
glucose metabolism is shifted away from the tricarboxylic 
acid cycle. This effect may be prevented by activation of 
peroxisome proliferation activating receptor α (PPARα, 
see p. 720), one of a family of lipid-activated transcrip-
tion factors. Mitochondrial diseases have been reported 
to cause insulin resistance or diabetes (e.g. diabetes in-
sipidus, diabetes mellitus, optic atrophy and deafness 
(DIDMOAD) syndrome, Friedreich ataxia and HIV-
associated lipodystrophy); indices of mitochondrial ac-
tivity (e.g. mitochondrial number and size) are generally 
reduced in insulin-resistant states.
Lactate, generated under anaerobic conditions (and 
in cells such as erythrocytes, which lack the requisite en-
zymes) can be used as a substrate for gluconeogenesis ei-
ther locally or after export to the liver (the Cori cycle), or 
may enter the tricarboxylic acid cycle after reconversion 
to pyruvate (f).
It has been postulated that an increased availability of 
substrates such as FFAs or ketone bodies, entering the 
tricarboxylic acid cycle via acetyl-CoA (g), may lead to ex-
cess generation of citrate, with the consequent inhibition 
of phosphofructokinase (PFK), thus shunting glucose 
down alternative, non-oxidative pathways (the glucose-
FFA or Randle cycle). The consequent reduction in the 
entry of glucose into the tricarboxylic acid cycle could 
contribute to diminished glucose oxidation and thus to 
diabetes.
Glycogenolysis (h) is initiated by glycogen phosphory-
lase, the activity of which is stimulated by glucagon (in 
liver) and catecholamines (in muscle). In muscle, the glu-
cose liberated from glycogen is used locally as an energy 
source: it is not exported into the circulation. Muscle gly-
cogen storage via glycogen synthase (i) is diminished in 
type 2 diabetes, potentially contributing to reduced glu-
cose disposal.
Intracellular glucose can also be metabolized through 
the pentose phosphate shunt (hexose monophosphate 
shunt) via glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (j). 
Deficiency of this enzyme causes an X-linked form of 
haemolytic anaemia, owing to the fact that this pathway is 
the only route of glucose metabolism in red blood cells; it 
is prevalent in people originating from the Mediterranean 
littoral.
The rate-limiting enzyme of the hexosamine synthetic 
pathway (glutamine:fructose 6-phosphate amido­transferase, 
GFAT) (k) is overactive in diabetes and hyperglycaemia; 
this pathway leads to the glycosylation of proteins, includ-
ing transcription factors, and can affect cellular sensing of 
glucose. The hexosamine pathway is also relevant to the 
development of complications of diabetes through altera-
tions in endothelial function mediated by endothelial 
nitric oxide synthase (eNOS), protein kinase A and protein 
kinase C. Defects in glucose oxidation and glycogen storage 
may cause shunting of glucose down this pathway, leading 
to insulin resistance, reduced insulin secretion and diabetic 
complications.
Animal models of glucotoxicity show many of the fea-
tures of type 2 diabetes, for example reduced GLUT4 
translocation (reducing glucose uptake into cells), reduced 
glycogen synthase activity (reducing glucose incorpora-
tion into glycogen), increased hepatic glucokinase activ-
ity (increasing intracellular glucose trapping), increased 
hepatic glucose output and reduced β-Cell glucokinase 
activity (reducing insulin secretion). Insulin resistance 
may thus be a defence against excessive intracellular accu-
mulation of glucose, sensed by excessive shunting down 
the hexosamine synthetic pathway and mediated via the 
transcriptional regulation of key enzymes and pathways 
(‘cellular satiety’). Reduced glucose oxidation in pancre-
atic β-Cells could lead to impairment of insulin secretion, 
and in other tissues could lead to diminished glucose 
disposal, both of which are hallmarks of type 2 diabetes. 
However, the extent to which these abnormalities actu-
ally contribute to diabetes rather than relate to specific 
experimental conditions (e.g. glucose and insulin con-
centrations), or are simply consequences of some other 
pathological processes, remains unclear.
Insulin
Biosynthesis
Insulin is a peptide hormone (51 amino acids arranged 
in two peptide chains linked by two disulphide bonds, 
molecular weight 5807 Da), which is secreted by the 
β-Cells of the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas. In 
the synthesis of insulin, translation of mRNA yields 
preproinsulin, a prohormone that undergoes post-­
translational modification prior to release of the 
­mature insulin molecule. Removal of 24 amino acids 
from preproinsulin yields proinsulin, which consists 
of 86 amino acids. Proinsulin is stored in secretory 
granules prior to release from β-Cells by exocytosis. 
In healthy subjects, >90% of proinsulin is converted 
to mature insulin by the removal of the metabolically 
inert C-peptide component prior to secretion. The 
other products of the post-translational modification 
are either released when exocytosis occurs or are de-
graded within the secretory granules prior to release. 
C-peptide is co-secreted in equimolar amounts with 
mature insulin. In healthy subjects, only small amounts 
(<10% of mature insulin output) of proinsulin and 
partially split proinsulin are released. These ratios 
are characteristically disturbed in certain pathological 
states, including autonomous insulin secretion from 
an insulinoma and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Plasma 
concentrations of proinsulin and C-peptide are low or 
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
279
undetectable in cases of surreptitious administration 
of exogenous insulin. Assay of these substances may, 
therefore, prove helpful in the differential diagnosis of 
hypoglycaemia in some circumstances. Proinsulin may 
accumulate in renal failure and its plasma concentra-
tion is elevated in familial hyperproinsulinaemia.
Substances stimulating the synthesis and storage of 
insulin include glucose, mannose, leucine, arginine and 
a variety of metabolizable sugars and sugar derivatives. 
Most of these also promote secretion.
Secretion and pharmacokinetics
The mechanisms by which insulin release is triggered 
are the focus of much research. It is apparent that there 
is an ATP-dependent, sulfonylurea-sensitive K
+ channel 
whose closure is a late event in the intracellular signalling 
mechanism within the β-Cell; closure triggers calcium 
influx and exocytosis. It is not clear how this K
+ chan-
nel is activated, although a wide range of secretagogues 
can stimulate activation of this final common pathway. 
The most important of these is hyperglycaemia, although 
mannose, lactate, arginine, leucine and other amino ac-
ids, glucagon, glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), glucose-
dependent insulinotropic peptide (GIP, known formerly 
as gastric inhibitory peptide), cholecystokinin, vasoactive 
intestinal peptide (VIP), sulfonylureas and parasympa-
thetic cholinergic (muscarinic) nerve activity also stim-
ulate insulin release; many of these secretogogues have 
synergistic effects. Both neural sympathetic tone and cir-
culating catecholamines inhibit insulin secretion.
Because of cephalic and gastric influences, oral glu-
cose is a more potent stimulus to insulin secretion than an 
equivalent amount of intravenous glucose. This difference 
is known as the ‘incretin’ effect and is predominantly me-
diated by gut-derived hormones such as the N-terminally 
truncated GLP-1 (7–36) amide, and GIP. Recently, drugs 
have become available that augment the release of insu-
lin via the sulfonylurea-sensitive K
+ channels of β-Cells 
(meglitinide analogues) and GLP-1 receptors (GLP-1 
analogues), both acting in a glucose-dependent manner. 
These mechanisms afford the clinically desirable possi-
bility of augmenting insulin release during conditions of 
­hyperglycaemia, while at the same time reducing the risk of 
hypoglycaemia. They are discussed further in Chapter 16.
In healthy adults, insulin is secreted in pulses with a 
pulse periodicity of 11–15 min. Stimuli of insulin secre-
tion increase the frequency and amplitude of these pulses. 
Approximately 30–40 U (210–280 nmol) of insulin are 
secreted per 24 h in healthy subjects of normal weight. 
Insulin secretion is basal (0.25–1.0 U/h) until glucose 
concentration exceeds a threshold of ~5 mmol/L, and be-
comes maximal at a concentration of 15–20 mmol/L.
Insulin is secreted into the portal venous system and 
thus must pass through the liver before reaching the sys-
temic circulation. Approximately half of the insulin is 
cleared in the ‘first pass’ through the liver. The liver is 
exposed to insulin concentrations approximately three-
fold higher than other tissues during endogenous insulin 
secretion. The first pass clearance of insulin by the liver is 
variable, being controlled not only by the prevailing blood 
glucose concentration but also by factors released from the 
gut before absorption is complete, and by the integrated 
action on β-Cell receptors of a range of endocrine and nu-
tritional signals. It is, therefore, not surprising that it is 
difficult to replicate physiological patterns of insulin con-
centrations by giving exogenous insulin subcutaneously.
Autocrine and paracrine regulation of insulin secretion 
by pancreatic and gut hormones (which may reach very 
high concentrations within islets) is not well understood. 
Increased secretion of insulin involves recruitment of 
more β-Cells to the secreting mode.
Fasting peripheral insulin concentrations vary be-
tween 20 and 140 pmol/L (~2.9–20 mU/L), as measured 
by immunoassays in healthy subjects, the higher values 
being associated with increasing age and obesity. After a 
typical mixed meal (700–800 kcal), peak plasma insulin 
concentrations reach ~350–580 pmol/L (50–84 mU/L) in 
lean young adults. The half-life of insulin injected into 
a peripheral vein is 2–6 min, with most being cleared by 
the liver and smaller amounts being cleared by other tis-
sues that have insulin receptors, such as skeletal muscle, 
although there is also non-receptor mediated clearance 
by a variety of tissue proteases.
Abnormalities of the synthesis and secretion 
of insulin
There are a number of recognized genetic abnormalities 
of insulin structure involving mutations of the insulin 
gene and hence altered amino acid sequences. Some of 
these are listed in Table 15.2. Each of the proinsulin and 
insulin variants mentioned has reduced biological activity 
in relation to insulin. This causes a propensity to diabe-
tes, although individuals who can sustain a compensatory 
hypersecretion may not develop the condition. For ex-
ample, in familial hyperproinsulinaemia, hypersecretion 
is usually sufficient to prevent diabetes, whereas in insulin 
Wakayama, diabetes is usual. There are also recognized 
associations between some polymorphisms affecting the 
insulin secretory mechanism (e.g. calpain 10, a molecule 
that promotes the fusion of secretory granules with cell 
membranes) and diabetes.
More common abnormalities of insulin secretion in-
volve loss of the normal pulsatility of insulin release, an 
early feature of both obesity and type 2 diabetes. The 
progressive loss of insulin secretory capacity in diabetes 
is discussed below.
Actions of insulin
Insulin has widespread actions, some of which are listed in 
Table 15.3. It is the dominant hormone regulating blood 
glucose concentration. It should be noted that while the 
mechanisms of its glucoregulatory action have been the 
subject of extensive research, much less is known about 
its other actions in health or in ­insulin-resistant states, 
although vascular effects (vascular smooth muscle prolif-
eration, vasodilatation), CNS effects (appetite, learning, 
memory) and effects in relation to growth, differentiation 
and apoptosis have all been proposed.
At present, only two receptors that mediate the ­actions 
of insulin have been identified: the insulin receptor and the 
IGF (insulin-like growth factor) receptor. It is apparent, 
280	
Clinical biochemistry
however, that there are individual dose–response curves 
for the different actions of insulin in different tissues. 
For example, the median effective dose (ED50) for insu-
lin’s antilipolytic action on adipose tissue is <140 pmol/L 
(20 mU/L) (and may be <70 pmol/L), while those for 
inhibition of hepatic glucose output and stimulation of 
glucose uptake into skeletal muscle are 210–350 pmol/L 
(30–50 mU/L) and 350–490 pmol/L (50–70 mU/L), re-
spectively. A doubling of insulin concentration inhibits 
hepatic glucose output by ~80% and stimulates periph-
eral glucose utilization by ~20%. In patients with type 2 
diabetes, these differential effects on lipolysis, hepatic 
glucose output and glucose uptake, coupled with ongoing 
(if reduced) insulin secretion, are probably responsible 
for the fact that most individuals are not at risk of devel-
oping ketoacidosis (at least for many years), despite the 
clear defect in glucoregulation that is evident.
The different actions of insulin have different time 
courses, with the glucoregulatory and antilipolytic oc-
curring within a few minutes, and growth regulation 
and actions dependent upon synthesis of new proteins 
occurring over periods of hours or days. Intravenous 
injection of insulin typically has little effect on blood 
glucose for 5–10 min, the maximal hypoglycaemic ac-
tion occurring after 5–15 min. Insulin stimulation of 
skeletal muscle glucose uptake declines with a half-life 
of 10–20 min after the insulinaemic stimulus has been 
removed.
TABLE 15.2  Some genetically determined abnormal insulins
Condition
Abnormality
Consequences
Familial hyperproinsulinaemia
Failure to cleave C-peptide from 
proinsulin
True insulin concentrations and glucose 
tolerance normal
Insulin Chicago
Leu for Phe substitution at position 25 of 
β chain
Reduced receptor binding
Insulin Los Angeles
Ser for Phe substitution at position 24 of 
β chain
Reduced receptor binding
Insulin Wakayama
Leu for Val substitution at position 3 of 
α chain
Reduced receptor binding
Proinsulins Boston and Tokyo
His for Arg substitution at position 65
Inability to cleave proinsulin to insulin
Proinsulin Providence
Asp for His substitution at position 10 of 
β chain
Inability to cleave proinsulin to insulin
Proinsulin Kyoto
Leu for Arg substitution at position 65
Inability to cleave proinsulin to insulin
TABLE 15.3  The principal actions of insulin
Actions
Mechanisms
Liver
Inhibition of hepatic glucose output
Limitation of substrate supply
Inhibition of glycogenolysis
Inhibition of gluconeogenesis
Stimulation of hepatic glycogen storage
Stimulation of glycogen synthase
Stimulation of hepatic glycolysis for intermediary  
metabolism
Stimulation of phosphofructokinase
Stimulation of hepatic lipogenesis
Stimulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase
Stimulation of hepatic glucose oxidation
Stimulation of pyruvate dehydrogenase
Skeletal muscle
Stimulation of glucose transport
Activation of glucose transporter (GLUT4)
Stimulation of muscle glycogen synthesis
Stimulation of glycogen synthase
Stimulation of muscle glycolysis
Stimulation of phosphofructokinase
Adipose tissue
Inhibition of lipolysis (stored lipid)
Inhibition of hormone-sensitive lipase
Promotion of re-esterification
? Increased supply of glycerol 3-phosphate
Stimulation of lipolysis (circulating lipid)
Stimulation of lipoprotein lipase
Increased glucose uptake
Several (? as for muscle/liver)
Central nervous system
Satiety
Uncertain
Changes in sympathetic tone
Uncertain
Postprandial thermogenesis
Uncertain
Other
Promotes DNA synthesis
Uncertain
Promotes RNA synthesis
Various
Stimulation of amino acid uptake
Uncertain
Na
+,K
+-ATPase stimulation
? Increase in intracellular energy availability
Na
+/H
+ antiport activation
Uncertain
Sodium retention
Probably several mechanisms
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
281
Proinsulin and partially split proinsulins have meta-
bolic activities generally similar to those of insulin, al-
though their plasma half-lives are 3–5 times longer and 
their biological potencies are only 8–15% that of insulin. 
It has been suggested that the hepatic activity of proin-
sulin may be relatively more potent than its effect on pe-
ripheral glucose uptake.
The insulin receptor
The main glucoregulatory effects of insulin are medi-
ated by a transmembrane receptor found on insulin-
sensitive cells. This receptor is a glycoprotein, with 
total molecular weight of 350 000 Da, comprising four 
peptide chains (two α- and two β-subunits), linked by 
disulphide bridges (Fig.  15.3). Two isoforms of the 
receptor (IR-A and IR-D) are formed by alternative 
splicing. The gene for, and amino acid structure of, the 
insulin receptor have been characterized and show ho-
mology with those of the IGF-1 receptor (see below). 
Within the intracellular domain of the β-subunit is a ty-
rosine kinase capability, which is activated when insulin 
binds with the extracellular domain of the α-subunits. 
The tyrosine kinase promotes autophosphorylation of 
the receptor followed by activation of threonine and 
serine kinases.
The insulin receptor gene is located on the short 
arm of chromosome 19 (19p 13.2). Rare gene mutations 
have been described, for example leprechaunism and 
Rabson–Mendenhall syndrome, which result in severe 
glucose intolerance with resistance to exogenous insu-
lin, and profoundly disordered growth, rather than typi-
cal insulin resistance. These conditions are usually lethal 
in infancy and adolescence, respectively. There are also 
more common, ‘milder’ polymorphisms of the insulin 
receptor gene. However, these appear to explain only a 
small proportion of the marked variance in population 
insulin sensitivity and they are considered to be a rare 
(<1%) cause of type 2 diabetes mellitus. Indeed, most 
mutations of the insulin gene that have been recognized 
are not sufficient to cause diabetes alone, although they 
may render it more likely to occur in the presence of 
other risk factors.
Second messengers mediating the effects 
of insulin
Insulin can have multiple actions, even on a single 
responsive cell, and hence there are probably several 
different intracellular pathways mediating its actions. 
Glucoregulatory and antilipolytic responses are rapid 
and probably mediated via serine and threonine kinases 
and cAMP. Stimulation of lipid and protein synthesis, 
inhibition of proteolysis, the nuclear transcription of 
RNA and the replication of DNA are slower and have 
different second messenger systems. Second messen-
ger systems involving diacylglycerol, protein kinase 
C and glycosyl-phosphatidyl-inositol are under in-
vestigation, but abnormalities in them have yet been 
demonstrated to be necessary or sufficient to cause 
diabetes in man. As a result of these second messenger 
cascades, glucose transporter proteins are translocated 
from within cells to their surface membranes to in-
crease glucose flux into the cytoplasm.
After activation, insulin–receptor complexes are in-
ternalized by an endocytotic process; receptors are later 
recycled to the cell surface. Internalization of the insulin 
is important (and possibly essential) for insulin signals to 
reach the nucleus and influence cell growth and protein 
synthesis. Internalization is an important route by which 
insulin is cleared from the circulation and degraded. The 
actions of insulin in stimulating DNA transcription and 
mRNA translation do not depend upon the plasma mem-
brane insulin receptor kinase activity and the second mes-
senger systems discussed above, or on the IGF receptors 
described below, but rather involve direct effects within 
the nucleus and on ribosomes.
Insulin-like growth factors and their 
receptors
In addition to its acute effects on glucose uptake and 
release and on lipid metabolism, insulin has growth 
promoting activity in a variety of tissue culture mod-
els. At least two protein hormones, insulin-like growth 
factors 1 and 2 (IGF-1 and IGF-2), have actions that 
partly resemble these actions of insulin. The amino acid 
sequences of these proteins and the base sequences of 
their coding DNA are known and show some homol-
ogy with those of insulin. Insulin-like growth factors are 
weak agonists for the insulin receptor and hence have 
weak glucoregulatory and antilipolytic effects. In addi-
tion, they have growth-promoting effects mediated by 
two IGF receptors. Insulin itself binds only weakly to 
IGF receptors.
The physiological role of IGFs is not yet fully estab-
lished. It has been suggested that they act as somatome-
dins (they were previously called somatomedins C and 
A, terms that are no longer recommended), in that they 
are induced by growth hormone and mediate its growth-­
promoting effects in children. In adults, they are believed 
to promote the growth of continually dividing cells such as 
osteoblasts, chondrocytes, fibroblasts and erythroid cells.
Adult growth hormone deficiency is manifest by low 
overall quality of life scores, reduction in lean body 
mass, centripetal fat distribution, loss of bone mineral, 
Insulin molecule
Insulin receptor
Cell membrane
α
β
Insulin signal pathway
α
β
FIGURE 15.3  ■ The insulin receptor.
282	
Clinical biochemistry
abnormal lipid profile, insulin resistance and changes in 
the secretion and metabolism of other circulating hor-
mones, for example thyroxine (see p. 367). The effects 
of growth hormone deficiency on insulin sensitivity are 
complex. While glucose intolerance is a common fea-
ture of acromegaly, in growth hormone deficiency states, 
adverse changes consequent upon an increase in body 
fat composition tend to outweigh the lack of a counter-
regulatory hormone to produce insulin resistance overall. 
Replacement therapy in adult growth hormone deficiency 
produces somewhat unpredictable effects, although a pe-
riod of increased insulin resistance may herald a modest 
longer-term improvement.
Tumour-related hypoglycaemia may be due to ex-
cess production of IGFs, specifically ‘big’ IGF-2. Local 
and systemic concentrations of IGFs are modulated by a 
range of binding proteins. While total IGF-2 may not be 
increased in tumour-related hypoglycaemia, the IGF-2 is 
present in an immature form which, because of impaired 
ability to form the normal ternary 150 kD complex with 
IGF binding protein-3 (IGFBP-3) and the acid-labile 
subunit (ALS), circulates with greater than normal bio-
availability. This effect has been described in a number of 
tumours, especially those of mesenchymal and epithelial 
origin. Further discussion of this topic is presented in 
Chapter 17.
It was first observed many years ago that proliferative 
diabetic retinopathy could regress following hypophysec-
tomy in both animals and humans. This effect appears to 
be mediated via reduction in IGF-1, owing to the growth 
hormone deficiency seen after pituitary ­ablation. It has 
been hypothesized that the metabolic derangements of 
diabetes reduce hepatic IGF-1 generation in response 
to growth hormone (i.e. induce growth hormone re-
sistance), which is then hypersecreted (owing to a lack 
of negative feedback from IGF-1), reaching concen-
trations that are able to stimulate IGF-1 generation in 
non-­hepatic tissues. However, studies of pegvisomant, a 
growth hormone analogue that antagonizes IGF-1 gen-
eration in response to growth hormone, have not shown 
benefit in diabetic retinopathy.
CLASSIFICATION AND DIAGNOSIS  
OF DIABETES MELLITUS
Introduction
Diabetes is the most common metabolic disorder, with 
a cumulative incidence of 5–10% in people in the de-
veloped world aged >40 years, in whom >90% of cases 
are due to type 2 diabetes. Population screening pro-
grammes typically reveal that up to half of the subjects 
found to have type 2 diabetes had previously been undi-
agnosed. While the burden of type 2 diabetes is increas-
ing exponentially with the epidemic of obesity in many 
parts of world, the incidence of type 1 diabetes has also 
been increasing for many years for reasons that are much 
less apparent. Nevertheless, the prevalence of type 2 dia-
betes in children is approaching that of type 1 diabetes, 
having been only ~2–4% of all childhood diabetes prior 
to 1994, and is predicted to outstrip type 1 diabetes by 
2025 on current trends. A high proportion of these chil-
dren, typically presenting around the time of puberty, 
require insulin from the time of diagnosis. Whether this 
is due to the accelerator hypothesis (‘double diabetes ef-
fect’), whereby an individual’s risk of contracting type 1 
diabetes is increased by the prior existence of type 2 dia-
betes or insulin resistance, is not clear.
Although insulin has many actions, as described above, 
diabetes is defined only in terms of elevated blood glu-
cose concentrations. Since blood glucose is a continuous 
variable, the cut-off points for diagnosis are necessarily 
somewhat arbitrary.
Recent changes to the diagnostic criteria for ­diabetes 
and glucose intolerance reflect the increased cardio­
vascular risk evident at even moderate levels of ­fasting 
­hyperglycaemia (~6.0 mmol/L in some studies). However, 
the blood glucose threshold for this effect is almost 
­certainly lower than that for the predominantly micro-
vascular complications unique to diabetes mellitus. Some 
people so diagnosed may not, therefore, ­necessarily be 
at risk of developing the unique set of complications 
(nephropathy, retinopathy, neuropathy) that have tra-
ditionally characterized the disease and determined its 
management.
Definitions
The diagnostic criteria for diabetes mellitus set out by 
The World Health Organization (WHO) have been ad-
opted by both the American Diabetes Association (ADA) 
and Diabetes UK, although they differ slightly for glu-
cose intolerance. The WHO introduced diagnostic cri-
teria in 1979, but introduced revised criteria in 2000 to 
reflect better understanding of ‘milder’ glucose intoler-
ance. The use of glycated haemoglobin (HbA1c) for diag-
nosis was introduced in 2011. The WHO glucose criteria 
for diagnosis are shown in Box 15.2 and Table 15.4 and its 
recommendations regarding the use of HbA1c are shown 
in Box 15.3. World Health Organization criteria consider 
fasting and 120 min values in the oral glucose tolerance 
test (OGTT). The reproducibility of the OGTT leaves 
much to be desired (the CV of 120 min plasma glucose 
concentrations is reported to be up to 50%). If a subject 
fulfils the WHO criteria for diabetes, subsequent im-
provement of glucose tolerance may occur (e.g. as a result 
of weight loss or spontaneously), but such individuals are 
considered to have a lifelong tendency to diabetes.
Table 15.4 indicates the criteria for the diagnosis of 
impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) and impaired fasting 
glycaemia (IFG), which are metabolic states intermediate 
between normal glucose tolerance and diabetes. For epi-
demiological or population screening purposes, the fast-
ing or 2 h value after 75 g oral glucose may be used alone. 
For clinical purposes, the diagnosis of diabetes should 
always be confirmed by repeating the test on another 
day, unless there is unequivocal hyperglycaemia with 
acute metabolic decompensation or obvious symptoms. 
Glucose concentrations should not be determined on 
serum or plasma unless red cells have been immediately 
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
283
removed, or glycolysis will result in an unpredictable un-
derestimation of the true concentrations. It should be 
stressed that glucose preservatives such as fluoride do 
not totally prevent glycolysis. If whole blood is used, the 
sample should be kept at 0–4 °C, and assayed as soon as 
possible.
Subjects with IGT and IFG are at high risk of pro-
gression to diabetes; IGT and IFG should therefore be 
considered as risk categories for future diabetes and/or 
cardiovascular disease. In certain cases, glycated hae-
moglobin (HbA1c), the concentration of which reflects 
glycaemia over several weeks, gives sensitivity and speci-
ficity for diagnosis almost equal to that of glucose mea-
surements, and a cut-off value of 48 mmol/mol (6.5%) 
is now accepted as diagnostic, although it is important 
to note that a value below this level does not necessarily 
exclude diabetes. Several classifications of diabetes have 
been proposed. The most widely used is that proposed by 
the WHO and adopted by the ADA shown in Box 15.4. 
However, it should be recognized that unanimity in no-
menclature has yet to be achieved, especially in the areas 
of gestational diabetes, diabetes related to pancreatitis 
and tropical/malnutrition-related diabetes.
Type 1 diabetes mellitus
Introduction
Approximately 5–10% of all patients with diabetes have 
type 1 diabetes mellitus: this is characterized by severe 
insulin deficiency because of β-Cell destruction. The de-
gree of insulin deficiency is so severe that patients require 
exogenous insulin therapy to avoid the rapid decline into 
cachexia, dehydration, ketoacidosis and death that was 
the inevitable consequence of this disease before the dis-
covery of insulin by Banting and Best in 1921. Dietary 
measures cannot prevent this problem, although they 
may delay its onset, and survival for several years in the 
pre-insulin era with harshly restrictive hypoketotic di-
ets was not unknown. Withdrawal of exogenous insulin 
therapy in patients with type 1 diabetes usually results in 
ketoacidosis within 48 h, and this may supervene in less 
than 12 h when insulin has previously been administered 
intravenously (and therefore cleared within minutes with 
no depot effect) and in conditions of increased insulin 
requirement or counter-regulatory response such as sys-
temic sepsis.
The severity of type 1 diabetes is such that most pa-
tients come to medical attention within weeks or, at most, 
months of onset, whereas the onset of type 2 diabetes is 
usually more insidious, so it may be present many years 
before diagnosis. Although the condition (including la-
tent autoimmune diabetes of adults, LADA, see below) 
can present at any age, most patients present in childhood 
and the diagnosis becomes rare after 30  years of age. 
TABLE 15.4  Glucose concentrations for the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus and other categories  
of ­hyperglycaemia in accordance with WHO guidelines (1999 and 2006)
  
 
Glucose concentration (mmol/L)
Whole blood
Plasma
Venous
Capillary
Venous
Capillary
Diabetes mellitus
Fasting
≥6.1
≥6.1
≥7.0
≥7.0
or
 
 
 
 
2 h post-glucose load
≥10.0
≥11.1
≥11.1
≥12.2
or both
 
 
 
 
Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT)
Fasting (if measured)
<6.1
<6.1
<7.0
<7.0
and
 
 
 
 
2 h post-glucose load
6.7–9.9
7.8–11.0
7.8–11.0
8.9–12.1
Impaired fasting glycaemia (IFG)
Fasting
5.6–6.0
5.6–6.0
6.1–6.9
6.1–6.9
and
 
 
 
 
2 h post-glucose load (if measured)
<6.7
<7.8
<7.8
<8.9
BOX 15.2	
World Health Organization 
recommendations for glucose-based 
diagnosis of diabetes mellitus
Criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus
1.	 Symptoms of diabetes plus casual plasma glucose 
concentration ≥11.1 mmol/L. Casual is defined as 
any time of day without regard to time since last 
meal. The classic symptoms of diabetes include poly-
uria, polydipsia and unexplained weight loss
or
2.	 Fasting plasma glucose ≥7.0 mmol/L. Fasting is de-
fined as no caloric intake for at least 8 h
or
3.	 Two-hour postload glucose ≥11.1 mmol/L during an 
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). The test should 
be performed as described by WHO, using a glucose 
load containing the equivalent of 75 g anhydrous 
glucose dissolved in water.
In the absence of unequivocal hyperglycaemia or classic 
symptoms, these criteria should be confirmed by repeat test-
ing on a different day.
The third measure (OGTT) is not recommended for 
routine clinical use.
284	
Clinical biochemistry
However, the distinction between types 1 and 2 diabe-
tes is not always clear-cut and it is not always possible to 
categorize patients on clinical grounds alone, even after 
a detailed history taking into account such factors as the 
duration of symptoms and degree of weight loss, so that 
in some patients additional investigations are required 
to establish the correct diagnosis. Latent autoimmune 
diabetes of adults is a rare subtype of type 1 diabetes. 
Affected individuals tend to develop diabetes more in-
sidiously and appear to respond, at least initially, to treat-
ments other than insulin such as sulfonylureas. Some 
patients with autoimmune type 1 diabetes, even though 
they may have presented with ketoacidosis, retain suffi-
cient islet cell reserve for some months after the diagnosis 
to remain ketosis free on little or even no insulin (the so-
called ‘honeymoon period’). Conversely, some patients 
with type 2 diabetes may become ketosis prone as β-Cell 
failure progresses from being relative to being absolute 
in the face of islet cell exhaustion or destruction, particu-
larly in conditions of increased insulin requirement such 
as systemic sepsis. The ‘accelerator hypothesis’ of type 2 
diabetes predisposing to type 1 diabetes via islet cell stress, 
and the high prevalence of the co-aggregation of features 
of both type 1 and type 2 diabetes is discussed above in 
relation to childhood onset diabetes.
Where confirmation of type 1 (autoimmune) diabetes 
is required, quantification of anti-glutamic acid decar-
boxylase (GAD) antibodies and/or islet cell antibodies 
(ICA) may be helpful. However, these antibodies may 
be detectable in healthy individuals (~2%), and the like-
lihood of a positive result in true autoimmune diabetes 
declines from >85% at disease onset to negligible rates 
after 10–15  years of disease. Although normal basal or 
glucagon-stimulated concentrations of C-peptide (the 
normal response is a doubling of C-peptide concentra-
tion 6–20 min after glucagon 1 mg i.m.) rule out the ex-
istence of severe absolute insulopaenia at the time of the 
test, negative results are potentially harder to interpret, as 
endogenous insulin secretion may have been suppressed 
by long-term treatment with exogenous insulin.
Individuals who do not have diabetes but who have 
detectable anti-GAD or ICAs may be at increased future 
risk of developing type 1 diabetes (and other autoim-
mune conditions). Several studies have attempted to de-
termine whether intervention with immunosuppressive 
therapy reduces this risk in those at highest risk (usually 
first-degree relatives of people with type 1 diabetes, with 
high-risk genotype and positive antibodies), or helps to 
preserve any residual β-Cell function at the time of diag-
nosis. Thus far, the side-effects of the drugs used would 
appear to outweigh their benefit, although some delay in 
progression to complete insulin deficiency has been dem-
onstrated, at least in some of the studies.
Aetiology: genetic susceptibility and possible 
environmental cofactors
Type 1 diabetes typically results from an autoimmune at-
tack upon pancreatic β-Cells. It is not understood what 
factors may trigger the attack. Although viral infection 
can provoke the attack (as seen clearly with congenital 
rubella), for most patients it is not clear what factor(s) 
BOX 15.3	
Diagnosis of diabetes mellitus using HbA1c in accordance with World Health Organization 
recommendations
Criteria for the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus
•	 HbA1c can be used as a diagnostic test for diabetes 
­providing that:
•	 stringent quality assurance tests are in place
•	 assays are standardized to criteria aligned to the 
­international reference values
•	 there are no conditions present which preclude its 
­accurate measurement
•	 An HbA1c of 48 mmol/mol (6.5%) is recommended 
as the cut-off point for diagnosing diabetes. A value 
<48 mmol/mol (6.5%) does not exclude diabetes 
­diagnosed using glucose tests
•	 In patients with an HbA1c of ≥48 mmol/mol but no 
symptoms of diabetes, repeat the HbA1c measurement 
on a further sample. If the second result is <48 mmol/
mol (6.5%), treat as high diabetes risk and repeat the test 
in six months, or sooner if symptoms develop.
Situations where HbA1c is not appropriate for diagnosis 
of diabetes
•	 All children and young people
•	 Patients of any age suspected of having type 1 diabetes
•	 Patients with symptoms of diabetes for less than two 
months
•	 Patients at high diabetes risk who are acutely ill (e.g. 
those requiring hospital admission)
•	 Patients taking medication that may cause rapid glucose 
rise, e.g. steroids, antipsychotics
•	 Patients with acute pancreatic damage, including 
­pancreatic surgery
•	 Pregnancy
•	 Haemoglobinopathies
•	 Anaemia (haemolytic and iron deficiency)
•	 Renal failure
•	 HIV infection.
Patients whose HbA1c is <48 mmol/mol (6.5%)
•	 Patients may still fulfil the WHO glucose criteria for the 
diagnosis of diabetes
•	 Use WHO glucose testing in patients with symptoms 
of diabetes or clinically at very high risk of diabetes 
(although the use of such glucose tests is not 
recommended routinely in this situation).
Patients who are clinically at high risk of developing 
diabetes:
•	 HbA1c 42–47 mmol/mol (6.0–6.4%):
•	 Provide intensive lifestyle advice
•	 Warn patients to report symptoms of diabetes
•	 Monitor HbA1c annually
•	 HbA1c <42 mmol/mol (6.0%):
•	 Patients may still have a high diabetes risk
•	 Review the patient’s personal risk and treat as ‘high 
diabetes risk’, as clinically indicated.
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
285
is/are responsible. In those patients with other autoim-
mune diseases (e.g. Addison disease, autoimmune thy-
roid disease, coeliac disease), it appears that the attack 
on the pancreas is part of a multiorgan or polyglandular 
process. It is marked by systemic indices of the autoim-
mune process such as circulating islet cell autoantibodies 
(which, when in high titre, may be complement fixing) 
and changes in circulating T and B lymphocyte subsets. 
The process of β-Cell destruction usually takes many 
months and occurs in cycles of deterioration and remis-
sion. The acute presentation of type 1 diabetes mellitus 
usually occurs during an acute deterioration of β-Cell 
function, the disorder frequently being unmasked by an 
intercurrent illness. After the patient recovers from the 
intercurrent illness, adopts a suitable diet and is treated 
with exogenous insulin, there is often a temporary pe-
riod of improved β-Cell function, known clinically as the 
‘honeymoon period’, during which glycaemic control may 
be relatively easily maintained. This honeymoon period 
typically lasts six, but occasionally up to 24 months, and β-
Cell function may be misleadingly good during this period.
Subsequently, insulin and C-peptide secretion are al-
most completely lost (maximal C-peptide response fol-
lowing a glucose load <0.5 μg/L); however, the degree of 
any residual β-Cell function may determine the ease with 
which good glycaemic control can be achieved with exog-
enous insulin therapy.
Although β-Cell destruction is the cause of type 1 dia-
betes mellitus, secondary metabolic defects occur, includ-
ing resistance to exogenous insulin, although this is more 
commonly seen in type 2 diabetes mellitus. There are a 
number of mechanisms for this, including the develop-
ment of anti-insulin antibodies (relatively rare with syn-
thetic human insulins) and abnormal body composition 
BOX 15.4	
Aetiological classification of diabetes mellitus
I. Type 1 diabetes (β-Cell destruction, usually leading to 
absolute insulin deficiency)
A.	Immune mediated
B.	Idiopathic
II. Type 2 diabetes (may range from predominantly 
insulin resistance with relative insulin deficiency to a 
predominantly secretory defect with insulin resistance)
III. Other specific types
A.	Genetic defects of β-Cell function
1.	 Chromosome 12, hepatocyte nuclear factor 
(HNF-1A) (MODY 3)
2.	 Chromosome 7, glucokinase (MODY 2)
3.	 Chromosome 20, HNF-4A (MODY 1)
4.	 Chromosome 13, insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF-1; 
MODY 4)
5.	 Chromosome 17, HNF-1B (MODY 5)
6.	 Chromosome 2, NeuroD1 (MODY 6)
7.	 Mitochondrial DNA
8.	 Others
B.	Genetic defects in insulin action
1.	 Type A insulin resistance
2.	 Leprechaunism
3.	 Rabson–Mendenhall syndrome
4.	 Lipoatrophic diabetes
5.	 Others
C.	Diseases of the exocrine pancreas*
1.	 Pancreatitis
2.	 Trauma/pancreatectomy
3.	 Neoplasia
4.	 Cystic fibrosis
5.	 Haemochromatosis
6.	 Fibrocalcific pancreatopathy
7.	 Others
D.	Endocrinopathies*
1.	 Acromegaly
2.	 Cushing syndrome
3.	 Glucagonoma
4.	 Phaeochromocytoma
5.	 Hyperthyroidism
6.	 Somatostatinoma
7.	 Aldosteronoma
8.	 Others
E.	Drug- or chemical-induced*
	
1.	 Vacor
	
2.	 Pentamidine
	
3.	 Nicotinic acid
	
4.	 Glucocorticoids
	
5.	 Thyroid hormones
	
6.	 Diazoxide
	
7.	 β-Adrenergic agonists
	
8.	 Thiazides
	
9.	 Dilantin
	
10.	 α-Interferon
	
11.	 Others
F.	 Infections
⁎
1.	 Congenital rubella
2.	 Cytomegalovirus
3.	 Others
G.	Uncommon forms of immune-mediated diabetes*
1.	 ‘Stiff-man’ syndrome
2.	 Anti-insulin receptor antibodies
3.	 Others
H.	Other genetic syndromes sometimes associated with 
diabetes
	
1.	 Down syndrome
	
2.	 Klinefelter syndrome
	
3.	 Turner syndrome
	
4.	 Wolfram syndrome
	
5.	 Friedreich ataxia
	
6.	 Huntington chorea
	
7.	 Laurence–Moon–Biedl syndrome
	
8.	 Myotonic dystrophy
	
9.	 Porphyria
	
10.	 Prader–Willi syndrome
	
11.	 Others
IV. Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)
Statistical risk classes (subjects with normal glucose tolerance but 
substantially increased risk of developing diabetes)
•	 Previous abnormality of glucose tolerance
•	 Potential abnormality of glucose tolerance
(From WHO Study Group on Diabetes Mellitus.)
*Marked causes are termed ‘secondary’ diabetes.
286	
Clinical biochemistry
due in part to the peripheral administration of insulin, 
or because the individual is predisposed to insulin resis-
tance by the genetic and morphological factors that also 
operate in type 2 diabetes mellitus. These morphologi-
cal factors are becoming increasingly common with the 
worldwide increase in obesity, which affects individuals 
with type 1 diabetes as well as those without.
Certain genetic markers are associated with a high 
prevalence of type 1 diabetes. Most of these are found 
on chromosome 6, in genes related to histocompatibil-
ity linked antigens (HLAs), which together probably ac-
count for about half the genetic risk, although recent 
genome-wide association studies have identified sev-
eral other markers of risk. Some of the associations are 
listed in Table 15.5. Most type 1 diabetes associated with 
HLA-DR4 presents in childhood while that associated 
with HLA-DR3 has a more variable age of onset.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus
Introduction: the heterogeneity of type 2 diabetes
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is the commonest form of diabe-
tes mellitus worldwide. It is often considered a diagnosis 
of exclusion, that is, patients are assumed to have type 2 
diabetes because they do not demonstrate the typical fea-
tures of type 1.
Type 2 diabetes is probably not a single condition. In 
all patients with the condition, there is both insulin resis-
tance and relative insulin deficiency. Some patients with 
late onset diabetes initially presumed to be type 2 will 
turn out to have type 1 (latent autoimmune diabetes in 
adults, LADA). With time (over perhaps 5–15 years from 
diagnosis), glycaemic control in type 2 patients usually 
becomes more difficult to achieve; insulin deficiency be-
comes more apparent and a subgroup of patients becomes 
prone to ketosis. Data from the UK Prospective Diabetes 
Study (UKPDS) trial suggested that the average time to 
insulin use was approximately seven years from diagnosis 
of type 2 diabetes, and confirmed the clinical impression 
of a progressive rather than static disease process. The 
typical patient with type 2 diabetes mellitus is overweight 
(average BMI at presentation >27 kg/m
2), with a central 
distribution of obesity (most conveniently assessed by 
waist circumference or waist:hip ratio) conferring risk 
that is independent of and additional to that of elevated 
body mass index (BMI). The age-adjusted relative risk for 
diabetes begins to increase at values of BMI that are con-
sidered normal based on mortality risk (24 kg/m
2 for men, 
22 kg/m
2 for women), and rises exponentially as BMI 
rises (Fig. 15.4). The marked increase in the prevalence 
of obesity is an important contributor to the increased 
prevalence of type 2 diabetes. Increases in abdominal fat 
mass, weight gain since young adulthood and a seden-
tary lifestyle are additional obesity-related risk factors for 
diabetes. In some ethnic groups (particularly those from 
parts of south Asia), the risk of diabetes may be higher at 
lower levels of obesity.
Other independent environmental risk factors include 
being born to a mother with gestational diabetes mellitus, 
being of exceptionally high birth weight and being of ex-
ceptionally low birth weight. The latter is postulated by 
the ‘Barker hypothesis’ to predispose to diabetes and obe-
sity by, among other things, switching on ‘thrifty’ genes 
to counter the effects of intrauterine malnutrition.
Leaner patients with type 2 diabetes tend to show 
more severe insulin deficiency. Greater degrees of obesity 
are associated with more insulin resistance. A major un-
resolved controversy of type 2 diabetes remains whether, 
for the typical type seen in Europid individuals, the prime 
defect in glucose homoeostasis is insulin deficiency or 
insulin resistance or both. Given that many individuals 
with severe insulin resistance do not have diabetes and 
that some patients with type 2 diabetes have little insulin 
resistance, it is probably true to say that insulin resistance 
is neither a necessary nor sufficient cause: rather, some 
degree of β-Cell dysfunction (whether as an inherited 
tendency or as a result of reduced β-Cell function as part 
of a degenerative process) is the sine qua non of type 2 
diabetes. Such β-Cell dysfunction may take the form of a 
relative lack of insulin secretion or of abnormal patterns of 
insulin secretion. Such abnormalities have been described 
in patients who later developed type 2 diabetes, and in-
clude changes in the amplitude and frequency of insulin 
secretory pulses and the loss of first-phase insulin secre-
tion (the initial pulse of insulin secretion seen after a meal 
TABLE 15.5  Genetic associations with type 1 
diabetes mellitus
Allele
Chromosome
Notes
HLA-DR3
6
Relative risk = × 5
HLA-DR4
6
Relative risk = × 7
HLA-B8, B15 and 
B18
6
Due to linkage 
disequilibrium 
with DR3 and 
DR4
HLA-DQR4
6
Relative risks up 
to × 90
Insulin gene
11
 
T cell receptor
?
Importance 
disputed
Ig heavy chain
14
Importance 
disputed
Kidd blood group
18
 
Body mass index (kg/m2)
100
75
50
25
0
Age-adjusted relative risk
Men
Women
1.0
2.9
1.0
4.3
1.0
5.0
1.5
8.1
2.2
4.4
6.7
11.6
21.3
42.1
93.2
54.0
40.3
27.6
15.8
<22
<23
23–23.9
24–24.9
25–26.9
27–28.9
29–30.9
31–32.9
33–34.9
35+
FIGURE 15.4  ■  Relationship between BMI and risk of type 2 dia-
betes. The risk of diabetes increases with increasing BMI values 
in men and women.
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
287
or glucose tolerance test), with prolongation and aug-
mentation of the second phase (the later response seen 
after a meal). These abnormalities of insulin secretion are 
reversible after certain forms of bariatric surgery for mor-
bid obesity in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Population studies indicate that the concurrent exis-
tence in an individual of both a cause for insulin resistance 
(usually obesity) and of a relatively low insulin secretory 
reserve predicts the later onset of type 2 diabetes mellitus.
The differentiation of idiopathic type 2 diabetes and 
‘secondary’ diabetes can be difficult. Secondary diabetes 
is a term that implies that another disease process has 
caused the diabetes (see Box 15.4). While there is good 
understanding of the natural history and approach to 
treatment in type 2 diabetes, there is less for secondary 
diabetes: occasionally, the diabetes can be improved sig-
nificantly by treating the primary condition.
Genetic factors in type 2 diabetes mellitus
Family studies suggest that type 2 diabetes mellitus is 
strongly inheritable. Concordance rates for identical 
twins exceed 90%. Some racial groups have a very high 
incidence of type 2 diabetes. Notable examples of this in-
clude the Pima Indians of Arizona and Pacific Islanders, 
with prevalence rates of up to 50%. In the UK, the preva-
lence of type 2 diabetes in people of South Asian extrac-
tion is approximately two or three times that in people 
of European origin. African-Caribbean people show an 
intermediate prevalence. The natural history of type 2 
diabetes and its propensity to give rise to long-term com-
plications varies between races (examples being the rela-
tive lack of diabetic foot disease in British Asians and the 
high prevalence of diabetic nephropathy among those of 
African-Caribbean descent).
In the majority of patients with type 2 diabetes, the 
pattern of inheritance suggests a polygenic disorder, with 
an important role for environmental factors such as obe-
sity and a low level of exercise.
Molecular biological techniques have not yet shown 
type 2 diabetes to be consistently associated with any ab-
normalities of the DNA coding of insulin, the insulin re-
ceptor or glucose transporter peptides, except in a small 
percentage (<1%) of cases. Abnormalities of the glucoki-
nase gene and of certain hepatic nuclear factor genes have 
been shown to cause some cases of maturity onset diabetes 
of the young (MODY) (see p. 292), but not typical type 2 
diabetes mellitus. More recent genome wide association 
studies have identified several predisposing genetic fac-
tors; most of these appear to relate to β-Cell function, 
but interestingly the strongest factor yet identified (the 
FTO gene, which is expressed in the hypothalamus and 
thought to be involved in body weight regulation), ap-
pears to increase diabetes risk by predisposing to a higher 
body weight; homozygotes for the predisposing gene 
variant are on average 3 kg heavier than those without.
Glucoregulatory defects in type 2 diabetes 
mellitus
The exact cause(s) of type 2 diabetes mellitus is (are) un-
known. Hyperglycaemia is due to elevated hepatic glucose 
output and, to a lesser extent, failure of skeletal muscle to 
take up glucose and store it as glycogen. Although many 
factors are believed to contribute to these two defects, 
they can broadly be categorized into three groups: β-Cell 
deficiency/dysfunction, insulin resistance and abnormali-
ties of non-insulin-mediated glucose disposal. It is also 
perhaps useful to indicate that, although only abnormal 
concentrations are observed in clinical practice, fluxes 
can be measured in research studies, and some of these 
are indicated in Table 15.6.
Pancreatic β-Cell deficiency/dysfunction in type 2 
diabetes mellitus. The importance of β-Cell deficiency 
varies between different groups and different ­individuals 
with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Abnormalities of insulin 
secretion are present in all patients, but the causes(s) of 
these defects is/are not yet established. Nor is it yet clear 
whether an abnormality of insulin secretion is usually 
the primary aetiological defect or whether other gluco-
regulatory defects are secondary to this pancreatic defect. 
Several workers have suggested that β-Cell dysfunction 
is the primary abnormality of type 2 diabetes, but that 
β-Cell dysfunction may be more subtle than that seen in 
type 1 diabetes.
Insulin deficiency has been described in type 2 diabe-
tes mellitus, but may sometimes be due to misclassify-
ing a late onset type 1 patient. Some patients with type 2 
­diabetes can exhibit both insulopaenia and hyperinsu-
linaemia (relative to normal weight controls) at different 
times during a single day. Some, especially obese subjects 
with mild glucose intolerance, may have hyperinsulinae-
mia throughout the whole 24 h. Other patients, usually 
TABLE 15.6  Some comparisons of concentrations and fluxes in obesity/insulin resistance syndrome/
early type 2 diabetes
Substance or process
Concentrations
Fluxes
Glucose
Increased fasting concentration
Normal whole body disposal rate
Normal whole body glucose production and 
clearance
Non-esterified fatty acids
Variable
Usually normal fasting total body production 
Impaired responsiveness to meal
Very low density lipoproteins
Increased concentration
Increased production, increased plasma half-life 
and increased whole body clearance
Oxidation of fuels
Whole body respiratory quotient 
(RQ) reflects diet
Whole body RQ reflects diet but RQ is lower in 
obese subjects
288	
Clinical biochemistry
those who are less obese, resemble patients with late on-
set type 1 diabetes mellitus and have absolute insulin de-
ficiency throughout. Fortunately, the accurate distinction 
between insulin-deficient type 2 diabetes mellitus and 
late onset type 1 diabetes mellitus rarely has significant 
implications for the clinical management of individual 
patients.
Patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus most frequently 
show hyperinsulinaemia during fasting, combined with 
reduced β-Cell reserve, relative to healthy subjects. The 
time course of insulin secretion in type 2 diabetes is ab-
normal: subjects typically exhibit relative insulin defi-
ciency during both the early phase of insulin secretion 
after an oral glucose load or meal and the first-phase in-
sulin response to an intravenous glucose load. This loss of 
early insulin response to glucose is paralleled by defects 
in the pulsatility of insulin secretion.
Assuming insulin clearance to be normal in such (hy-
perglycaemic) type 2 diabetes patients, hyperinsulinae-
mia implies hypersecretion of immunoreactive insulin 
compared with healthy (euglycaemic) subjects. However, 
secretion of insulin by β-Cells is dependent on the prevail-
ing blood glucose concentration as well as several other 
factors. Thus, the level of insulinaemia can be considered 
a reflection of β-Cell function only if it is considered in 
relation to the blood glucose concentration. The hyper-
glycaemic drive to the islets may compensate or even 
overcompensate for β-Cell dysfunction, producing near-
normal or even supranormal insulin concentrations. In 
the 1990s, it became clear that conventional radioimmu-
noassays for insulin failed to distinguish mature insulin 
from proinsulin and partially split proinsulins. Since the 
precursor molecules have much less biological activity 
than mature insulin, conventional radioimmunoassays 
had probably been overestimating the degree of insu-
linaemia typically found in type 2 diabetes. However, 
even modern specific assays do confirm at least some de-
gree of hyperinsulinaemia in obese type 2 patients with 
milder degrees of hyperglycaemia.
With increasing time, even patients who were hy-
perinsulinaemic at diagnosis usually become relatively 
insulin deficient. This group of patients, together with 
those who are insulin deficient from diagnosis, often need 
exogenous insulin treatment to maintain near-normal 
glycaemia. They may then be termed ‘insulin-treated’ 
or ‘insulin-requiring’, but it should be recognized that 
such insulin-treated patients form a heterogeneous group, 
very different in character from type 1, insulin-dependent 
patients.
Amylin. Amylin (also known as islet amyloid poly-
peptide, IAPP) is a 39-amino acid peptide co-secreted 
with insulin by β-Cells in all subjects with intact insu-
lin secretion, but not those with type 1 diabetes. The 
amino acid structure has some homology with calcitonin 
gene-related peptide. Plasma concentrations of amylin 
are very low (<10
−10 molar) in both diabetic and non-
diabetic subjects. There is no established physiological 
role for the peptide in the systemic circulation, but it 
has been suggested that amylin may have a physiological 
role in the regulation of insulin secretion within pancre-
atic ­islets or some effects on bone metabolism. Possible 
pathophysiological roles of amylin include the induction 
of insulin resistance in skeletal muscle, but this only oc-
curs at pharmacological concentrations. Amylin fibrils 
(with typical amyloid features of secondary protein struc-
ture and insolubility) are deposited in islet cells in condi-
tions of excess insulin secretion (such as insulinoma), and 
in situations where insulin secretion may initially have 
been increased but has subsequently declined (such as in 
old age and type 2 diabetes). The possible role of amylin 
in the islet damage of type 2 diabetes is under intensive 
investigation.
Insulin resistance in type 2 diabetes mellitus. In 
1970, Berson and Yalow defined insulin resistance as ‘a 
state in which greater than normal amounts of insulin 
are required to elicit a quantitatively normal [glucose] 
response’. The concept of insulin resistance had been 
suggested in the 1930s when Himsworth noted that the 
same amount of exogenous insulin injected into differ-
ent diabetic subjects had different antihyperglycaemic 
effects. Those with lesser antihyperglycaemic responses 
were labelled insulin insensitive (or insulin resistant). 
When early assays showed that many patients with type 2 
diabetes had high concentrations of circulating insulin 
as detected by radioimmunoassay, the concept of in-
sulin resistance was reinforced. These patients were 
hyperglycaemic, and hence by definition relatively 
insulin deficient, yet they actually appeared to have 
more ­immunoreactive insulin than other people so 
that their true insulin requirement was believed to 
be larger still. Hyperinsulinaemia with eu- or hy-
perglycaemia is generally taken to indicate insulin 
resistance, since hyperinsulinaemia produces hypo-
glycaemia in subjects with normal insulin sensitivity. 
The type 2 patients who apparently needed supranor-
mal amounts of insulin were seen to be the same group 
that Himsworth had found to be insulin resistant.
As insulin has several actions, resistance can take sev-
eral forms. It appears that some subjects show resistance 
to its hepatic effects while some show resistance to its ef-
fects on skeletal muscle (activation of muscle glycogen 
synthase by insulin is often defective), and some show re-
sistance to liporegulatory effects, the degree of resistance 
being different for different actions of insulin. There is 
no consensus as to the cellular mechanisms underlying 
insulin resistance in most patients with type 2 diabetes, 
though several have been suggested (see Fig. 15.2). Some 
workers have highlighted the competition between lip-
ids and glucose as metabolic fuels (the glucose–fatty acid 
cycle (Randle cycle) hypothesis): it can be shown experi-
mentally that high circulating concentrations of alterna-
tive fuels such as triglycerides, NEFA, lactate and ketone 
bodies compete with glucose for uptake and that, in their 
presence, glucose clearance is reduced. Others have sug-
gested that insulin resistance is a consequence of ‘cellular 
satiety’, seen whenever intracellular sensors such as uri-
dine diphosphate (UDP)-glucosamine detect excess en-
ergy supply, and other workers have implicated specific 
cellular abnormalities such as reduced numbers of insulin 
receptors, reduced receptor function, dysfunction of sec-
ond messenger systems and intracellular antagonists of 
the effects of insulin.
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
289
Abnormalities of non-insulin-mediated glucose dis-
posal in type 2 diabetes mellitus. As discussed above, 
most glucose clearance from the plasma occurs inde-
pendently of insulin. This process, largely via GLUT1, 
is defective in type 2 diabetes, and contributes to hy-
perglycaemia, although the mechanism is uncertain. 
Changes in tissue blood flow in diabetes, particularly 
within skeletal muscle, may also reduce clearance of 
plasma glucose.
Associations of type 2 diabetes mellitus
The metabolic syndrome and obesity. Type 2 diabe-
tes mellitus often occurs in patients with a syndrome of 
morphological and metabolic abnormalities together 
with associated conditions that has been termed the 
metabolic syndrome (also known as ‘Reaven syndrome’, 
‘syndrome X’ or the ‘hyperinsulinaemia syndrome’). 
The features include insulin resistance, dyslipidaemia, 
obesity (particular abdominal obesity) and hypertension 
among others. Unfortunately, there have been multiple 
definitions of these syndromes (e.g. different factors, 
different combinations of factors and different cut-offs 
for their definition) and no consensus has been reached. 
However, these syndromes all reflect co-segregation of 
factors in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and those 
with lesser degrees of glucose intolerance, as well as in 
individuals with normal glucose tolerance. Subjects with 
metabolic syndrome, with or without diabetes, have an 
increased predisposition to atherosclerosis, and subjects 
with glucose intolerance (type 2 diabetes mellitus or 
IGT) have an increased predisposition to atherosclero-
sis mediated by these associated risk factors. However, 
identifying metabolic syndrome itself has no unique 
implications for clinical management: this should focus 
on the management of the obesity (hence insulin re-
sistance) and the individual cardiovascular risk factors. 
Some workers specifically exclude obese subjects from 
this syndrome, but there are many features in common 
between slim subjects with the metabolic syndrome and 
those who are obese.
The natural history of type 2 diabetes usually involves 
an evolution from normal glucose tolerance through im-
paired glucose tolerance (usually accompanied by other 
features of insulin resistance syndromes) to the onset of 
frank diabetes, followed by a continuing β-Cell failure 
leading to the need for exogenous insulin (Fig.  15.5). 
Obesity, low physical fitness or other hereditary factors 
can all hasten this evolution.
The morphological associations of type 2 diabetes 
mellitus include shorter stature (by 1–4 cm compared 
with non-diabetic subjects), with obesity of the android 
type (also known as ‘apple’, upper body, central or vis-
ceral obesity) marked by a high waist:hip ratio, low capil-
lary density in skeletal muscle and high ratios of slow to 
fast twitch muscle fibres. Insulin resistance is a prominent 
feature of obesity, especially of the android type, even in 
the absence of diabetes, and obesity powerfully identifies 
individuals within a population at greatest risk of devel-
oping type 2 diabetes. Compensatory hyperinsulinaemia 
is marked in obesity and contributes to the associated 
dyslipidaemia and probably to the hypertension.
Hypertension. The association between diabetes and 
hypertension has been long recognized and is strong. 
The prevalence of hypertension in obese patients with 
type 2 diabetes approaches 50% in some series. The typi-
cal body habitus of patients with type 2 diabetes is as-
sociated with hypertension even in non-diabetic subjects. 
Although diabetic patients are liable to develop the same 
secondary forms of hypertension as the non-diabetic 
population (and renal artery stenosis is commoner in 
diabetes), most diabetic hypertensive patients have a low 
renin hypertension that is unlike that in non-diabetic pa-
tients with essential hypertension.
Patients with either type 1 or type 2 diabetes and hy-
pertension and characteristically have sodium retention 
and impaired natriuresis: exchangeable body sodium is 
increased by an average of 10%. This abnormality is seen 
even before the development of any clinically detectable 
complications of diabetes. Possible sodium-retaining 
mechanisms include hyperinsulinaemia induced overac-
tivity of tubular sodium transporters, increased glomer-
ular filtration of glucose leading to enhanced proximal 
tubular sodium–glucose cotransport, extravascular shift 
of fluid with sodium and, in later stages, renal impair-
ment. Plasma renin activity, angiotensin II, aldosterone 
and catecholamine concentrations are usually normal in 
glycaemically well-controlled type 1 and type 2 patients. 
On the other hand, plasma natriuretic peptide concentra-
tions are usually increased, and an exaggerated vascular 
reactivity to noradrenaline (norepinephrine) and angio-
tensin II is common even in uncomplicated types 1 and 2 
diabetes.
In type 1 diabetes, hypertension is strongly linked 
with the development of diabetic nephropathy. Although 
it is uncertain whether this is initially cause or effect, it 
becomes a vicious circle. There appear to be familial ef-
fects, with non-diabetic relatives of diabetic nephropathic 
hypertensive patients showing defects in ion transport 
function (erythrocyte Na
+/Li
+ counter transport and leu-
kocyte Na
+/H
+ antiport) and an increased liability to de-
velop essential hypertension.
Data from the UKPDS confirm the clinical impres-
sion that hypertension in type 2 diabetes is often re-
fractory to treatment. Typically, a combination of three 
antihypertensive agents was required to maintain good 
Insulin
resistance
β-Cell
dysfunction
Insulin
concentration
β-Cell
insufficiency
Insulin-
requiring
Euglycaemia
Time
Insulin
action
Normal
IGT
Syndrome X
Diabetes
Diabetes
progression
Hyperglycaemia
FIGURE  15.5  ■ The natural history of type 2 diabetes. (From 
DeFronzo et al. Diabetes Care 1992; 15:318, with permission).
290	
Clinical biochemistry
control of blood pressure. Furthermore, the same study 
showed that even a modest reduction in blood pressure 
reduced the incidence of nephropathy and death. The re-
lationship between blood pressure and the development 
and progression of diabetic nephropathy was particularly 
striking.
Dyslipidaemia. Diabetes is strongly associated with 
abnormalities of lipid metabolism. Several mechanisms 
are postulated for these associations. The obesity and 
body fat distribution common in type 2 diabetes is it-
self linked with dyslipidaemias in non-diabetic subjects. 
Non-enzymatic glycation of apolipoproteins impairs li-
poprotein clearance. Insulin is the principal antilipolytic 
regulator, through its inhibition of hormone-sensitive 
lipase. This enzyme breaks down adipose tissue triglyc-
eride and consequently mobilizes fat stores for subse-
quent utilization. As a result of its regulation by insulin, 
hormone-sensitive lipase is most active in the fasting 
state and least so upon feeding. In diabetes, insulin-
mediated inhibition is attenuated or lost, so breakdown 
of fat stores carries on even if food is available. The un-
controlled release of free fatty acids is followed by their 
uptake by the liver in a simple concentration-dependent 
manner.
Free fatty acids are metabolized by β-oxidation, 
but once their concentration exceeds capacity for oxi-
dation they are re-esterified with glycerol to form 
triacylglycerol (triglyceride) which leads to increased 
rate of synthesis (and thereby release) of triglyceride-
rich very low density lipoprotein (VLDL). Peripheral 
VLDL-triglyceride clearance may be impaired because 
insulin is needed to synthesize and secrete lipoprotein 
lipase, the principal enzyme responsible for clearing 
VLDL-triglyceride.
Type 2 diabetes mellitus is associated with low 
plasma concentrations of high density lipoprotein 
(HDL), which, by acting as an antioxidant, may limit 
the lipid peroxidation that is one of the factors respon-
sible for atheroma formation. This may contribute 
to increased cardiovascular risk in diabetes, but high 
VLDL-cholesterol and elevated triglyceride concen-
trations may also contribute. Total plasma cholesterol 
concentration is often normal in type 2 diabetes, but the 
HDL:LDL and HDL:total cholesterol ratios are usu-
ally low. The composition of VLDL changes such that 
it contains more triglyceride and cholesteryl esters rela-
tive to the apoprotein content. The size distribution of 
LDL changes towards smaller, denser particles. These 
abnormalities are particularly atherogenic and under-
line the need to consider the whole lipid profile rather 
than just total or LDL-cholesterol in the dyslipidaemia 
of type 2 diabetes. Improved glycaemic control only 
partly improves these lipid abnormalities.
In type 1 diabetes, poor glycaemic control is typically 
associated with high plasma concentrations of VLDL-
cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol and triglycerides, and 
sometimes with low HDL-cholesterol. The triglyceride 
concentration falls in response to improved glycaemic 
control and the abnormalities of VLDL and LDL usu-
ally also improve. In contrast to patients with type 2 dia-
betes, those with well-controlled type 1 diabetes usually 
achieve plasma lipid concentrations similar to those seen 
in non-diabetic groups; HDL concentrations may even 
be elevated.
Lipotoxicity and glucotoxicity
Lipotoxicity. Although adipose tissue is now known to 
have a large number of important functions, related, for 
example, to thermo-insulation, immunity, fertility and 
protection of tissues such as the eye in the orbit, its main 
function is the storage of energy in the form of triglycer-
ides in the postprandial state and the subsequent release 
of lipid in the form of NEFA in the fasting state. The 
consequences of accumulation of lipids in lean tissues, as 
observed in fatless rodents and humans with generalized 
lipodystrophy, include hepatic steatosis, lipid-induced 
cardiomyopathy, insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes 
mellitus. This process is termed lipotoxicity (lipoapop-
tosis, where programmed cell death occurs) and is re-
versible in fatless rodents by the transplantation of small 
amounts of normal adipose tissue, but not by transplan-
tation of adipose tissue from ob/ob mice, which lack the 
ability to secrete leptin. In humans with generalized li-
podystrophy, long-term treatment with leptin improves 
insulin resistance, hyperlipidaemia and hepatic steatosis 
dramatically.
Non-esterified fatty acids can induce insulin resistance 
in muscle via at least three putative mechanisms: through 
the glucose–fatty acid cycle, whereby increased intracel-
lular citrate derived from fat leads to diversion of glu-
cose away from the tricarboxylic acid; through an effect 
of intermediates such as diacylglycerol that increase the 
activity of protein kinase C activity, thereby phosphory-
lating and inactivating the insulin receptor and insulin re-
ceptor substrate (IRS)-1, and via activation of the NFκB 
transcription factor pathway, which has putative vascular 
effects that might contribute to the observed increase in 
vascular damage that precedes hyperglycaemia. In the 
liver, NEFAs inhibit the suppression of glycogenolysis by 
insulin. Other mechanisms include modulation of adipo-
kines, such as tumour necrosis factor α (TNFα), which 
could promote insulin resistance, or adiponectin, which 
reduces it. The question then arises of why it is that so 
many individuals with obesity and elevated plasma con-
centrations of NEFA do not develop diabetes. One expla-
nation for this may lie in the fact that NEFAs are potent 
stimulators of insulin secretion in healthy individuals, an 
effect that might mitigate the tendency for NEFAs to in-
duce insulin resistance. However, both in subjects with 
type 2 diabetes and their normoglycaemic first-degree 
relatives, NEFAs do not induce a sufficient compensatory 
rise in insulin secretion to overcome the induced insulin 
resistance. Thus NEFAs may be able to cause diabetes in 
those with a genetic predisposition to β-Cell dysfunction 
but not in those with normal β-Cell reserve. Activators of 
PPARγ (see p. 315) may alleviate several of these NEFA-
induced abnormalities by reducing plasma NEFA con-
centrations, increasing adiponectin and redistributing fat 
from visceral to subcutaneous deposits, thus reducing the 
direct effects on the liver and elsewhere. Lipotoxicity may 
also contribute to β-Cell dysfunction – accumulation of 
lipid droplets has been observed in the islets in rodent 
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
291
models of obesity and diabetes, and these may both inter-
fere with insulin secretion and promote an inflammatory 
response leading to β-Cell destruction.
Glucotoxicity. It has long been known that acute eleva-
tion of plasma glucose concentrations to very high levels 
is able to induce a state of insulin resistance character-
ized by impairment of insulin secretion in response to 
glucose. Elevation of plasma glucose to concentrations 
just above the physiological range potentiates insulin se-
cretion in both humans and animals when transient and 
in the presence of a normal β-Cell mass, but reduces it 
otherwise. Conversely, strict metabolic control is able to 
induce improvements in both insulin secretion and sen-
sitivity, although not usually to normality. It is likely that 
multiple mechanisms contribute to this effect, including 
changes in the Km of glucose sensing systems such as glu-
cokinase/hexokinase, which may lead to alteration of the 
dose–response curve of islet cells to blood glucose con-
centrations, changes in the ratios of proinsulin to insulin 
secretion and alteration in the functional activity of the 
membrane sulfonylurea-sensitive K
+ channel. It is likely 
that the honeymoon period often observed in new onset 
type 1 diabetes is at least partly attributable to a reduction 
in glucotoxicity.
Prevention studies in type 2 diabetes
Type 2 diabetes may be prevented, or at least its on-
set delayed, by relatively modest degrees of weight loss. 
In four intervention studies, conducted in the USA, 
Finland, China and India in patients with impaired glu-
cose tolerance, lifestyle interventions resulting in av-
erage weight loss of <7 kg over six months, with some 
later regain, resulted in up to 58% reduction in the 
cumulative incidence of diabetes in the intervention 
groups over periods of up to four years. Other studies 
have shown that adopting a more physically active life-
style appears to confer useful protection, independently 
of body weight. For patients unable to lose weight af-
ter appropriate lifestyle interventions, treatment with 
metformin may bring about a modest reduction in the 
incidence of type 2 diabetes. Other diabetes treatments, 
including acarbose, thiazolidinediones and the weight 
loss drug orlistat also reduce progression to diabetes in 
those a greatest risk.
The role of bariatric surgery in managing type 2 
diabetes
Weight loss is the cornerstone of the management of 
overweight and obese subjects with type 2 diabetes. 
Increasingly, patients are being considered for bariat-
ric surgery after other methods of weight control have 
proved fruitless. Whereas the time course and degree of 
improvement in diabetes are more or less in line with 
predictions based on the degree of postoperative weight 
loss resulting from operations that physically limit food 
intake, such as laparoscopic gastric banding, the effects 
of gastric and intestinal bypass procedures appear to be 
quite different. Not only have improvements in gly-
caemia been reported well before weight loss becomes 
apparent, but they appear also to exceed those expected 
on the basis of the amount of weight lost. It has been 
proposed that increased secretion of a number of gut 
peptides with insulinotropic actions such as glucagon-
like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insu-
linotropic peptide (GIP), and decreased secretion of 
orexigenic peptides such as ghrelin may be responsible 
for the success of bypass techniques, raising the intrigu-
ing possibility that operations of this kind have a partly 
endocrine mechanism of action. Many studies have 
purported to show ‘cure’ of diabetes, often associated 
with restoration of first-phase insulin response, in up to 
80% of subjects for as long as 16  years of follow-up. 
However, more recent prospective studies suggest that 
the true rate of remission of type 2 diabetes after bar-
iatric surgery is closer to 40%, with those patients with 
shorter duration of diabetes, and lower requirements for 
glucose-lowering drugs most likely to remain free of the 
need for treatment for many years. Long-term studies 
comparing surgery with optimal medical treatment are 
really needed to resolve the question as to whether sur-
gery is a better treatment.
Gestational diabetes mellitus
The study of diabetes occurring in association with 
pregnancy has been characterized (and hampered) by 
the local adoption of many different criteria for the di-
agnosis of gestational diabetes, coupled with different 
recommendations for screening. Such local diversity is 
probably a consequence of different levels of provision 
of care for pregnant women, and the balance between 
the unnecessary labelling of a pregnancy as ‘abnormal’ 
or ‘high risk’ and the avoidance of preventable risk to 
mother and fetus.
Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) was defined by 
Lowy as glucose intolerance that presents in pregnancy. 
However, it must be appreciated that this will group to-
gether a number of conditions that are associated with a 
variety of qualitative and quantitative threats to the preg-
nancy. The offspring of women who have undiagnosed 
pre-existing type 2 diabetes discovered during pregnancy 
will, for example, have been exposed to hyperglycaemia 
and other metabolic abnormalities in the first trimester of 
pregnancy during which organogenesis occurs. They will 
therefore be subject to the increased risk of fetal malfor-
mation seen in pre-existing diabetes despite the diabetes 
being labelled ‘gestational’. When the glucose intoler-
ance is induced by the pregnancy itself, its onset is typi-
cally in the late second or early third trimester, and the 
risks of major fetal malformations are therefore similar to 
those in the non-diabetic population.
The reported incidence of GDM varies enormously 
between populations, not least because of local differ-
ences in screening procedures and definition. The rec-
ommendations of the UK National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence (NICE) for screening and diagnosis 
of diabetes during pregnancy are shown in Box 15.5.
Glycaemic control during pregnancy should be strictly 
optimized in order to minimize fetal mortality and 
morbidity. In patients with type 1 diabetes who are at-
tempting to conceive, similarly strict glycaemic control 
292	
Clinical biochemistry
(together with folic acid supplements) is believed to re-
duce the incidence of congenital malformations. One 
large UK study showed, in an unselected population, 
that the infants of women with type 1 diabetes have a 
ten-fold greater risk of a congenital malformation and a 
five-fold greater risk of being stillborn than those from a 
representative general population. These effects are re-
duced but not abolished by pre-pregnancy counselling, 
the use of folic acid and tight glycaemic control prior to 
conception and throughout pregnancy. Local targets for 
glycaemic control vary, but most would agree that, at the 
least, all overnight fasting and preprandial blood glucose 
concentrations should be <7 mmol/L during pregnancy. 
In practice, many adopt targets for overnight fasting con-
centrations of <5.9 mmol/L and 1 h postprandial glucose 
concentrations of <7.8 mmol/L, in both pre-existing dia-
betes and gestational diabetes. Although the use of oral 
hypoglycaemic agents appears to be safe, they are at pres-
ent not licensed for use in pregnancy, although they are 
recommended by many guidelines (including NICE in 
the UK), on the basis of a published evidence base sup-
porting the use of both metformin and glibenclamide in 
pregnancy. Glibenclamide does not appear to cross the 
placental barrier and thus does not cause neonatal hy-
poglycaemia, but may cause maternal hypoglycaemia, so 
should be used with caution.
Despite the above, insulin treatment remains the gold 
standard in all forms of gestational diabetes, despite the 
fact that, at the time of writing, no insulin is licensed 
for such use. As with diabetes not associated with preg-
nancy, many regimens have been used with success and 
there is no single recommended regimen. However, the 
predominantly postprandial nature of the glycaemic de-
rangements in GDM lend themselves to treatment with 
short-acting insulins at meal times, supplemented if nec-
essary with a long-acting insulin, and such regimens usu-
ally prove satisfactory.
In patients with pre-existing diabetes, particularly 
where complicated by microvascular disease, retinopathy 
and neuropathy may advance rapidly during pregnancy, 
and screening by fundoscopy and for microalbuminuria 
in each trimester is probably warranted. Angiotensin-
converting-enzyme inhibitors are teratogenic and should 
be discontinued during pregnancy.
The timing and mode of obstetric delivery merits 
consideration in pregnancies complicated by diabetes. 
Again, there is a lack of clear evidence, but many would 
advocate intervention at around 38 weeks in cases where 
diabetes was present prior to pregnancy, to reduce the 
risk of late placental failure; this occurs in approximately 
1–2% of pregnancies, presenting with sudden and ap-
parently unexpected late intrauterine fetal death (some-
times manifest by a sudden improvement in glycaemic 
control).
Gestational diabetes or delivery of a large-for-dates 
or macrosomic baby is strongly predictive of subsequent 
type 2 diabetes, and many recommend screening such 
women for type 2 diabetes mellitus six weeks after deliv-
ery, and periodically (every 1–2 years) thereafter.
Maturity onset diabetes of the  
young (MODY)
This syndrome is a rare (<5% of childhood diabetes 
and <1% of all type 2 diabetes) form of type 2 diabetes, 
inherited in an autosomal dominant fashion and typi-
cally presenting at a young age. It is sometimes known 
as ‘Mason-type’ diabetes after the index family. Strict 
diagnostic criteria for the condition include a diagnosis 
of type 2 diabetes (with preservation of C-peptide re-
sponse) with onset before the age of 25 years in at least 
two family members, with evidence of vertical trans-
mission through at least three generations. In clinical 
practice, it may not always be possible to ensure that all 
these criteria are met. Thus, many patients with a prob-
able diagnosis of MODY will not fulfil the criteria by 
virtue of later age of onset (at least 25% present later 
than 25 years of age), the occurrence of new mutations 
and incomplete family histories.
All the six known MODY subtypes are characterized by 
defects in insulin secretion rather than in insulin action, al-
though, in some, a degree of insulin resistance may super-
vene, probably as a result of glucotoxicity. They have been 
characterized as being due to mutations in genes encoding 
glucokinase (MODY 2) or a range of transcription factors 
that result in defects in insulin secretion. In patients with 
MODY1, abnormalities in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a 
(HNF-4A) result in impaired or absent first-phase insulin 
BOX 15.5	
Recommendations for screening for 
and diagnosis of gestational diabetes 
mellitus in accordance with UK 
NICE guidelines
•	 Women with one or more of the following risk factors 
for gestational diabetes should be offered testing for 
gestational diabetes mellitus
•	 Body mass index >30 kg/m
2
•	 Previous macrosomic baby weighing >4.5 kg
•	 Previous gestational diabetes
•	 Family history of diabetes (first-degree relative with 
diabetes)
•	 Family origin with a high prevalence of diabetes:
•	 South Asian (India, Pakistan or Bangladesh)
•	 African Caribbean
•	 Middle Eastern
•	 Screening for gestational diabetes using fasting plasma 
glucose, random blood glucose, glucose challenge test 
and urinalysis for glucose should not be undertaken
•	 The 2-h 75 g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) 
should be used to test for gestational diabetes and di-
agnosis made using the criteria defined by the WHO
•	 Fasting plasma venous glucose concentration 
≥7.0 mmol/L
or
•	 2-h 
plasma 
venous 
glucose 
concentration 
≥7.8 mmol/L
•	 Women who have had gestational diabetes in a previ-
ous pregnancy should be offered early self-monitoring 
of blood glucose or an OGTT at 16–18 weeks, and a 
further OGTT at 28 weeks if the results are normal
•	 Women with any of the other risk factors for 
gestational diabetes should be offered an OGTT at 
24–28 weeks
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
293
secretion, reduced peaks of insulin secretion, hyperglycae-
mia, a degree of secondary insulin resistance reversible by 
good metabolic control and fully susceptibility to the com-
plications of diabetes expected for the degree of exposure 
to hyperglycaemia. In contrast, patients with MODY 2 
have mild fasting hyperglycaemia, as a result of the defect 
in glucose sensing that correlates with the degree of func-
tional inactivation of the enzyme. MODY 2 is associated 
with low risk of microvascular complications of diabetes 
and thus often does not require treatment. The condition 
often only comes to light as a chance finding. These pa-
tients are characteristically highly sensitive to sulfonylurea 
treatment, if used. As predicted by the actions of glucoki-
nase in the liver, hepatic glycogen production is reduced 
and gluconeogenesis increased in the postabsorptive state 
in this condition.
Mutations in the HNF-1A gene that encodes hepato-
cyte nuclear factor 1a (HNF-1A) (MODY 3) account for 
up to two-thirds of all MODY diagnoses. This condition 
has a variable age of onset, and progressive β-Cell dys-
function that leads to potentially severe hyperglycaemia 
and similar microvascular complications to those en-
countered in type 2 diabetes. Abnormal HNF-1A func-
tion in the proximal renal tubules may lead to incomplete 
reabsorption of glucose, phosphate and amino acids, but 
nephropathy appears no more common than would be 
expected for the degree and duration of hyperglycaemia. 
These patients are characteristically highly sensitive to 
sulfonylurea treatment, and there are several cases re-
ported where patients have been misdiagnosed as type 1 
­diabetes, treated with insulin (sometimes for many 
years) but later transferred safely to sulfonylurea treat-
ment. MODY 4 results from abnormalities of IPF-1, 
which plays a role in pancreatic development: patients 
may present with varying degrees of hyperglycaemia at 
variable ages of onset. MODY 5 is caused by defects in 
HNF-1B, which plays a role in renal development as well 
as β-Cell function. It is characterized by renal cyst for-
mation (which may lead to chronic kidney disease) and 
variable degrees of hyperglycaemia. MODY 6 is associ-
ated with abnormalities of NeuroD1, which plays a role 
in pancreatic development.
Clinicians need to be aware of the possibility of MODY 
in patients with a strong family history of early onset type 2 
diabetes, and consider genetic testing. Other tests are also 
being developed, for example low plasma concentrations 
of C-reactive protein (measured with a highly sensitive as-
say) can be highly predictive of MODY 3 and may eventu-
ally be incorporated into diagnostic algorithms.
Secondary diabetes
Several diseases may cause diabetes or glucose intoler-
ance. Most of these are readily diagnosed, perhaps with 
haemochromatosis and chronic pancreatitis being the 
least readily apparent. Clinical concern is frequently 
raised about Cushing syndrome when an obese subject 
presents with glucose intolerance, and a number of stud-
ies have suggested that up to 4% of patients with type 2 
diabetes are in fact suffering from Cushing syndrome. 
Pseudo-Cushing syndrome, either idiopathic or related 
to alcohol excess, is a more common association.
Tropical diabetes. Fibrocalcific pancreatic diabetes is 
a form of secondary diabetes that occurs in the tropi-
cal developing countries. The condition has typical 
clinical features, pancreatic calcification being char-
acteristic, but its aetiology has not been established. 
There was previously considered to be another form of 
tropical diabetes termed protein-deficient pancreatic, 
or J-type, diabetes, but this is not included in current 
classifications.
Alcohol-related and pancreatic causes of diabetes. 
Chronic pancreatitis accounts for <1% of all diabetes 
in the developed world. Alcohol is the usual cause. Most 
patients give a history of long-term (>5 years) excessive 
alcohol consumption with recurrent episodes of mild ab-
dominal pain. Hospitalization during these episodes of 
pancreatitis is unusual. There may or may not be pan-
creatic calcification, but sclerosis of islets occurs. Insulin 
secretion is reduced, causing diabetes, but patients are 
highly sensitive to exogenous insulin therapy (perhaps 
because glucagon secretion is also reduced). Chronic 
heavy alcohol consumption may also induce severe exo-
crine pancreatic failure and, consequently, steatorrhoea. 
Pancreatic resection, for example for cancer, is a rare 
cause of diabetes.
Acute pancreatitis is associated with transient glucose 
intolerance resulting from reduced insulin secretion and 
the insulin resistance of systemic illness. Acute haemor-
rhagic pancreatitis occasionally produces such damage to 
the pancreas that permanent diabetes mellitus results.
Mild (subclinical) abnormalities of exocrine pancre-
atic function and reductions in pancreatic lipase and 
immunoreactive trypsin are seen in 20–70% of diabetic 
patients. The cause for these abnormalities is not estab-
lished, although the pancreas is smaller in patients with 
diabetes (especially type 1 diabetes). Changes in insu-
lin secretion, glucagon secretion and autonomic neu-
ral function may also play a role in exocrine pancreatic 
dysfunction.
Haemochromatosis. Iron storage disease, whether 
owing to familial defects or repeated iron infusion, re-
sults in liver damage that may progress to cirrhosis (see 
Chapter  14) and β-Cell damage, as well as damage to 
other endocrine and non-endocrine tissues (e.g. cardiac 
muscle). Diabetes is a common result of such problems. 
Glucose tolerance improves with treatment of the iron 
overload, but the more severe the damage, the lower 
the probability of recovery with treatment. Screening 
diabetic clinic populations typically reveals 0.1–0.5% 
of type 2 diabetes mellitus to be associated with undiag-
nosed iron storage disorders. However, modestly elevated 
concentrations of ferritin are commonly associated with 
type 2 diabetes, particularly at the time of diagnosis, and 
do not of themselves necessarily suggest the diagnosis of 
haemochromatosis.
Endocrine disorders. In many of the conditions men-
tioned in this section, insulin resistance occurs but, in 
most subjects, β-Cell reserve is sufficient to produce 
­compensatory hyperinsulinaemia so that, although there 
is mild glucose intolerance, full-blown diabetes mellitus 
294	
Clinical biochemistry
is unusual. The unrecognized development of an endo-
crine condition in a known diabetic patient may present 
as worsening glycaemic control or recurrent ketoacidosis. 
It is more common for endocrine disease to exacerbate or 
unmask pre-existing glucose intolerance rather than for it 
to be the sole cause of diabetes.
Polycystic ovary syndrome is a common condition, as-
sociated with obesity, insulin resistance and glucose intol-
erance or frank type 2 diabetes (see below and Chapter 22).
Active thyrotoxicosis is associated with glucose intol-
erance in 30–50% of patients, but this rarely extends to 
frank diabetes. The mechanism causing this may vary 
between patients. Hepatic glucose production is often 
increased; increased gastrointestinal motility may exag-
gerate postprandial hyperglycaemia; insulin clearance 
is increased, and hypersensitivity of β-adrenoreceptors 
may mediate the elevated NEFA concentrations found in 
hyperthyroidism.
The increased incidence of impaired glucose toler-
ance in patients with hypothyroidism is well established, 
­although the mechanism for it is uncertain.
Hyperprolactinaemia causes insulin resistance and 
glucose intolerance, which is reversed by treating the pri-
mary condition; symptomatic diabetes is rare.
The hypercortisolaemia of Cushing syndrome, what-
ever the cause, results in increased hepatic gluconeo-
genesis and hepatic glucose output while skeletal muscle 
becomes insulin resistant. Glucocorticoids increase li-
polysis and protein catabolism, increasing the circulating 
concentrations of alternative fuels and reducing glucose 
clearance. Glucose intolerance is found in 80–90% and 
frank diabetes in 15–20% of patients with Cushing syn-
drome. Treatment with glucocorticoids is a common 
cause of secondary diabetes.
Conn syndrome was originally described as includ-
ing glucose intolerance. However, this is usually mild 
and only a small minority of patients has even moderate 
glucose intolerance. The cause is thought to be impaired 
insulin secretion owing to severe potassium depletion.
Growth hormone is a counter-regulatory hormone. 
Acromegaly frequently causes glucose intolerance 
(seen in 60–70% of cases) and even symptomatic dia-
betes (in 6–25%). Successful treatment of acromegaly 
usually improves glucose tolerance. Isolated growth 
hormone deficiency is also associated with glucose in-
tolerance, probably as a result of the insulin resistance 
that results from the decrease in lean body mass and 
the increase in abdominal fat and a blunted insulin re-
sponse to glucose. Diabetic microvascular disease is 
rare in this group.
Phaeochromocytoma is associated with multiple 
abnormalities of glucoregulation, adrenaline (epi-
nephrine) having a greater hyperglycaemic effect than 
noradrenaline (norepinephrine). Catecholamines stimu-
late hepatic glycogenolysis and hepatic glucose output, 
and inhibit insulin secretion via α-receptors; β-receptor 
effects include promotion of adipose tissue lipolysis, 
increased skeletal muscle glycogenolysis and reduced 
skeletal muscle glucose uptake. Both α- and β-receptors 
augment glucagon secretion. Improvement of glucose 
tolerance occurs within a few weeks of successful surgi-
cal resection.
Hypercalcaemia and hypophosphataemia, as seen in 
primary hyperparathyroidism, reduce peripheral insu-
lin sensitivity, probably through effects on intracellular 
second messenger systems and glucose uptake, and are 
associated with hyperinsulinaemia, although glucose tol-
erance is rarely impaired.
Gastrointestinal endocrine tumours of several types 
are associated with glucose intolerance. Glucose in-
tolerance is a cardinal feature in patients with gluca-
gonomas. Zollinger–Ellison (gastrinoma) syndrome; 
Verner–Morrison or watery diarrhoea hypokalaemia, 
achlorhydria (WDHA or VIPoma) syndrome; carcinoid 
syndrome; polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopa-
thy, monoclonal gammopathy, skin changes (POEMS) 
syndrome and somatostatinoma, all have glucose intoler-
ance as a frequent, and often florid, feature.
Autoimmune hypoadrenalism is associated with type 1 
diabetes mellitus but not causative: indeed, adrenal fail-
ure is a cause of hypoglycaemia.
Iatrogenic diabetes. Treatment with steroids is the most 
common form of iatrogenic diabetes. Some frequently 
used drugs, including thiazides and β-blockers, especially 
in combination, may worsen glucose tolerance, their ef-
fects being most clinically relevant in diabetic patients. 
Other drugs may cause diabetes via effects on lipid me-
tabolism (e.g. protease inhibitors), via weight gain or 
through mechanisms that are not fully understood (e.g. 
atypical antipsychotic agents).
Rare conditions associated with glucose intolerance. 
Several congenital conditions with varying degrees of im-
pairment of glucose intolerance are listed in Table 15.7. 
In most of these conditions, the diabetes is not the most 
pressing clinical problem.
Severe insulin resistance. Most of the endocrine causes 
of glucose intolerance are the result of circulating insulin 
antagonists causing insulin resistance. A variety of other 
medical conditions, although rare, may be associated with 
severe resistance to insulin.
Acanthosis nigricans is characterized by the presence 
of velvety brown hyperkeratotic lesions on the neck, axil-
lae and groins. There is a well-recognized, but relatively 
rare association with malignancy. Acanthosis nigricans 
not associated with malignancy may be classified into two 
types, both associated with insulin resistance and obesity. 
Type A is a variant of polycystic ovarian syndrome where 
the skin changes are marked; additional features include 
hirsutism, polycystic ovaries, virilization, coarse features 
and early accelerated growth. The cause of the insulin re-
sistance in this type has not yet been determined. Several 
factors may be involved: reductions in insulin binding, 
receptor number and receptor kinase activity, and post 
receptor defects have each been reported in some pa-
tients. Patients with type B acanthosis nigricans tend to 
be older and are usually female. They have markers of 
autoimmune disease including hypergammaglobulinae-
mia, proteinuria, hypocomplementaemic nephritis, leu-
copenia, arthralgia, alopecia, enlarged salivary glands and 
positive antinuclear and anti-DNA antibodies. They have 
reduced insulin binding to monocytes in vitro, owing to 
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
295
the presence of an autoantibody against the insulin recep-
tor. Ataxia telangiectasia may show some overlap with the 
features of type B acanthosis nigricans.
Leprechaunism is a rare congenital condition with 
typical facies, lipodystrophy, cliteromegaly, hirsutism and 
acanthosis nigricans. It is usually fatal. Affected children 
are severely resistant to exogenous insulin. They produce 
large amounts of normal insulin endogenously. Several 
cellular defects have been described that produce the phe-
notype of leprechaunism. Most patients have defective ki-
nase activity of the insulin receptor, although some show 
defective insulin receptor formation and others are un-
able to recycle insulin receptors back to cell membranes 
after insulin binding. The common features of acanthosis 
nigricans and virilism are probably an effect of stimula-
tion of IGF receptors by high concentrations of insulin.
Lipodystrophy occurs in local and generalized forms; 
it is usually familial. There are several associated features 
but these vary from family to family. Acanthosis nigri-
cans, hepatosplenomegaly, nephritis and hyperlipopro-
teinaemia have all been reported. Likewise, the cellular 
defect varies, with some families having reduced insulin 
binding and some having reduced receptor numbers. 
Lipodystrophy is also frequently seen as a complication 
of treatment of acquired immune deficiency syndrome 
(AIDS), particularly with protease inhibitors. This may 
be severe enough not only to be disfiguring, but also 
to cause severe hyperlipidaemia and diabetes mellitus. 
There is something of a paradox in the fact that type 2 
diabetes is associated with increased visceral fat depots 
but also with lipodystrophy. This is probably explained by 
the role that adipose tissue has in storing fatty acids as tri-
glycerides. In conditions where this process is impaired, 
circulating concentrations of NEFA are increased and 
may affect hepatic insulin sensitivity in much the same 
way that they do when there is excess visceral adipose tis-
sue accumulation in obesity.
Anti-insulin antibodies. A previously common form of 
insulin resistance was iatrogenic, owing to the induction 
of anti-insulin antibodies (also known as insulin antibod-
ies) by the use of exogenous pork or beef insulins for the 
treatment of diabetes. Treatment with human insulin 
ab initio results in very few (if any) patients developing 
such antibodies. Anti-insulin antibodies bind exogenous 
insulin, reducing its plasma concentration and action. 
Clinically, the presence of significant anti-insulin anti-
bodies manifests as either a high insulin requirement for 
the achievement of glycaemic control or with altered in-
sulin kinetics (usually delayed insulin action). The anti-
bodies may be detected by a variety of assays. Treatment 
is usually by changing to insulin analogues, human or 
(very rarely) sulfated animal insulins.
Insulin-binding autoantibodies are also seen as a result 
of autoimmune disease or haematological malignancy and 
may cause profound insulin resistance, although ketosis 
rarely occurs as the binding of insulin to IGF receptors 
is not affected and appears to allow sufficient suppression 
of lipolysis to prevent excess ketogenesis. These autoanti-
bodies may be an indication for steroid therapy, although 
high doses of exogenous insulin may be satisfactory.
Cirrhosis. Glucose intolerance occurs in most, and ­fasting 
hyperglycaemia in 30% of patients with cirrhosis, unless 
the latter is due to idiopathic haemochromatosis, when 
diabetes is common. There are multiple ­glucoregulatory 
defects in cirrhosis including insulin resistance, hyperin-
sulinaemia, impaired insulin clearance, elevated growth 
hormone 
concentrations 
and 
hyperglucagonaemia. 
However, in clinical practice, hypoglycaemia resulting 
from reduced storage, synthesis and mobilization of glu-
cose typically dominates the clinical picture in a patient 
with advanced hepatic cirrhosis.
ENDOCRINE ASSOCIATIONS WITH DIABETES
Several endocrine conditions occur with increased fre-
quency among diabetic populations. Endocrine condi-
tions that cause secondary diabetes have been discussed 
above.
Abnormalities of glucagon secretion appear to be a 
consequence of diabetes. In normal subjects, insulin in-
hibits glucagon release and glucagon concentrations fall 
during hyperglycaemia. Hyperglucagonaemia is usual in 
both types 1 and 2 diabetes, and glucagon concentrations 
in diabetic patients are relatively insensitive to changes 
in glucose concentrations. The mechanisms for this are 
unknown but may relate to de-repression of glucagon re-
lease by the insulin deficiency of diabetes. In longstanding 
type 1 diabetes, the glucagon response to hypoglycaemia 
may be lost, which may contribute to poor recovery from 
hypoglycaemia.
Some other endocrine disorders show an association 
with diabetes, but the link is shared susceptibility rather 
TABLE 15.7  Congenital conditions with 
­associated glucose intolerance
Condition
Main features
Klinefelter syndrome
Skeletal, gonadal 
(infertility)
Turner syndrome
Skeletal, gonadal 
(infertility)
Down syndrome
Neurological
Friedreich ataxia
Neurological
Ataxia telangiectasia
Neurological
Dystrophia myotonica
Neurological
Huntington chorea
Neurological
DIDMOAD
Diabetes insipidus, 
diabetes mellitus, 
optic atrophy and 
deafness
Refsum disease
Neurological
Alstrom syndrome
Neurological
Laurence–Biedl–Moon 
syndrome
Neurological, obesity
Prader–Willi syndrome
Neurological, obesity
Cystic fibrosis
Respiratory, pancreatic 
(malabsorption)
Werner syndrome
Growth retardation, 
premature senility
Fetal rubella syndrome
Neurological, cardiac
Lipodystrophy (various forms)
Metabolic, renal, 
vascular, hepatic
Glycogen storage disorders
Hepatic/myopathic
296	
Clinical biochemistry
than causal; these include autoimmune hypoadrenalism, 
Graves and Hashimoto diseases. The development of 
thyrotoxicosis owing to Graves disease in a patient with 
diabetes may underlie subsequent loss of diabetic control 
and weight loss. The prevalence of primary hypothyroid-
ism is reported to be 4–17% in type 1 diabetes.
Type 1 diabetes is statistically associated with coeliac 
disease (up to 6% of patients may be affected), and both 
are related to HLA-DR4. Guidelines recommend screen-
ing for coeliac disease in patients with type 1 diabetes. 
The combined dietetic requirements of the two condi-
tions may be onerous for patients. The diarrhoea of un-
recognized coeliac disease may be mistaken for diabetic 
diarrhoea, and coeliac disease should be considered as 
a cause of newly developing hypoglycaemia in a patient 
whose glycaemic control was previously poor.
DIABETES, NUTRITION AND GROWTH
In well-nourished children with well-controlled type 1 
diabetes, skeletal growth is normal. Poor glycaemic con-
trol is associated with elevated growth hormone con-
centrations but reduced IGF concentrations and is thus 
a growth hormone-resistant state. It is thought that the 
latter is related to the reduced growth velocity seen in 
uncontrolled diabetes.
As a group, patients who develop diabetes as children 
tend to be more centrally obese than their non-diabetic 
siblings. It is not yet clear whether this problem is less-
ened by better glycaemic control.
It is important to appreciate that children with dia-
betes need a diet that permits healthy growth as well as 
maintaining good glycaemic control.
MECHANISMS OF DIABETIC TISSUE 
DAMAGE
Introduction
Both types 1 and 2 diabetes are associated with various 
long-term complications, also known as diabetic tissue 
damage. The acute metabolic complications of diabe-
tes are discussed in Chapter 16. Diabetic tissue damage 
includes a range of ‘microvascular complications’ (e.g. 
retinopathy and nephropathy), ‘macrovascular complica-
tions’ (ischaemic heart disease, peripheral vascular disease, 
stroke and renal artery stenosis) and some complications 
that do not fit entirely into either category (e.g. glove and 
stocking peripheral neuropathy, mononeuritis multiplex, 
cranial neuropathies, entrapment neuropathies, proximal 
motor neuropathies, autonomic neuropathy, various sorts 
of cataract and diabetic cheiroarthropathy). Diabetic sub-
jects have a reduced life expectancy and macrovascular 
disease is, in most cases, the major determinant of this.
Few organs or tissues are exempt from potential dam-
age in diabetes; approximately half of those diagnosed 
with type 2 diabetes have evidence of tissue damage at 
diagnosis. However, only relatively few cell types are 
known to be vulnerable to direct damage from chronic 
hyperglycaemia, for example the mesangial cells of the 
kidney, vascular endothelial cells, pancreatic β-Cells, 
Schwann cells and neurons. Many other cells appear to 
be able to reduce glucose uptake under conditions of ex-
tracellular hyperglycaemia and, perhaps for this reason, 
are relatively resistant to direct hyperglycaemic damage.
The two main clinical subtypes of diabetic tissue 
damage, macrovascular and microvascular disease, are 
differentially affected by the cumulative effect of hyper-
glycaemia. It has been proposed that microvascular tis-
sue damage is the result of hyperglycaemia per se, even 
if accelerated by other factors. Macrovascular complica-
tions are frequently found in epidemiological studies to 
be associated with insulin-resistant states and hyperinsu-
linaemia, and their relationship to hyperglycaemia is less 
clearly established. Data derived from the UK Prospective 
Diabetes Study (UKPDS) suggest that the risk of micro-
vascular disease increases approximately ten-fold with an 
increase in HbA1c from 37 to 80 mmol/mol (5.5–9.5%), 
whereas the risk of macrovascular disease becomes appar-
ent at values of HbA1c below that typically associated with 
diabetes but increases only by a factor of about two-fold 
with the same increase in HbA1c.
Pathogenesis
The pathogenetic mechanisms involved are ill understood 
and, for even the major forms of diabetic tissue damage, 
it is not easy to determine the role of purely diabetic 
abnormalities (e.g. hyperglycaemia per se and hypo- or 
hyperinsulinaemia) as opposed to abnormalities related 
to diabetes (e.g. hypertension, dysplipidaemia or obesity).
The first cellular mechanism to underlie purely hyper-
glycaemic tissue damage to be described was increased 
activation of the polyol pathway. The enzyme aldose 
reductase, usually involved in the reduction of toxic al-
dehydes to their respective alcohols, is diverted under 
conditions of intracellular hyperglycaemia to reduc-
ing excess glucose to sorbitol, which is later oxidized to 
fructose. This process consumes the cofactor NADPH, 
which is then not available for the regeneration of re-
duced glutathione, thus rendering cells vulnerable to the 
effects of oxidative stress. Sorbitol accumulation in the 
lens may cause cataracts, and has been demonstrated in 
biopsies from diabetic subjects to occur in the eye, pe-
ripheral nerves and renal glomeruli. Unfortunately, tri-
als of aldose reductase inhibitors have conferred only 
marginal reduction in the progression of neuropathy in 
people with diabetes. This is either because the pathway 
is not important, is one of several mechanisms of diabetic 
tissue damage or is a downstream process whose correc-
tion would not be expected fundamentally to alter cellu-
lar responses to hyperglycaemia. As a result, these agents 
are not presently used in routine clinical practice.
The next mechanism to be proposed was mediated by 
the slow accumulation over time of advanced glycation end 
products (AGEs), which are irreversibly formed by the non-
enzymatic glycation of matrix, cellular and plasma proteins. 
Glucose and amino acids combine to form unstable Schiff 
base adducts, which undergo chemical rearrangement over 
time to form Amadori products and, eventually, AGEs that 
are chemically stable, irreversibly attached to proteins and 
able to trap other protein elements by covalent binding 
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
297
and promotion of cross linking. Advanced glycation end 
products are thought to cause tissue damage by alterations 
in the structure and function of the extracellular matrix 
with accumulation of PAS-positive material (e.g. in the 
basement membrane of blood vessels), by activation of in-
flammatory cytokines and growth factors via stimulation 
of AGE receptors (in part by the NFκB pathway) and by 
alteration of cellular genetic material. These changes may 
contribute to the endothelial dysfunction, basement mem-
brane thickening and increased vascular permeability ob-
served in the diabetic microvasculature.
Another mechanism postulated to be involved in the 
evolution of diabetic tissue damage is that intracellu-
lar hyperglycaemia, by causing increased diacylglycerol 
(DAG) concentration, may cause further activation of the 
NFκB pathway via activation of protein kinase C (PKC). 
The end result is vasoconstriction and hypercoagulabil-
ity via increased endothelin-1, TGF-β and plasminogen 
activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1) generation and reduced en-
dothelial nitric oxide synthase production.
The fourth major mechanism proposed to result in 
diabetic tissue damage results from shunting of excessive 
intracellular glucose via fructose 6-phosphate to glucos-
amine 6-phosphate, a reaction catalysed by the enzyme 
glutamine:fructose 6-phosphate amidotransferase (see 
Fig. 15.2). Glucosamine 6-phosphate undergoes further 
conversion to UDP N-acetyl glucosamine, which, by 
binding to serine and threonine residues on transcription 
factors, leads to increased proinflammatory cytokine ac-
tivity (TGF-β, PAI-1 and others).
A further mechanism relating to the generation of re-
active oxygen species (ROS) and oxidative stress has re-
cently been proposed. Excessive intracellular glucose or 
NEFAs are thought to stimulate tricarboxylic acid cycle 
reactions by substrate accumulation. Citrate, formed 
from NEFA or glucose-derived acetyl-CoA and oxaloac-
etate, is converted to isocitrate by the enzyme isocitrate 
dehydrogenase, generating mitochondrial NADH in the 
process. Excessive generation of NADH leads to ROS 
formation via increased electron transport along the in-
ner mitochondrial membrane and, perhaps when other 
means of electron dissipation such as uncoupling proteins 
are saturated, their donation to oxygen species, generat-
ing toxic ROS. β-Cells are thought to be especially vul-
nerable to the resulting oxidative stress by virtue of a low 
antioxidant capacity. In hyperglycaemic clamp studies, 
glutathione infusion has been shown to restore islet cell 
function (particularly first-phase insulin response), and 
hyperglycaemia or excessive NEFA-induced endothelial 
dysfunction may similarly be ameliorated by antioxidant 
infusion. However, data from various studies do not dem-
onstrate convincing benefits from supplemental vitamin 
E (an antioxidant) in diabetic or other subjects at high 
risk of cardiovascular disease.
The precise interrelationship between these pro-
posed mechanisms of diabetic tissue damage, for ex-
ample whether they may be downstream effects of a 
common maladaptive cellular response to hyperglycae-
mia or whether they represent independent pathways, 
is not yet clear. There is compelling evidence, for exam-
ple that PKC activation may be stimulated by superox-
ide ions and AGE formation, thus linking the oxidative 
stress, advanced glycation end product and PKC path-
ways. Ruboxistaurin mesylate (LY333531), an inhibitor 
of PKC, has shown promise in human and animal trials 
in slowing progression of, and in some cases reversing, a 
number of diabetic microvascular complications includ-
ing nephropathy, retinopathy and neuropathy.
Other aspects of diabetic tissue damage
Although the mechanisms discussed above relate to the 
specific effects of hyperglycaemia, other factors such as 
infection, genetic susceptibility, hypertension, vascular 
disease, hyperlipidaemia and other associated conditions 
such as hyperuricaemia and gout are important and com-
mon cofactors for tissue damage in the clinical setting, 
and these are discussed briefly below.
Tissue damage is encountered in diabetes as a result 
of increased susceptibility to infection (e.g. renal scar-
ring from repeated episodes of urinary sepsis). Phagocyte 
(principally neutrophil) dysfunction appears to be the 
main predisposing factor; this occurs via a number of 
mechanisms including abnormal adherence, chemotaxis, 
phagocytosis, respiratory burst and bacterial killing. It is 
not known precisely what duration of exposure to hyper-
glycaemia is required to produce these abnormalities in 
human subjects: the concentration threshold is probably 
~11 mmol/L.
High concordance rates between twins for compli-
cations of diabetes suggest that inherited factors may 
influence their development. There is evidence that au-
toimmune processes contribute to the development of 
some diabetic complications (e.g. the autonomic neurop-
athy/iritis syndrome).
There is good evidence that growth hormone defi-
ciency, either coincidental or induced by hypophysec-
tomy, prevents or reverses the onset of microvascular 
complications. However, the results of trials using pegvi-
somant, a growth hormone receptor antagonist, have 
been disappointing.
The role of recurrent hypoglycaemia in diabetic tis-
sue damage, especially neurological damage to CNS and 
autonomic neurons, is currently being investigated but 
hypoglycaemia is certainly not a necessary condition for 
its development.
Although microvascular disease and some other com-
plications may be more characteristic of diabetes, macro-
vascular disease accounts for most of the excess mortality 
associated with the condition. Diabetic macrovascular 
disease is related to, but not identical to, atherosclerosis 
occurring in non-diabetic patients. In diabetic macrovas-
cular disease, the age of onset is earlier and the prevalence 
of vascular disease in men and women is approximately 
equal. Differences in the ranking of the strength of as-
sociations of risk markers in diabetic and non-diabetic 
populations suggest some differences in aetiology: smok-
ing is the main risk factor in non-diabetic populations, 
but hypertension seems relatively more important in 
diabetes. Furthermore, diabetic macrovascular disease 
has some singular clinical features, verging on the patho-
gnomic. For example, there is a strong association with 
calcification of the vascular media and a predilection for 
involvement of multiple distal arteries (a pattern that 
298	
Clinical biochemistry
often precludes surgical intervention) rather than fewer 
proximal arteries. The well-documented higher mortality 
rate from myocardial infarction in patients with diabetes 
(compared with similar patients without diabetes) may be 
related to this widespread involvement of middle-sized 
and small arteries. Acute (‘stress’) hyperglycaemia may 
also contribute to increased mortality, but trials of strict 
glycaemic control in the immediate post-infarct period 
have produced mixed results, possibly because the magni-
tude of the hyperglycaemic response may also be related 
to the severity of the infarct.
The causation of the increased macrovascular disease 
risk observed in diabetes is complex; most of the conven-
tional risk factors for vascular disease in non-diabetic in-
dividuals (e.g. smoking, hypertension, age) are associated 
with accelerated atherosclerosis in diabetic populations. 
However, there is evidence that hypertension in diabe-
tes is in some ways distinct from essential hypertension 
(e.g. the relationship between plasma renin concentra-
tion and plasma renin activity is altered and renal and 
endothelial dysfunction may be more pronounced). The 
lipid abnormality most commonly linked with mortality 
in diabetes may not be high LDL-cholesterol, as found in 
non-diabetic subjects, but rather the combination of low 
HDL-cholesterol, small, dense LDL and hypertriglyceri-
daemia, as also seen in the metabolic syndrome.
Studies of blood rheology, the glycation and peroxi-
dation of lipoproteins and endogenous thrombotic and 
thrombolytic mechanisms show widespread abnormali-
ties in diabetes, which may all be relevant to the develop-
ment of macrovascular disease.
The risk of macrovascular disease (whether of the 
‘normal’ or the ‘diabetic’ pattern is unclear) is increased 
in subjects with IGT as well as in those with frank dia-
betes. Most physicians consider that cardiovascular risk 
factors in patients with IGT should be managed as if they 
had diabetes.
CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH  
INADEQUATELY CONTROLLED DIABETES 
MELLITUS
Various conditions are associated with poorly controlled 
diabetes, including gout, osteopenia and hepatic steatosis. 
Acute diabetic emergencies are discussed in Chapter 16.
The association of gout with diabetes has been rec-
ognized for >200 years. The reason for the link is not 
yet clear, but alterations in renal urate clearance may 
contribute; high uric acid concentrations are associated 
with other features of the metabolic syndrome and with 
increased cardiovascular risk. In some patients, hyper-
uricaemia may be exacerbated by the use of drugs such 
as thiazides and β-blockers for the treatment of diabetic 
hypertension.
Generalized osteopenia is also clearly associated with 
diabetes mellitus. No specific defect in calcium or phos-
phate metabolism has been identified and the basis of the 
association is unclear. Of particular importance is ­local 
osteolysis, with loss of bone mineral, which in the feet, can 
be difficult to distinguish from osteomyelitis, especially 
in the context of suspect Charcot foot (see p. 324). The 
inactivity occasioned by diabetic foot ulcers may accel-
erate the osteopenia. The thiazolidinedione drugs have 
been associated with increased fracture risk in diabetes.
Fatty change in the liver is common in obesity and 
in some cases may be associated with an increased risk 
of developing diabetes. It is also found in poorly con-
trolled diabetes; it frequently causes elevation of plasma 
liver enzyme activity, notably of alanine aminotransferase 
and, less frequently, of other enzymes. Liver ultrasound 
scans will confirm fatty liver in cases of uncertainty. 
Historically, this has often been considered a benign 
process, but more recent data suggest that many cases of 
idiopathic cirrhosis may, in fact, have arisen in fatty liv-
ers. There appears to be a spectrum of non-alcoholic fatty 
liver disease from simple steatosis, which represents the 
benign end of the scale with little propensity to progress, 
through various grades of inflammation and fibrosis (ste-
atohepatitis), to frank cirrhosis. There are few good data 
on selection of patients for biopsy and on measures to 
prevent progression from simple steatosis to more seri-
ous degrees of steatohepatitis. However, most authorities 
advocate measures to effect good glycaemic control, to 
treat dyslipidaemia (fibrates may have a particular role) 
and to improve insulin resistance by exercise and weight 
loss. Several recent studies have demonstrated beneficial 
effects from the thiazolidinedione group of drugs, prob-
ably as a result both of insulin sensitization and also their 
effects on NEFA metabolism and fat distribution. This 
topic is discussed in detail in Chapter 14.
Low 
concentrations 
of 
circulating 
magnesium 
have been reported during treatment of ketoacidosis. 
Hypomagnesaemia may be more common in outpatients 
with diabetes mellitus than in non-diabetic subjects. 
However, this suggestion has not been confirmed and 
there is no evidence that plasma magnesium should be 
checked routinely in patients with diabetes.
Hyponatraemia may arise in diabetes through several 
mechanisms. Chlorpropamide and tolbutamide (and per-
haps other sulphonylureas) may cause water retention 
through potentiation of the action of antidiuretic hor-
mone (see Chapter  4). Artefactual hyponatraemia may 
arise from the hyperlipidaemia (hypertriglyceridaemia) 
of ketoacidosis or poor glycaemic control. Compensatory 
hyponatraemia is often seen in poorly controlled diabetes, 
perhaps as an osmoregulatory response to high glucose 
concentrations. This effect may be particularly signifi-
cant in the management of acute diabetic emergencies 
and is, in effect, a translocational hyponatraemia brought 
about by the movement of water from the intracellular to 
the extracellular space as a consequence of the increased 
plasma osmolality in hyperglycaemic conditions. Plasma 
sodium concentration should fall by ~1.6 mmol/L for ev-
ery 5 mmol/L that plasma glucose exceeds 5 mmol/L. If 
the measured sodium differs significantly from this ‘cor-
rected’ value, a cause should be sought, and if it lies well 
outside the reference range, fluid management may have 
to be adjusted accordingly. To what extent, if at all, os-
motic tissue damage contributes to the long-term com-
plications of diabetes is at present unclear.
Diabetic kidney damage most commonly presents as 
hypertension or (micro)-albuminuria in patients under 
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
299
regular review. Late presentations include chronic kidney 
disease, nephritic syndrome, nephrogenic diabetes insipi-
dus (sometimes associated with papillary necrosis), renal 
tubular acidosis (type 4) or toxicity from renally-excreted 
drugs.
BIOCHEMICAL MEASUREMENTS  
IN DIABETES MELLITUS
Glucose measurements
Measurements of blood glucose concentrations are fun-
damental to the diagnosis and management of diabetes 
mellitus. Plasma contains more glucose (per unit volume) 
than erythrocytes, so criteria for diagnosis of diabetes re-
flect these differences between samples (see Table 15.4). 
Since glucose enters the circulation via the hepatic vein 
and is cleared peripherally, arterial concentrations are 
higher than in venous blood samples, with capillary blood 
having intermediate values.
Over the last decade, home and bedside blood glu-
cose monitoring by patients or their attendants has 
become widespread, using dry reagent enzymatic reac-
tions or electrochemical methodologies on test strips. 
Although such techniques represent the only current 
practical approach to long-term self or nurse monitor-
ing, they are prone to multiple errors if misused (espe-
cially by inadequately educated patients or healthcare 
professionals) and should not be relied upon for clini-
cal decisions in seriously ill patients. They require ap-
propriate calibration and proper technique (e.g. prior 
washing and drying of hands, correct sample volume 
and correct test strip for the metre used). Recent ad-
vances in testing include electronic transfer of results to 
databases including the electronic patient record, and 
alternative site (e.g. forearm) sampling to avoid the pain 
and repeated trauma associated with fingertip sampling 
(although forearm glucose concentrations may differ 
from fingertip concentrations when blood glucose con-
centrations are rapidly changing, e.g. during exercise or 
in the postprandial state). Other developments include 
collection of interstitial fluid by reverse iontophoresis 
for automated glucose analysis every 10 min, and con-
tinuous glucose monitoring systems in which a dispos-
able subcutaneous glucose sensor that can function for 
several days is monitored via a wired or wireless system. 
This permits collection of a detailed profile throughout 
a 24 h period that may yield information that is hard to 
gather using conventional testing. It is particularly use-
ful overnight, e.g. in patients with suspected nocturnal 
hypoglycaemia. Glucose concentrations determined by 
this method lag behind blood glucose by about 10 min, 
and the method is limited by the development of local 
skin irritation. The systems are expensive and usually 
only used for short-term monitoring, although they are 
sometimes advocated for longer periods of use in patients 
attempting to achieve tight control of glucose concen-
trations. The ultimate development of this would be a 
closed loop system that monitors glucose and calculates 
the correct amount of insulin to infuse via a pump, but 
this has not yet gone beyond short experimental studies.
Table 15.8 indicates some factors that may interfere 
with blood glucose analysis by laboratory or point of care 
testing methods.
Measurements of urinary glucose concentration are 
cheap but prone to often correlate poorly with the de-
gree of glycaemic control. Problems include variation 
in the tubular threshold for glucose (e.g. increased in 
diabetes, reduced in pregnancy, subject to interindividual 
variation and altered by a range of drugs and renal tubular 
disorders) and the fact that the plasma glucose concen-
tration that corresponds to the renal threshold (around 
10 mmol/L) is higher than the level that clinical studies 
(UKPDS and Diabetes Control and Complications Trial, 
DCCT) have demonstrated to be the target range for 
blood glucose concentrations. Furthermore, urine glu-
cose concentration is affected by fluid intake and urine 
concentration and provides information about the entire 
period since last voiding rather than giving an indication 
of the current level of glycaemia (unless a second voided 
specimen is used). The dry reagent stick chemistries used 
are imprecise at lower levels of glycosuria and may be af-
fected by some drugs. Their use is declining in the devel-
oped world; however, they may be more acceptable than 
blood testing to some patients. They provide an adequate 
index of glycaemic control in some elderly patients with 
type 2 diabetes, controlled on diet alone or on small doses 
of oral hypoglycaemics, although HbA1c (see below) is 
now the preferred method of monitoring for most of 
these patients.
Testing for ketones
Urine testing for ketones has an important place in the 
management of diabetes, particularly for patients with 
type 1 diabetes, who should generally be instructed in its 
uses and limitations. Ketone testing is particularly impor-
tant when metabolic control is threatened by intercurrent 
illness or stress or when blood glucose concentrations are 
persistently high (e.g. >15 mmol/L), particularly when 
accompanied by symptoms compatible with ketoacido-
sis such as nausea, vomiting or abdominal pain. It must 
be appreciated that the normally approximately equi-
molar ratio of the major ketones, β-hydroxybutyrate and 
acetoacetate, may increase to approximately 6:1 during 
diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA), reducing during recovery. 
Furthermore, in recovery from DKA, excretion of urine 
ketones may continue long after blood acid–base balance 
is restored to normal. Thus, since all commercially avail-
able test sticks use nitroprusside-based reactions, which 
measure only acetoacetate, tests may become more posi-
tive as the patient recovers and remain positive for hours 
or even days after resolution of the illness. It should also 
be appreciated that positive results may be found in a 
significant proportion of normoglycaemic individuals 
(particularly pregnant women) when testing first-voided 
urine specimens after an overnight fast. Certain drugs, 
such as captopril and levodopa, may cause spuriously 
positive results, while ascorbic acid intake may cause false 
negative ones.
Enzymatic methods detecting β-hydroxybutyrate in 
blood using a stick test that can be performed by the 
patient or at the bedside have a number of theoretical 
300	
Clinical biochemistry
advantages over urine testing. β-Hydroxybutyrate is the 
most relevant ketone in ketoacidosis, and the use of a me-
tre with the stick permits its quantitative measurement, 
thus enabling more accurate diagnosis and monitoring of 
this disorder. The sticks usually also have a longer shelf-
life than the urine tests, which is an advantage given that 
most patients will need to test for ketones only occasion-
ally. Blood ketone measurement is now recommended 
in some guidelines (e.g. Joint British Diabetes Societies 
guideline for the management of diabetic ketoacidosis), 
either by stick testing or using rapid automated labora-
tory methods, although it is not yet in widespread use.
Oral glucose tolerance test
The oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) is the refer-
ence method for the assessment of glucose tolerance, 
despite the notoriously poor reproducibility of the test 
(CV = 50% for 2 h blood glucose). Most diabetic patients 
are diagnosed on the basis of symptoms, examination and 
random or fasting plasma glucose concentrations without 
recourse to an OGTT. However, WHO and UK guid-
ance is that patients with intermediate fasting glucose 
concentrations (impaired fasting glycaemia) should un-
dergo formal glucose tolerance testing. The test also has 
a particular place in the diagnosis of gestational diabetes 
mellitus, where fasting plasma glucose concentrations 
lack diagnostic sensitivity. Historically, there has been di-
vergence of opinion as to the dose of glucose to be used. 
Current WHO recommendations are that this should 
be 75 g of anhydrous glucose (not glucose monohydrate 
which is 10% water by weight). For three days before 
the test, the subject should be on an unrestricted weight-
maintaining diet, with at least 150 g carbohydrate per day, 
and should exercise normally. The subject should fast 
overnight for at least 10 h, and should remain seated and 
not smoke during the test. Oral glucose tolerance tests 
are not recommended for subjects with fasting plasma 
glucose ≥7.1 mmol/L or hospitalized, acutely ill or im-
mobile patients. Interpretation may be difficult in sub-
jects taking β-blockers, diuretics, nicotinic acid or high 
doses of glucocorticoids.
Tests of recent glycaemic control
Several tests are available that reflect prior glycaemic con-
trol: pre-eminent among these is glycated haemoglobin. 
There are multiple potential glycation sites but the prin-
cipal one is the β-chain terminal valine residue. Glycation 
at this site, followed by an Amadori rearrangement to a 
stable adduct, forms HbA1c. Since the usual lifespan of an 
erythrocyte is 120 days and the erythrocyte membrane is 
freely permeable to glucose, glycated haemoglobin con-
centration reflects the glycaemic control over the preced-
ing 120 days, although with substantial weighting towards 
a shorter time (see below). Many different methodologies, 
including cation-exchange chromatography, electropho-
resis, isoelectric focusing, affinity chromatography and 
immunoassay can be used to measure glycated haemo-
globin after its separation from non-glycated haemoglo-
bin. All HbA1c assays should be traceable to the reference 
TABLE 15.8  Factors that may interfere with the biochemical analyses used in diabetes
Substance assayed
Biological fluid
Assay method
Interference from
Error induced
Glucose
Blood
Any
Delay in sample separation, 
especially if not cooled and 
in fluoride
Erythrocytes 
consume glucose 
giving falsely low 
value
Glucose
Blood
Glucose oxidase (e.g. 
YSI (Yellow Springs®)
Paracetamol
Reads high
Glucose
Plasma
Spectrophotometry
Haemolysis or 
hyperlipidaemia
Affects linearity of 
response
Glucose
Urine
Any
Bacteriuria
Consumes glucose
Glucose
Urine
Glucose oxidase 
(e.g. Multistix®, 
Combistix®)
Detergent (e.g. from cleaning 
container)
False positive
 
 
 
Reducing substances (e.g. 
vitamin C), ketones
False negative
Lactate
Blood
Any
Delay in sample separation, 
especially if not in fluoride
Lactate produced in 
collection tube
 
 
 
Sweat from touching 
pipettes etc.
Sweat may contain 
high concentrations 
of lactate
Acetoacetate
Blood or urine
Rothera based (e.g. 
Ketostix®)
Phenolphthalein
False positive
Fructosamine
Blood
Spectrophotometry
Hypertriglyceridaemia, 
bilirubin
Affects linearity of 
response
HbA1c
Blood
Any
Shortened red cell life span
Lowers value
HbA1c
Blood
Electrophoresis, 
ion-exchange 
chromatography
Haemoglobin genetic variants
Unable to distinguish 
glycated 
haemoglobin from 
haemoglobin 
variants
Albumin
Urine
Dye binding
Many detergents, salicylates
False positive
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
301
method developed by the International Federation for 
Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine (IFCC).
The interpretation of glycated haemoglobin measure-
ments will be affected by any coincidental condition that 
reduces the lifespan of erythrocytes, especially haemo-
lytic anaemias. Conversely, iron deficiency anaemia may 
spuriously increase HbA1c concentrations by increasing 
erythrocyte lifespan. Other conditions such as raised plasma 
concentrations of triglycerides and bilirubin, uraemia, 
and the presence of haemoglobinopathies may cause in-
terference in some assays.
As an approximation, an HbA1c of 50 mmol/mol 
(6.7%) corresponds with a mean plasma glucose concen-
tration of approximately 9 mmol/L, and each 10 mmol/
mol (1%) increase with a 2 mmol/L increase in mean 
plasma glucose concentrations. Although HbA1c is a mea-
sure of long-term glycaemia, it must be appreciated that 
more recent effects are relatively more weighted so that 
the 30 days prior to sampling contribute 50% of the sam-
ple result, whereas events from 90–120 days prior to the 
sample being taken contribute a mere 10%. In conditions 
where glycaemic control and insulin requirements may 
change from week to week (such as pregnancy) or where 
the patient has a structurally abnormal haemoglobin, it 
may be preferable to use an alternative index of glycaemic 
control.
Fructosamine is the name given to the ketoamine 
products of protein glycation formed when glucose 
bound to a variety of proteins by aldimine linkage under-
goes an Amadori rearrangement. The major component 
of fructosamine in plasma is glycated albumin, but other 
proteins and possibly non-protein components as well 
contribute to the measured values. Standardization has 
been difficult, so reference ranges may differ between dif-
ferent laboratories. Fructosamine is relatively simple to 
measure (using a nitroblue tetrazolium assay); its concen-
tration reflects control over the preceding 10–15  days, 
but is subject to spurious results in the presence of fac-
tors that affect albumin turnover (including diabetic 
nephropathy). There is an inverse relationship between 
weight and fructosamine so that fructosamine concentra-
tions are lower than expected for the degree of control in 
obese patients with diabetes. Whether or not to correct 
fructosamine for serum albumin concentration (given 
that the absolute concentration, not the glycated pro-
portion of the protein, is measured) remains uncertain. 
The clinical utility of fructosamine is further limited by 
the lack of evidence-based targets, but it has a limited role 
in patients with disorders such as haemolytic anaemia or 
haemoglobinopathies in whom HbA1c cannot be used.
Screening for diabetes
It is estimated that 50% of diabetic subjects in the de-
veloped world are undiagnosed. Screening has been 
recommended by NICE in the UK for asymptomatic 
subjects who are at high risk of developing diabetes (see 
Fig. 15.6). This involves a two-stage check – the first is 
a risk assessment using a validated computer-based risk 
assessment tool (these usually use factors such as sex, age, 
BMI, waist circumference, family history, history of hy-
pertension and ethnicity to estimate risk, see, e.g. http://
www.diabetes.org.uk/Riskscore/) in those who meet the 
following criteria:
•	 adults aged 40 and above, except pregnant women
•	 adults aged 25–39 of South Asian, Chinese, African-
Caribbean, black African and other high-risk black 
and minority ethnic groups, except pregnant women
•	 adults with conditions that increase the risk of type 2 
diabetes (cardiovascular disease, hypertension, obe-
sity, stroke, polycystic ovary syndrome, a history of 
gestational diabetes and mental health problems. In 
addition, people with learning disabilities and those 
attending emergency medical admissions units, vas-
cular and renal surgery units and ophthalmology 
departments may be at high risk).
High-risk individuals should be offered a blood test for 
either HbA1c or fasting plasma glucose. For individuals 
with results of these tests below the diagnostic threshold 
for diabetes, an HbA1c of 42–47 mmol/mol (6–6.5%), or 
a fasting glucose of 5.5–6.9 mmol/L indicates high risk. 
These individuals should be offered advice on intensive 
lifestyle intervention and re-testing at least once a year.
Similar recommendations have been made by the 
American Diabetes Association and other organizations.
Tests for insulin resistance
In subjects who require large amounts of insulin to 
maintain euglycaemia, e.g. >150 units or >1.5 units/kg 
body weight/24 h, insulin resistance is likely to be pres-
ent (although it is important to ensure that the patient 
is compliant with therapy). Many such subjects will be 
morbidly obese and this is usually an adequate explana-
tion. Measurements of fasting insulin, C-peptide and 
glucose will show inappropriately high concentrations. 
Haemolysis reduces insulin concentrations, so care should 
be taken to avoid this, and blood samples should be kept 
cool (4 °C) until the plasma can be separated. Normal 
fasting insulin concentrations are up to 140 pmol/L 
(20 mU/L), depending on the assay used. If doubt re-
mains as to whether the subject is insulin-resistant, it may 
be necessary to check insulin and glucose concentrations 
after observed insulin administration or a hyperinsulinae-
mic clamp may be undertaken (see below).
If insulin-binding antibodies are suspected, for exam-
ple in a subject who has received non-human insulins, free 
insulin can be assayed by immunoassay. If the free insulin 
concentration is much lower than total insulin concentra-
tion, insulin-binding antibodies are likely. Subjects who 
have little glycaemic response to high concentrations of 
endogenous insulin, but who are sensitive to exogenous 
insulin, may have an abnormal immunoreactive insulin 
(see p. 279 and Table 15.2).
If a subject without insulin-binding antibodies fails to 
respond to intravenous insulin, an insulin receptor or post-
receptor problem should be suspected and a careful fam-
ily study should be undertaken. Family members should 
be screened for insulin resistance by measuring fasting 
plasma glucose and insulin concentrations. The binding 
of insulin to the patient’s white blood cells or adipose tis-
sue may be measured in order to indicate whether the pa-
tient has normal insulin receptor numbers and whether 
the receptors show normal avidity for insulin.
302	
Clinical biochemistry
≥ 75 years
Use risk-assessment tools
and questionnaires
40–74 years
•  Use a validated risk-
   assessment tool or
   validated self-assessment
   questionnaire
High-risk groups
High risk score
Offer a blood test
Choose either FPG
or HbA1c – use as
appropriate and according
to national quality
specifications
Reassess risk at least
every 5 years
Low or intermediate
risk score
Offer brief advice on:
FPG < 5.5 mmol/l or
HbA1c < 42 mmol/mol
(6.0%)
Stage two
Stage one
Offer a brief intervention to:
Reassess risk at least
every three years
FPG = fasting plasma glucose    HbA1c = glycated haemoglobin
Reassess weight and
BMI and offer a
blood test at least
once a year
No diabetes
Offer an intensive
lifestyle change
programme
Diabetes
Enter diabetes
management
pathway
Moderate risk
•  People aged 25–39 years
   of South Asian, Chinese,
   African-Caribbean, black
   African and other high-risk
   black and minority ethnic
   groups
•  People with conditions that
    increase the risk of type 2
    diabetes
•  the risks of developing
    diabetes
•  the benefits of a healthy
    lifestyle
•  discuss the risks of
    developing diabetes
FPG 5.5–6.9 mmol/l or
HbA1c 42–47 mmol/mol
(6.0–6.4%)
Offer a intensive lifestyle-
change programme to:
High risk
•  increase physical activity
FPG ≥ 7.0 mmol/l or
HbA1c ≥ 48 mmol/mol
(6.5%)
Carry out a further blood test
if asymptomatic, according
to national quality
specifications, to confirm or
reject the presence of diabetes
Possible type 2 diabetes
•  achieve and maintain
    weight loss
•  increase dietary fibre,
    reduce fat intake,
    particularly saturated fat
•  help modify individual risk
    factors
•  offer tailored support
    services
•  modifying risk factors
Use risk-assessment tools and
questionnaires
Consider a blood
test for South Asian
and Chinese people
aged 25 and over
with BMI > 23 kg/m2
•  Follow NHS Health Check
   process and protocols
   where possible
FIGURE 15.6  ■  Flowchart for the identification and management of type 2 diabetes mellitus. (From NICE public health guidance PH 38: 
Preventing type 2 diabetes: risk identification and interventions for individuals at high risk (2012): http://guidance.nice.org.uk/PH38, with per-
mission from the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence).
	
15  Glucose metabolism and the ­pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus	
303
Glucose transporter function can be investigated by 
incubating cells of interest (e.g. leukocytes, monocytes, 
adipocytes) with a non-metabolisable glucose analogue 
such as 2-deoxyglucose. The cellular content of the glu-
cose analogue after a given time provides a measure of 
glucose transporter function. Glucose transporter num-
ber may be estimated by the use of specific antibodies 
linked to an imaging system (fluorescence or radioactiv-
ity based).
Molecular biological techniques can be used to deter-
mine DNA sequences coding for insulin, the insulin re-
ceptor and glucose transporter molecules, as appropriate, 
when the site of the defect has been identified.
Research investigations
Tests commonly used in diabetes research include the 
hyperinsulinaemic glucose clamp and the intravenous 
glucose tolerance test (IVGTT), as well as a variety of 
measures of β-Cell function.
Hyperinsulinaemic clamps. The hyperinsulinaemic 
clamp is the reference measure of insulin resistance. In 
the euglycaemic variant of the test, insulin is infused 
into a peripheral vein to increase the plasma insulin con-
centration to a target range (e.g. 250 pmol/m
2 per min 
or 35 mU/m
2 per min increases the insulin to around 
60 mU/L). Without further intervention, the hyperinsu-
linaemia would induce hypoglycaemia. However, in the 
clamp procedure, the plasma glucose concentration is 
measured every 3–5 min and glucose is infused peripher-
ally to maintain glucose concentrations within the desired 
range. When a steady state has been reached (usually 90–
120 min), the rate of exogenous glucose infusion needed 
to maintain the glucose concentration is an index of the 
glucose clearance rate and of the subject’s insulin sensi-
tivity. Many variations on the clamp methodology are 
described, including use of stable isotope tracers, which 
permit better description of the physiological abnormali-
ties in glucose turnover in response to insulin.
Intravenous glucose tolerance testing. The IVGTT is 
an alternative test of glucose tolerance in which glucose 
(typically 20 g/m
2 of body surface area) is injected as a bo-
lus. This test has better reproducibility than the OGTT 
but is even less physiological. An IVGTT is a powerful 
stimulus to insulin secretion. It has been used in research 
studies to screen high-risk non-diabetic subjects for early 
defects of glucose tolerance and insulin response, with 
some success in predicting those that will subsequently 
progress to overt diabetes.
Measurement of β-Cell function. These tests are pri-
marily used to determine the relative contribution of insu-
lin deficiency and insulin resistance to glucose intolerance. 
There is no consensus as to which should be used in type 2 
diabetes mellitus. The gold standard for research purposes 
is the hyperglycaemic clamp, where glucose is clamped 
at high concentrations and insulin secretion measured. If 
it is clinically important to document the severity of insulin 
deficiency, this is best done by ­measuring plasma C-peptide 
concentration. The DCCT trial used a basal concentration 
for C-peptide of <0.2 nmol/L and a ­concentration of 
<0.5 nmol/L measured 6 min after ­giving 1 mg glucagon 
intravenously to distinguish type 1 from type 2 diabetes. 
Other tests of β-Cell function used for research purposes 
include the arginine stimulation test and mathematical 
models based on measures of insulin or C-peptide during 
oral or intravenous glucose tolerance tests.
Elevated fasting plasma proinsulin concentrations 
indicate subjects with abnormal β-Cell function, even if 
glucose tolerance is normal.
Homoeostasis model assessment. The homeostasis 
model assessment (HOMA) is a mathematical model that 
uses fasting glucose and insulin concentrations to derive 
estimates of both insulin resistance and β-Cell function. 
It is useful for epidemiological studies where more so-
phisticated testing is not practical, but interpretation can 
be difficult especially in the context of treatment with in-
sulin or oral drugs that stimulate insulin secretion.
CONCLUSION
There are two major types of diabetes: type 1 and type 2. 
Both are characterized by hyperglycaemia, but in type 1, 
this is a consequence of absolute insulin ­deficiency as a re-
sult of β-Cell destruction, whereas in type 2 the ­deficiency 
is relative, with most patients being resistant to the actions 
of insulin, although their production of insulin tends to 
decrease with time. Both conditions are associated with 
short-term and long-term complications. Biochemical 
investigations are essential for both the ­diagnosis and 
management of the conditions.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors wish to acknowledge Dr Simon Coppack 
and Dr Victor Lawrence, who wrote this chapter in the 
second edition of this book.
Further reading
Bilous R, Donnelly R. Handbook of diabetes. 4th ed. Chichester: 
Wiley; 2010. 
A good general account of diabetes.
Garber AJ, (ed.). Type 2 diabetes. In: Med Clin North Am 
2004;88:787–1128. 
This issue contains articles on the metabolic syndrome, and the 
pathogenesis, management and complications of type 2 diabetes.
Holt RIG, Cockram CS, Flyvbjerg A et  al. editors. In: Textbook of 
diabetes. 4th ed Oxford: Blackwell Science; 2011. 
A comprehensive account of all aspects of diabetes.
Kahn SE, Porte Jr D. Beta cell dysfunction in type 2 diabetes: pathogenesis 
and genetic basis. In: Valle D Beaudet AL, Vogelstein B et al. editors. 
The online metabolic and molecular bases of inherited disease. New 
York: McGraw-Hill. http://dx.doi.org/10.1036/ommbid.86.
MacLaren NK, Kukreja A. Type 1 diabetes. In: Valle D, Beaudet AL, 
Vogelstein B et  al. editors. The online metabolic and molecular 
bases of inherited disease. New York: McGraw-Hill. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1036/ommbid.88
Taylor SI. Insulin action, insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
In: Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WS et al. editors. The metabolic 
and molecular bases of inherited disease. New York. http://dx.doi.
org/10.1036/ommbid.87.
These three chapters provide detailed accounts of the pathogenesis of 
diabetes mellitus.
304	
Clinical biochemistry
The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group. 
The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on the development 
and progression of long-term complications in insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 1993;329:977–86. 
A pivotal multicentre randomized study that provided firm evidence 
of the benefits of achieving and maintaining near-normal plasma glucose 
concentrations in patients with type 1 diabetes.
UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Effect of intensive 
blood-glucose control with metformin on complications in 
over-weight patients with type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 34). Lancet 
1998a;352:854–65.
UK Prospective Diabetes Study (UKPDS) Group. Intensive blood 
glucose control with sulphonylureas or insulin compared with 
conventional treatment and risk of complications in patients with 
type 2 diabetes (UKPDS 33). Lancet 1998b;352:837–53. 
A trial that clearly demonstrated the benefits of achieving and maintaining 
good glycaemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes.
305
C H A P T E R  1 6
The clinical management 
of diabetes mellitus
Ian W. Seetho  •  John P.H. Wilding
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  305
GENERAL ASPECTS OF MANAGEMENT  305
Nutrition 
306
Exercise 
306
Smoking cessation 
307
Education about diabetes 
307
Pharmacological management of 
­cardiovascular risk 
307
GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPY 
IN DIABETES  309
Background 
309
Insulin use in type 1 diabetes 
310
Glycaemic management in type 2 
diabetes 
313
Metformin 
313
Sulfonylureas (and related insulin 
secretagogues) 
314
Meglitinides 
315
Peroxisome proliferator activator  
γ ­analogues  315
Glucagon-like peptide 1 analogues 
316
Dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitors 
317
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors 
317
Insulin use in type 2 diabetes 
317
Bariatric surgery 
317
Pancreatic transplantation 
318
Islet cell transplantation 
318
Immunotherapy for type 1 diabetes 
318
OBSTACLES TO ACHIEVING GLYCAEMIC 
CONTROL  318
Intensive control 
319
Hypoglycaemia 
319
Intercurrent illness, ‘sick day rules’ and 
stress 
321
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF  
DIABETES  322
Nephropathy 
322
Neuropathy 
323
The feet in diabetes 
324
Eye disease 
325
Other complications 
326
EMERGENCIES IN DIABETES  326
Diabetic ketoacidosis 
326
Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state 
329
Other metabolic acidoses 
330
Alcoholic ketoacidosis 
330
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETES IN THE HOSPITAL 
SETTING  330
PREGNANCY  331
CONCLUSION  332
INTRODUCTION
The rise in prevalence of diabetes presents some of 
the greatest medical and economic challenges of the 
21st century. Despite advances in our understanding 
and management of diabetes mellitus, it continues 
to exact a huge toll both in terms of morbidity and 
mortality.
In this chapter, we consider dietary, lifestyle and mac-
rovascular risk optimization measures for people with 
diabetes. Glucose-lowering treatment is discussed, fol-
lowed by obstacles patients face in order to achieve 
their glycaemic goals, particularly hypoglycaemia. Later 
sections discuss the management of chronic and acute 
complications of diabetes, and its management in par-
ticular circumstances, for example in critical illness and 
during pregnancy.
GENERAL ASPECTS OF MANAGEMENT
The management of patients with diabetes should involve 
a multidisciplinary team composed of diabetologists, dia-
betes specialist nurses, dietitians, podiatrists, the patient’s 
general practitioner and other specialists if specific com-
plications are present.
306	
Clinical biochemistry
In addition to therapies that specifically target glycae-
mic control, nutritional management, lifestyle modifi-
cations such as adequate physical exercise and smoking 
cessation, and structured patient educational programmes 
are key components in the management of patients with 
diabetes.
Nutrition
Patients with diabetes should follow a healthy diet and 
make appropriate nutritional choices to reduce cardio-
vascular risk and improve glycaemic control. A dietitian 
with specialist knowledge in diabetes should take the lead 
role in providing nutritional care. Dietary advice should 
be tailored specifically for each patient, considering their 
personal and cultural preferences, beliefs, lifestyle and 
the changes that the patient is willing and able to make.
The principles of diet include eating regular meals 
with a reduction in simple carbohydrate intake with an 
increase in complex carbohydrates, a high fibre content 
and an energy intake to achieve or maintain an ideal 
body weight, or in those who are overweight or obese, to 
achieve and sustain modest weight loss. The key aim is to 
balance energy input and expenditure and ensure a good 
quality diet.
Contrary to the general perception that a diet in dia-
betes needs to be unique or special, there is no special 
‘diet for diabetes’. People with diabetes, except perhaps 
in specific circumstances such as renal failure, should eat 
the same healthy diet as recommended to those who do 
not have diabetes. Thus, no more than 30% of total en-
ergy intake should be in the form of fat, and the ratio 
of unsaturated to saturated fats should be increased with 
saturated fat intake ideally making up <7% of total calo-
ries and trans fatty acid intake minimized. Replacement 
of saturated fats with mono- or polyunsaturated fats aids 
lowering of cholesterol.
Carbohydrate (preferably in the form of slowly ab-
sorbed complex carbohydrate with a low ‘glycaemic 
index’ rather than simple sugars) should provide approxi-
mately 55% of total energy intake with protein providing 
the remaining 15%. Foods that improve glycaemic con-
trol and might reduce cardiovascular risk include whole 
grains and green vegetables. Conversely fried foods, high 
glycaemic index diets and red and processed meats may 
increase cardiovascular risk.
Carbohydrate intake can significantly affect postpran-
dial blood glucose concentrations. In type 1 diabetes, 
matching insulin doses to the amount of carbohydrate 
consumed (carbohydrate counting) is effective in improv-
ing glycaemic control. Patients who are on fixed insulin 
doses or biphasic insulin regimens should be advised to 
aim for consistency in carbohydrate and glycaemic index 
dietary intake.
In patients treated with diet only or diet and oral hypo-
glycaemics, total energy intake in terms of carbohydrate 
consumption should be monitored as this is important in 
achieving glycaemic control. Strategies employed may in-
clude carbohydrate counting, exchanges or food portions 
based on past experience. However, as each individual is 
different, there is no fixed recommended ideal macronu-
trient composition of carbohydrate, fat and protein in the 
diet. Nevertheless, some studies have shown improved 
body weight and glycaemic control with low carbohy-
drate diets through a reduction in energy intake over the 
short term.
Sodium intake should not generally exceed 6 g/day 
and plentiful fruit and vegetables (‘five portions a day’ be-
ing the current mantra) should be consumed, mindful of 
the fact that some fruits (e.g. grapes) may contain large 
amounts of sugar and should not be taken in excess. A total 
daily dietary fibre intake of 40 g is ideal but rarely achieved 
in practice. Except in specific and unusual circumstances, 
it is a general principle that the pharmacological treat-
ment of diabetes should be tailored to the dietary intake 
and ­lifestyle of the individual and not vice versa. Fructose 
reduces postprandial glycaemia when it is used as a re-
placement for sucrose or starch, but it may have adverse 
metabolic effects including causing dyslipidaemia and in-
sulin ­resistance. Non-nutritive sweeteners are safe when 
consumed within recommended daily limits.
It is currently recommended that patients with new 
onset type 2 diabetes should be managed with dietary 
and lifestyle modification with consideration for early in-
troduction of metformin (discussed later). The degree of 
adherence to a particular diet will affect the outcome and 
a diet that is both palatable and acceptable is more likely 
to be followed.
Exercise
Patients with diabetes should be encouraged to partici-
pate in regular exercise of the kind that would benefit the 
rest of the population. Regular low-intensity exercise, 
such as brisk walking (so as to be slightly breathless while 
talking at the same time), swimming or cycling for 30 min 
three to five times a week should be a realistic goal for 
many individuals. Exercise improves glucose disposal (by 
increasing the expression of type 4 glucose transporters, 
GLUT4) in skeletal muscle, among other mechanisms), 
prevents progression from impaired glucose tolerance to 
type 2 diabetes (by ~50%), increases basal metabolic rate 
and has convincingly been demonstrated to reduce the 
risk of cardiovascular events.
Some patients with cardiovascular disease require de-
tailed assessment (e.g. electrocardiogram, review of med-
ications) before taking part in exercise programmes, but 
the few absolute contraindications to exercise in patients 
with diabetes (e.g. tight aortic valvular stenosis) apply 
equally to individuals without diabetes.
In insulin-treated patients, exercise may be associated 
with either an increased frequency of hypoglycaemia or 
hyperglycaemia as blood glucose concentrations are in-
fluenced by the timing, type and quantity of insulin, car-
bohydrate intake and intensity and duration of physical 
activity. Careful monitoring of blood glucose concen-
trations is necessary to guide the adjustment of insulin 
therapy and carbohydrate intake, and the strategy ad-
opted may depend on whether the exercise is planned or 
unplanned.
Aerobic exercise improves glycaemic control and 
lowers low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol in pa-
tients with type 2 diabetes, but has little effect on other 
lipid parameters. Resistance training has effects on both 
	
16  The clinical management of diabetes mellitus	
307
glycaemia and cardiovascular risk factors such as systolic 
blood pressure, fat mass and insulin resistance.
Studies have shown that it is safe for individuals with 
type 2 diabetes who are treated by diet alone or in con-
junction with oral hypoglycaemic agents to exercise in 
both the fasting and post-meal states with the most ben-
eficial effects on blood glucose concentrations observed 
postprandially. As with dietary modification, exercise 
programmes must be individually designed in order to 
encourage compliance.
Smoking cessation
Smoking is hazardous to all, but is particularly so in peo-
ple with diabetes. The macrovascular risks of smoking are 
compounded with those of diabetes itself. Smoking is as-
sociated with increased mortality and predisposes to mi-
crovascular complications of diabetes such as retinopathy 
and nephropathy. Smoking is potentially diabetogenic: it 
is a risk factor for the development of type 2 diabetes, 
and can influence glycaemic control by impairing insulin 
sensitivity and glucose tolerance.
Smoking is at least as prevalent in patients with dia-
betes as in the general population and young women in 
particular may perceive the habit as an adjunct to weight 
management.
Many approaches to the supportive management of 
patients have been described. These include smoking-
cessation clinics and nicotine replacement therapy. Such 
forms of therapy apply equally to people with and with-
out diabetes.
Education about diabetes
Structured educational programmes have been developed 
in Europe and North America. In the UK, a five-day in-
tensive educational course called the Diet Adjustment 
For Normal Eating (DAFNE) programme provides op-
portunities for support and learning for patients with 
type 1 diabetes. This course teaches those with type 1 
diabetes how to adjust their insulin doses according to 
carbohydrate portion intake, and allows participants to 
learn about aspects of lifestyle and management related 
to their diabetes.
For patients with newly diagnosed type 2 diabetes, the 
Diabetes Education and Self Management for Ongoing 
and Newly Diagnosed (DESMOND) programme of-
fers support to patients in identifying their health risks 
and enables goal-setting, developing confidence in self-
management of their condition.
Pharmacological management of 
­cardiovascular risk
Despite the fact that patients with diabetes are uniquely 
susceptible to microvascular complications, around 80% 
of patients with type 2 diabetes will die of macrovascular 
disease. Ischaemic heart disease, stroke and peripheral 
vascular disease are some 2–4 times more common in pa-
tients with diabetes than in the non-diabetic population. 
Many available risk tables do not even include powerful 
diabetes-related risk factors such as microalbuminuria. 
Type 2 diabetes is associated with dyslipidaemia. There 
are ­elevated concentrations of small, dense LDL particles 
that are more prone to oxidation, which increases their 
ability to damage the vascular endothelium. Reduced 
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) concentrations result 
in reduced protection against atheroma: increased tri-
glyceride-rich lipoprotein concentrations predispose to 
atheroma formation.
The risk of mortality from cardiovascular disease is 
higher in patients with diabetes and increases further 
with additional cardiovascular risk factors such as hyper-
cholesterolaemia, hypertension and smoking. Diabetes 
is so powerful a risk factor that patients should, in most 
cases, be treated as if they had already suffered a cardio-
vascular event, rather than have their treatment assessed 
on the basis of primary prevention studies.
Apart from recommendations regarding the dietary 
and other lifestyle measures detailed above, there is a de-
gree of uncertainty about which patients should receive 
preventative treatment with agents such as aspirin, lipid-
lowering therapy or angiotensin-converting-­enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors, and what targets to pursue at any spe-
cific stage of the disease. Guidelines have been prepared 
by various organizations in countries with populations 
of differing genetic background and socioeconomic 
structures. None can obviate the need for individualized 
risk–benefit assessment, and it is important to involve 
patients in setting their own treatment goals, and man-
agement plans.
It is likely that future guidelines will recommend a 
lifetime risk calculator that uses a range of risk factors to 
calculate the absolute risk of an event over the rest of the 
patient’s lifetime. This has the effect of ­promoting more 
aggressive intervention to modify risk factors from an 
early age. Risk calculators can also be used to help ­patients 
to understand their personal risk and how changes can 
­affect it, in order to improve compliance.
Aspirin
Aspirin (75 mg daily) is recommended for secondary pre-
vention of cardiovascular disease in patients with diabe-
tes. It is effective in reducing cardiovascular morbidity 
and mortality in high-risk patients with previous cardio-
vascular disease. The risk of adverse effects associated 
with this dose of aspirin depends on many factors, in-
cluding the age of the patient, intake of other drugs (cor-
ticosteroids and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs), 
presence of other disease (e.g. untreated proliferative 
retinopathy, uncontrolled hypertension, asthma) and 
medical treatment (e.g. forthcoming surgery). The risks 
of major gastrointestinal haemorrhage appear to be in-
creased by a factor of 1.5–2 with approximately one addi-
tional event per 500 patient years under trial conditions 
(approximately 0.2% per patient per year). Intracranial 
haemorrhages are increased by one event per 3–5000 
­patient years.
The use of aspirin for secondary prevention of macro-
vascular disease in all patients in whom it is not contraindi-
cated is well established. However, in primary prevention 
in patients with diabetes with no prior cardiovascular 
events, the use of aspirin has been more contentious.
308	
Clinical biochemistry
The current Joint British Societies guidance (JBS2) 
recommends aspirin 75 mg daily in patients with diabetes 
aged >50 years, those who are younger but have had the 
disease for more than 10 years, and those who are already 
receiving treatment for hypertension, with controlled 
blood pressure <150 mmHg systolic and <90 mmHg dia-
stolic. The UK National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence (NICE) guidelines have stated that low-dose 
aspirin should be offered to patients aged >50  years if 
blood pressure is below 145/90 mmHg and to those aged 
<50 years who have significant cardiovascular risk (fea-
tures of the metabolic syndrome, strong early family his-
tory of cardiovascular disease, smoking, hypertension, 
existing cardiovascular disease or microalbuminuria).
However, a more recent meta-analysis found no sig-
nificant beneficial effects of using aspirin for primary 
prevention of cardiovascular disease in diabetes, and 
the Prevention of Progression of Arterial Disease and 
Diabetes (POPADAD) study demonstrated that aspirin 
did not significantly reduce the risk of major cardiovascu-
lar events even in patients with asymptomatic peripheral 
arterial disease. At present, there is little evidence to sup-
port the use of aspirin in patients aged <30 years and, in 
those <16 years, aspirin should be avoided because of an 
increased risk of Reye syndrome.
Lipid-lowering agents
Effective management of dyslipidaemia reduces the risk 
of cardiovascular disease; plasma lipid concentrations 
should be monitored at least annually in patients with di-
abetes. Most people in the developed world, with or with-
out diabetes, would benefit from a less atherogenic lipid 
profile. Lifestyle modifications such as dietary restriction 
of saturated fat, cholesterol and trans-unsaturated fat, in-
creased intake of ω-3 fatty acids, viscous fibre and plant 
sterols, achievement and maintenance of an ideal body 
weight and taking adequate exercise are recommended, 
whether or not further treatment is required. Secondary 
causes of dyslipidaemia such as alcohol excess, hypothy-
roidism or liver disease should be considered in all pa-
tients prior to initiating any lipid-lowering therapy. For 
patients with diabetes, poor glycaemic control (denoting 
inadequate insulin action) may also cause excess very low 
density lipoprotein (VLDL) production and hypertri-
glyceridaemia. Treatment with metformin, pioglitazone 
and insulin have all been shown to improve this, either via 
increasing insulin action or by other specific mechanisms 
(e.g. by reducing the flux of non-esterified fatty acids to 
the liver in the case of pioglitazone).
Many primary and secondary prevention trials have 
convincingly demonstrated the benefits of lipid-­lowering 
therapy in reducing macrovascular risk in subjects with 
and without diabetes. Many of these studies have in-
volved the use of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA 
(HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors (statins), and have 
shown that lowering LDL-cholesterol is approximately 
linearly related to risk reduction down to concentrations 
of 2.2 mmol/L or even below.
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) ­currently 
recommends statin therapy, in addition to lifestyle factors, 
as secondary prevention for patients with diabetes who have 
cardiovascular disease, with a goal for ­LDL-cholesterol of 
<1.8 mmol/L. Treatment is recommended for primary 
prevention in all patients with diabetes over the age of 
40, and in younger people who have additional cardio-
vascular risk factors, with an LDL-cholesterol target of 
<2.6 mmol/L. Statins should be used with caution, and 
only on specialist advice, in children and are contraindi-
cated in pregnant women.
The typical diabetic dyslipidaemia comprises raised 
triglycerides, intermediate density lipoprotein (IDL) and 
small, dense LDL concentrations together with low HDL 
concentrations. These abnormalities are particularly ath-
erogenic, with the result that the significance of dyslipidae-
mia in diabetes is underestimated by routine measurements 
of total lipid subfractions. Fibric acid derivatives have a role 
in the management of the raised triglycerides in diabetic 
dyslipidaemia. The ADA currently recommends targets for 
triglycerides of <1.7 mmol/L, and for HDL-cholesterol of 
>1.0 mmol/L in men and >1.3 mmol/L in women. Both 
the JBS2 and NICE guidelines (NICE Clinical Guideline 
66) recommend a target total cholesterol <4.0 mmol/L 
and LDL <2.0 mmol/L. Alternatively, JBS2 recommends 
a 25% reduction in total cholesterol with a 30% reduction 
in LDL-cholesterol, if this achieves lower absolute con-
centrations. Both guidelines recommend statins for those 
with diabetes who are aged >40 years and for those aged 
18–39 years with diabetes complications (retinopathy and 
nephropathy), poor glycaemic control, hypertension, fea-
tures of the metabolic syndrome or family history of pre-
mature CVD in a first degree relative.
Combination lipid-lowering therapy, to achieve addi-
tional lowering of LDL, may be considered in order to 
reach desired targets if these are not reached with maxi-
mum tolerated statin doses. To date, however, there is 
little evidence to show that combination therapy to lower 
LDL produces significant cardiovascular risk reduction 
over and above statin therapy alone. We would advocate a 
strategy of: (1) assessing overall risk and choosing targets 
for LDL, triglyceride and HDL; (2) excluding second-
ary causes of hyperlipidaemia and optimizing glycaemic 
control; (3) optimizing lifestyle options, and (4) target-
ing LDL-cholesterol with a statin. These drugs may in 
addition produce minor favourable effects on HDL-
cholesterol and triglycerides. It should be noted that 
therapy targeting HDL or triglycerides does not have the 
evidence base of statin treatment.
Severe hypertriglyceridaemia requires lifestyle and 
pharmacological therapy. A fibrate or ω-3 fatty acid-rich 
marine oils may be used to reduce the risk of pancreati-
tis associated with high triglycerides. Any statin–fibrate 
combination requires care because of the potentially in-
creased risk of rhabdomyolysis, and monitoring of plasma 
creatine kinase activity may be appropriate.
Hypertension
Assiduous control of blood pressure (BP) has been shown 
to reduce major cardiovascular events and minimizes pro-
gression of diabetes complications. In the UK Prospective 
Diabetes Study (UKPDS), intensive treatment of hyper-
tension to a median of 144/82 mmHg was compared with 
conventional BP treatment (median BP in the control 
	
16  The clinical management of diabetes mellitus	
309
group was 154/87 mmHg). Intensive ­treatment resulted 
in reductions in multiple diabetes-related endpoints, 
including death. The majority of subjects in the tight 
control arm of the study required three or more agents 
in order to achieve this. The ADA has adopted an even 
more aggressive target of 130/80 mmHg on the basis of 
epidemiological risk studies showing an inflexion in the 
relationship between BP in patients with diabetes and 
cardiovascular risk at 115/75 mmHg.
Apart from more rigorous treatment goals, manage-
ment of hypertension in patients with diabetes is similar 
to that in patients without the condition. Initially, life-
style changes are recommended including weight loss, 
exercise and dietary modifications, such as a reduction in 
sodium and alcohol intake and increased consumption of 
fruit and vegetables. However, if blood pressure remains 
inadequately controlled despite lifestyle modifications, 
pharmacological therapy may be commenced.
Some patients will have comorbid conditions that 
will direct the choice of drug therapy. The presence of 
microalbuminuria, proteinuria, mild to moderate renal 
­impairment, diabetic retinopathy, ischaemic heart disease, 
stroke and left ventricular systolic dysfunction would, 
for example, indicate a specific role for an angiotensin-
converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitor or angiotensin-II 
­receptor antagonist (blocker) (ARB). Given the poten-
tially beneficial effects of ACE inhibitors and ARBs on 
glycaemia and in the prevention of diabetic complications 
such as diabetic nephropathy (see below), they are gener-
ally considered as first-line agents in patients with dia-
betes if lifestyle changes do not improve blood pressure.
β-Blockers, diuretics, and calcium channel blockers 
have all been shown to reduce cardiovascular events in 
patients with diabetes, and all may be used in combina-
tion with an ACE inhibitor or ARB. Most patients will 
require multiple agents to manage their hypertension. 
Generally initial treatment will be with either an ACE 
inhibitor or ARB, and if required, a calcium channel 
blocker, then a thiazide diuretic, β-blocker, α-blocker 
or potassium-sparing diuretic. It is important to moni-
tor renal glomerular function and plasma potassium con-
centration whenever ACE inhibitors, ARBs or diuretics 
are used. Thiazides are effective, but unwanted effects 
including hyperglycaemia, erectile dysfunction, gout and 
dyslipidaemia have reduced their use as first line agents. 
β-Blockers are specifically indicated in some situations, 
for example stable heart failure and ischaemic heart 
disease, and were found to be safe and effective in the 
UKPDS. However, they may promote weight gain and, 
in some patients with impaired awareness, hypoglycaemia 
may be a problem. In the Anglo–Scandinavian Cardiac 
Outcome Trial (ASCOT), treatment with an atenolol–
thiazide-based regimen was associated with 30% greater 
incidence of new type 2 diabetes than treatment with an 
amlodipine–perindopril-based regimen, and was less ef-
fective at reducing BP and cardiovascular events in pa-
tients with established diabetes.
In the past, there were concerns about the safety of the 
dihydropyridine group of voltage activated calcium chan-
nel blockers. However, results from the Antihypertensive 
and Lipid Lowering Treatment to Prevent Heart Attack 
Trial (ALLHAT) and ASCOT have been reassuring, and 
it now seems reasonable to recommend amlodipine as a 
second-line agent in combination with an ACE inhibitor 
or ARB (although amlodipine and other calcium chan-
nel blockers inhibit the metabolism of simvastatin, which 
must not be co-prescribed at high dose).
α-Blockers appear effective and have favourable effects 
on insulin sensitivity and LDL-cholesterol concentra-
tions. However, ALLHAT showed an apparent doubling 
in the incidence of heart failure (a secondary outcome 
measure) with an α-blocker compared with a thiazide di-
uretic. For this reason, α-blockers are generally reserved 
for use where treatment with at least two other classes 
of hypotensives in combination has failed to achieve the 
target BP.
Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors and 
angiotensin-II receptor antagonists
Angiotensin II (ATII) increases hepatic glucose produc-
tion and decreases insulin sensitivity. The use of ACE in-
hibitors or ARBs consistently increases insulin sensitivity 
by some 15–20% in pharmacological studies. The Heart 
Outcomes Prevention Evaluation (HOPE) study was ter-
minated early after interim analysis demonstrated that 
4.5 years of treatment with the ACE inhibitor ramipril, 
10 mg daily, reduced major vascular events and death in 
subjects with preserved left ventricular function, and ei-
ther pre-existing vascular disease or those with diabetes 
and an additional vascular risk factor. The latter group also 
had a reduced risk (relative risk 0.84) for the development 
of diabetic complications. In an extension to the study to a 
total of 7.2 years follow-up, there was a 31% relative risk 
reduction for new diagnosis of type 2 diabetes.
Results of other studies and meta-analyses have, in 
general, not shown such large benefits in patients who al-
ready have diabetes (unless with other clearly established 
indications), although they have generally been restricted 
to relatively small subgroup analyses. While it is not clear 
whether all (non-pregnant) patients with diabetes should 
be offered these agents, ACE or AT-II inhibition is clearly 
indicated for subjects with diabetes and hypertension, mi-
croalbuminuria, proteinuria, mild to moderate renal im-
pairment, diabetic retinopathy, ischaemic heart disease, 
stroke or left ventricular systolic dysfunction. Caution 
must be exercised with the use of these agents when renal 
artery stenosis is present (e.g. in patients with impaired 
renal function and absent distal pulses or a renal bruit) 
and in subjects with hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism 
(type 4 renal tubular acidosis), in whom dangerous hyper-
kalaemia may result.
GLUCOSE-LOWERING THERAPY IN DIABETES
Background
Trials in both type 1 Diabetes Control and Complications 
Trial (DCCT) and type 2 (UKPDS) diabetes have con-
firmed that microvascular, and, to a lesser extent, mac-
rovascular, complications of diabetes may be delayed or 
even prevented by tight glycaemic control. The UKPDS 
(1998) trial in type 2 diabetes found that a 10 mmol/mol 
310	
Clinical biochemistry
(0.9%) reduction in HbA1c from 63 to 53 mmol/mol (7.9–
7.0%) over a median follow-up of ten years from diag-
nosis led to a reduction of 12% for any diabetes-related 
endpoint, 25% for microvascular ­endpoints and 24% for 
cataract extraction, and of 21% for retinopathy and 33% 
for albuminuria at 12 years. The improvements in mac-
rovascular disease were less convincing and of borderline 
statistical significance.
The DCCT (1993) trial in type 1 diabetes showed a 
risk reduction of 26–63% in microvascular disease with 
intensive insulin therapy, but at the cost of a three-fold 
elevation in the incidence of severe hypoglycaemia (fits, 
unconsciousness) and some additional weight gain com-
pared with the control arm of the study. However, the use 
of more modern insulin analogues has been associated 
with lower incidence of hypoglycaemia.
Insulin use in type 1 diabetes
Patients who have been diagnosed with type 1 diabetes 
will require insulin therapy along with general measures 
such as dietary and lifestyle changes. Although it is often 
considered that patients with type 1 diabetes have no use-
ful islet cell function, this is not entirely true. In fact, β-
Cell function is approximately 10% of normal at disease 
presentation, and may double after the initiation of in-
sulin therapy, resulting in a reduced requirement for ex-
ogenous insulin and stabilization of glucose metabolism 
(‘honeymoon effect’). This effect does not last and, in the 
majority of patients, insulin secretion declines again over 
the next 2–5 years.
The ‘honeymoon effect’ may reflect, in part, the 
amelioration of glucotoxicity or lipotoxicity (see 
Chapter 15) on the reduced numbers of metabolically 
stressed β-Cells. After initiation of insulin therapy, the 
toxic effects of hyperglycaemia are removed, thereby 
relieving this metabolic stress. In some studies, as 
many as 10% of patients with newly diagnosed type 1 
diabetes have been maintained off insulin altogether 
for the first year, but this is clearly not recommended 
in routine clinical practice because of the risks of 
ketoacidosis.
In a subset (~15%) of patients, there is retention of 
some detectable islet function, as assessed by C-peptide 
secretion, for at least 40 years. These individuals also ap-
pear to have reduced susceptibility to severe diabetic ke-
toacidosis (DKA), less risk of retinopathy, a more robust 
glucagon response to hypoglycaemia and lower average 
insulin requirements.
A number of trials have attempted to augment residual 
insulin secretion with immunosuppressive drugs (e.g. 
steroids, azathioprine, antithymocyte globulin and ciclo-
sporin) or by plasmapheresis, and these measures have 
been met with some success but, on current evidence, 
their benefits have not been clearly outweighed by their 
risks. Studies using strict metabolic control in order to 
mitigate any effects of lipotoxicity or glucotoxicity on the 
β-Cell (e.g. with continuous subcutaneous insulin infu-
sion, CSII) have been able to demonstrate transiently 
preserved insulin secretion, but only for a period of a few 
months, with rapid regression on discontinuation of strict 
metabolic control.
Regular insulin
Regular human insulin (e.g. Actrapid
®, Humulin S
®) has 
an onset of activity within 30–60 min after subcutaneous 
injection, a variable peak concentration at around 2–4 h, 
and a duration of action of 5–8 h, contrasting with its du-
ration of action of only a few minutes when administered 
intravenously. This difference may be explained by the 
tendency for hexamerization in solution.
The hexameric form of regular insulin has to disso-
ciate into dimers or monomers in order to be absorbed 
into the bloodstream. This is rate-limiting for its absorp-
tion and influences the pharmacokinetic profile. As such, 
in order to treat prandial glucose peaks, regular insulins 
have to be injected about 30 min before each meal so that 
the onset of action coincides with the rise in prandial glu-
cose concentrations.
Insulin analogues
More recent developments in insulin technology have fo-
cused on the design and production of insulin analogues 
whose pharmacokinetic profiles are determined by modi-
fications to non-receptor-binding regions of the insulin 
molecule.
Insulin aspart (Novorapid
®) is homologous with regu-
lar human insulin with the exception of a single substi-
tution of aspartate for proline in position B28 of the B 
chain: it is produced by recombinant DNA technology 
in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker’s yeast). Insulin lispro 
(Humalog
®) is identical to normal human insulin except 
that the positions of the amino acids proline and lysine at 
B28 and B29 are reversed. In insulin glulisine (Apidra
®), 
asparagine is replaced by lysine at position B3, with glu-
tamic acid replacing lysine at B29. As a result of these 
changes in amino acid sequence, the rapid insulin ana-
logues (aspart, lispro and glulisine) have a lower tendency 
to form hexamers, permitting more rapid absorption and 
a faster onset of action (<15 min), enabling injection im-
mediately before, or just after, eating. There is a sharper 
peak, more closely resembling first-phase insulin secre-
tion in the non-diabetes state, and a shorter duration of 
action (3–5 h), which may reduce the incidence of hypo-
glycaemia before the next meal is ingested.
Intermediate-acting insulin
Isophane (NPH, Neutral protamine Hagedorn) is an 
intermediate-acting insulin that is a combination of sol-
uble insulin and protamine zinc. Protamine delays the 
onset of action and prolongs the effects of the soluble 
insulin. The onset of action is within two hours, with a 
duration of action of 10–20 h. Most patients require two 
subcutaneous injections daily to provide adequate glycae-
mic control. Isophane has fallen out of favour because of 
increased risks of nocturnal hypoglycaemia and fasting 
hyperglycaemia.
Premixed insulin analogues
The most commonly prescribed premixed insulins are a 
mixture of quick acting analogue and an insulin analogue 
protamine complex (e.g. Novomix 30
® is composed of 
	
16  The clinical management of diabetes mellitus	
311
insulin aspart-protamine complex and insulin aspart in a 
ratio of 70:30). These are usually given as a twice-daily 
regimen.
Long-acting insulin analogues
Longer-acting insulin analogues (insulin glargine and in-
sulin detemir) are produced by genetic engineering. The 
onset of action is within two hours and they have a longer 
duration of action of up to 24 h. These insulins provide a 
steady basal insulin profile with minimal peak action and 
are injected subcutaneously once daily.
In insulin glargine, asparagine is replaced by glycine 
at position 21 of the α chain of the insulin molecule and 
the carboxyl terminal of the β chain is changed with the 
addition of arginine. This insulin is slowly released into 
the circulation because of its acidic pH, which causes it 
to precipitate when injected subcutaneously. In insulin 
detemir, tyrosine at position B30 is lost with acylation at 
B29 that results in a fatty acid side chain (tetradecanoic 
acid) becoming linked with lysine. With these alterations, 
insulin detemir forms hexamers with slower dissociation 
and a longer duration of action.
Insulin regimens
Most patients with type 1 diabetes use an insulin re-
placement regimen that comprises multiple-dose sub-
cutaneous injections (three to four injections per day) 
consisting of basal and prandial insulin. Insulin is in-
jected subcutaneously. Short-acting insulin (regular sol-
uble or analogue) acts to control prandial blood glucose 
concentrations; long-acting insulin provides a constant 
background basal insulin concentration. This combi-
nation of short-acting and long-acting basal insulin is 
called the basal bolus ­regimen or multiple daily injec-
tion therapy. Most people take their long-acting insulin 
at bedtime in order to ­provide optimal glycaemic con-
trol overnight. Some patients learn how to adjust insulin 
doses according to carbohydrate intake (in the UK often 
through attendance at a DAFNE (dose adjustment for 
normal eating) course).
An alternative is a twice daily insulin regimen con-
sisting of a premixed or biphasic mixture of longer- and 
shorter-acting insulins in ratios of 75:25, 70:30 or 50:50. 
Such regimens are commonly used in type 2 diabetes and 
in patients with type 1 diabetes before they progress to 
a basal bolus regimen. Some patients with type 1 dia-
betes prefer twice daily insulin to the basal bolus regi-
men, particularly those who dislike frequent injections, 
but it is not suited to those whose diet and activities tend 
to differ on a day-to-day basis, as there is less scope for 
dose adjustment in relation to carbohydrate intake, with 
attendant risks of hypoglycaemia. The longer-acting 
component may not provide effective glycaemic control 
overnight because of a waning of the effect of the pre-
vious evening’s dose, a decrease in insulin sensitivity in 
the early hours of the morning, and increases in growth 
hormone and cortisol concentrations, all of which will 
increase the risk of early morning hyperglycaemia (the 
‘dawn’ phenomenon). Premixed insulin preparations are, 
therefore, not recommended for long-term treatment 
in type 1 diabetes and most patients are eventually rec-
ommended to convert to the basal bolus regimen for 
optimal glycaemic control. The relative merits and dis-
advantages of these two regimens, and a comparison 
with continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion, are out-
lined in Table 16.1.
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion pumps (‘insu-
lin pumps’) are portable devices that deliver a continu-
ous subcutaneous infusion of short-acting insulin at a set 
rate. The pump is battery-driven and comprises a reser-
voir containing about 3 mL of insulin in a syringe. A sy-
ringe driver delivers insulin via a cannula that is inserted 
subcutaneously into the abdominal wall. The cannula is 
re-sited every 1–2 days to avoid skin infections. In addi-
tion to the continuous basal infusion, the patient triggers 
the delivery of an additional dose at mealtimes to provide 
prandial cover.
The advantages of a pump include having a basal in-
sulin rate that is personalized to each individual, allowing 
more flexibility with regards to mealtimes as the basal rate 
can be supplemented with a corrective mealtime insulin 
dose according to the carbohydrate consumed. Studies 
have shown improved glycaemic control in pump users. 
However, in the event of pump failure, there is the risk of 
diabetes ketoacidosis occurring.
Clinical indications for pump therapy include poor 
glycaemic control despite high levels of care, disabling 
hypoglycaemia on multiple daily injection regimens, 
recurrent unpredictable hypoglycaemia, especially in 
patients with severe dawn phenomenon and pregnant 
women without acceptable glycaemic control with sub-
cutaneous insulin. Before each patient is commenced 
on the insulin pump, they must attend a comprehensive 
educational pump course. They must be sufficiently mo-
tivated to use the pump, with a commitment to regular 
blood glucose monitoring, attendance at pump clinics 
and adherence to carbohydrate counting so that they 
will be able to manage their pump. Close liaison with 
the diabetes pump team is essential for the success of this 
form of therapy.
It should be stressed that when deciding which regi-
men to use, each patient’s specific circumstances will need 
to be carefully considered in light of different needs, goals 
and capabilities and the level of support available. An im-
portant factor is the risk of hypoglycaemia that comes 
with insulin therapy. There should be a balance between 
achieving optimal glycaemic control whilst at the same 
time ensuring each patient’s safety, in terms of hypogly-
caemia risk, when deciding on which insulin and regimen 
is to be used.
Insulin administration
The recommended subcutaneous injection sites include 
the abdomen, upper outer thighs, upper outer arms and 
buttocks. It is important to avoid injecting insulin intra-
muscularly. This commonly occurs in the limbs of slim 
individuals or children and can influence insulin absorp-
tion and hence blood glucose profiles.
TABLE 16.1  Comparison of different insulin regimens
 
Twice daily mixed insulin
Basal-bolus regime
Constant subcutaneous 
insulin infusion (CSII)
Glycaemic 
control
Some patients achieve excellent 
results but, in general, the 
method is inferior to basal–bolus 
insulin regimens and most adult 
patients with type 1 diabetes 
requiring good control should 
probably use an alternative 
regimen
Potential for very good control in 
most individuals. Little evidence 
that it is systematically less 
efficacious than CSII
Potential for the best possible 
control, but training and 
considerable patient 
expertise required. May 
not be suitable for patients 
with totally erratic control. 
Expensive (both unit cost 
and disposables)
Flexibility of 
eating
Hypoglycaemia during mid 
morning a specific problem 
without snacking. Most 
suitable for those whose diet 
and lifestyles are similar from 
day-to-day
Basal insulin dose usually 
sufficient to avoid ketoacidosis if 
a meal and its associated insulin 
are missed. Additional correction 
doses may be given if pre-meal 
blood glucose is elevated. 
Additional dose may be given to 
cover unscheduled eating, e.g. a 
snack, ice-cream
Greatest possible flexibility
Hypoglycaemia 
risk
Particular risk if lunch delayed or 
small. Risk if dose is adjusted, 
e.g. to cover a large meal 
without considering the effect 
this will have on the longer-
acting insulin in the mixture. The 
longer-acting insulin component 
used in the early evening 
rather than before bed risks 
morning hyperglycaemia (dawn 
phenomenon), and increases in 
dose may risk hypoglycaemia 
earlier in the night, as peak 
action (6–8 h) may occur after 
maximum growth hormone 
secretion in early deep sleep
Depends on doses used and 
degree of control aimed for. 
Some evidence that insulin 
analogues maintain/improve 
glycaemic control with reduction 
in hypoglycaemia
Depends on doses used and 
degree of control aimed 
for. User error may lead to 
hypoglycaemia
Number of 
injections
Lowest possible in type 1 diabetes 
(two per day)
More injections (4–5 depending on 
whether a single dose of longer-
acting insulin achieves adequate 
24 h cover)
No injections (abdominal 
cannula left in situ for 
24–48 h) but the needle site 
may be irritating/painful. 
Infections at insertion 
site are unusual but very 
unpleasant
Dosage 
titration 
principles
Titrate morning dose to pre-
evening meal blood glucose and 
evening dose to pre-breakfast 
blood glucose. Difficult to adapt 
to a specific meal or situation 
(e.g. exercise) as adjustment of 
each insulin independently is not 
possible (use of different mixes 
at different times theoretically 
possible but rarely done). May be 
particularly suitable for patients 
who prefer not to titrate insulin 
doses themselves and who have 
little day-to-day variation in 
lifestyle. Consider changing the 
mix if necessary to provide more 
or less soluble insulin based on 
blood glucose measurements 2 h 
after breakfast and evening meal. 
Basic regimen may be adapted, 
e.g. supplemented with soluble 
insulin at lunchtime
Titrate basal insulin to fasting 
(especially pre-breakfast) blood 
glucose concentrations and bolus 
insulin to 2 h postprandial results 
for each meal. Carbohydrate 
counting (e.g. the dose 
adjustment for normal eating 
(DAFNE) principle) may be 
applied, noting that greater doses 
may be required for the same 
effect in the morning than in the 
evening. Correction doses may 
be applied according to pre-meal 
blood glucose concentrations if 
prepared to test at least thrice 
daily. Basic regimen may be 
adapted, e.g. by using an insulin 
mixture with breakfast to avoid 
the need for a lunchtime injection. 
Type of each insulin may be 
adapted to need, e.g. Actrapid
® 
vs NovoRapid
®, depending on the 
interval between meals and blood 
glucose values by the time of the 
next meal after optimal titration 
of basal insulin
Complex programming is 
possible (e.g. different 
regimens for work days and 
weekends). Typically 50% 
of the total daily insulin is 
given as basal insulin at 
1–2 units/h during the day 
and 0.5 units/h at night, 
increasing to coincide with 
the dawn phenomenon 
with the remaining 50% 
given as mealtime boluses 
depending on the timing, 
size, content and glycaemic 
index of the meal to be 
ingested. Basal rates may 
be varied according to other 
activities, e.g. exercise, 
illness
Other
Difficult to use when sick day rules 
apply: risk of ketoacidosis
Less risk of ketoacidosis as patient 
may titrate short-acting insulin 
to blood glucose taken 4–6 
hourly when ill, noting that the 
total daily dose may need to be 
increased when ill
Risk of ketoacidosis associated 
with mechanical failure (e.g. 
pump stops, needle falls 
out, blocks) becoming less 
of a problem with advances 
in design and alarming of 
systems
	
16  The clinical management of diabetes mellitus	
313
As a result of the trophic action of insulin, an ac-
cumulation of fat, called lipohypertrophy, may occur 
at sites of repeated subcutaneous insulin injections. 
Lipohypertrophy can affect insulin absorption, causing 
problems such as hypoglycaemia, but can be avoided 
by rotating injection sites. Insulin injection sites should 
be inspected when patients attend for their diabetes 
review.
Glycaemic management in type 2 diabetes
When type 2 diabetes is diagnosed, lifestyle modification 
should be advised initially, and metformin commenced in 
combination with lifestyle if HbA1c does not reach tar-
get after three months. If glycaemic control remains poor 
­after 3–6 months, further oral agents, or a glucagon-like 
peptide 1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist or insulin may be 
added. Some patients with marked hyperglycaemia may 
be commenced on insulin at diagnosis if it is deemed that 
non-insulin agents will not provide the necessary control 
of blood glucose.
Metformin
Metformin belongs to a class of drugs called the bi-
guanides that act to reduce insulin resistance, therefore 
improving insulin sensitivity. Metformin is the only bigu-
anide currently available. It has an established role in the 
treatment of type 2 diabetes in combination with diet and 
lifestyle measures. The UKPDS study showed that obese 
patients treated with metformin had reduced myocardial 
infarction (by 6%), stroke (by 3%) and mortality (by 7%). 
These effects were independent of improved glycaemic 
control.
Metformin has the clear advantage over many other 
drugs of improving glycaemic control without causing 
weight gain. Metformin does not cause hypoglycaemia 
and may even lead to weight loss by suppressing ap-
petite. As such, it is often prescribed as first line treat-
ment in patients who are overweight. Several of the 
adverse features of the metabolic syndrome, including 
raised circulating concentrations of non-esterified fatty 
acids (NEFAs), triglycerides and plasminogen activat-
ing inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), are improved by metformin. 
Metformin has an effect on blood glucose that is addi-
tive to, and broadly equivalent to, that of sulfonylurea 
monotherapy. In type 2 diabetes, metformin can be 
used as monotherapy, or combined with insulin or with 
sulfonylureas, dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPP-4) inhibi-
tors, GLP-1 analogues or thiazolidinediones. In type 
1 diabetes it is sometimes used together with insulin 
for obese adults, although this usage is currently unli-
censed. Metformin may also be considered in patients 
who are not overweight.
Metformin has a useful role in diabetes prevention; a 
31% relative reduction in the progression of diabetes was 
observed in the Diabetes Prevention Programme (DPP) 
placebo-controlled study, with greatest effect in younger 
and more obese subjects. Metformin also has a possi-
ble role in the treatment of polycystic ovary syndrome 
(PCOS), alone or in combination with drugs acting on 
sex steroid metabolism, particularly in those patients who 
are also glucose intolerant.
Mechanism of action
Metformin decreases hepatic gluconeogenesis and glu-
cose output, improves peripheral glucose uptake and 
utilization in insulin-sensitive tissue such as muscle and 
adipose tissue, and may reduce intestinal glucose trans-
port. Its actions depend on the presence of adequate 
β-Cell function, and therefore insulin in the circulation. 
The exact mechanism of action of metformin is not clear 
but it may work through the activation of an intracellular 
AMP-activated protein kinase.
Lactic acidosis
Lactic acidosis is a rare but serious complication that can 
occur whilst taking metformin. Lactic acidosis was more 
frequently reported with phenformin, another biguanide 
that was subsequently withdrawn in most countries in 
1977 after 306 documented cases. While phenformin ex-
cretion relies upon hepatic hydroxylation (pharmacoge-
netically deficient in approximately 10% of Caucasians), 
metformin is subject to renal tubular secretion, and its 
excretion depends only on renal function.
Lactic acidosis presents with non-specific symptoms such 
as lethargy, nausea, vomiting, altered level of ­consciousness 
and abdominal pain. Biochemical features of lactic acido-
sis are those of an elevated anion gap metabolic acidosis 
with high blood lactate concentrations. There ­appears to 
be no direct correlation between blood concentrations of 
metformin and lactate, and the ­overwhelming majority of 
cases of lactic acidosis have ­occurred in the setting of ma-
jor comorbidities (Table 16.2). These include conditions 
associated with increased lactate formation (e.g. cardiac 
failure, pulmonary disease), reduced lactate metabolism 
(e.g. hepatic failure) and reduced metformin and lactate 
excretion (e.g. renal failure).
There is an increased risk of lactic acidosis in patients 
treated with metformin who receive radiological contrast 
media. This may be avoided by withholding metformin 
for a few days before and after the intended radiological 
procedure.
A systematic review has shown that there is no evi-
dence from prospective comparative trials or from ob-
servational cohort studies that metformin is associated 
with an increased risk of lactic acidosis, or with increased 
plasma concentrations of lactate, compared with other 
antihyperglycaemic treatments, if prescribed as licensed. 
Patients with significant cardiac, renal or liver dysfunc-
tion should not receive metformin. As metformin is 
renally excreted, there is the attendant risk of accumu-
lation in acute or chronic kidney disease, resulting in 
an increased risk of lactic acidosis. It is recommended 
by NICE that prescription of metformin should be re-
viewed in patients with a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) 
<45 mL/min/1.73m
2 and it is to be avoided in those with 
a GFR <30 mL/min/1.73 m
2. Some physicians recom-
mend that metformin should not be used if the patient’s 
plasma creatinine concentration is raised to any extent; 
others argue that guidelines have been progressively 
tightened with no reduction in the incidence of lactic aci-
dosis, which has anyway always been very low throughout 
the history of metformin usage. Although some formular-
ies suggest avoiding metformin when plasma creatinine 
314	
Clinical biochemistry
concentration is raised above certain thresholds, cardiac 
dysfunction is probably a more important, but less well 
recognized, contraindication to its use.
Other unwanted effects of metformin
The major side-effects of metformin include gastrointesti-
nal problems such as nausea, abdominal discomfort, metal 
taste and diarrhoea. Many patients will experience these 
symptoms after commencing metformin but will eventu-
ally develop tolerance. These side-effects are generally 
dose dependent, and can be minimized by commencing 
at a low dose and then slowly titrating the dose upwards, 
or by using a slow-release preparation. Approximately 
80% of the total benefit of metformin is seen with doses 
of around 1.5 g/day, which is close to the median toler-
ated dose. Metformin induces malabsorption of vitamin 
B12 and folate but this is rarely clinically significant.
Sulfonylureas (and related insulin 
secretagogues)
First generation sulfonylurea (sulphonylurea) derivatives 
were first used to treat diabetes in the 1950s, following 
the observation in 1942 that certain sulphonamide anti-
biotics could provoke severe hypoglycaemia in patients 
treated for typhoid fever. They act as insulin secreta-
gogues, reducing blood glucose concentrations by aug-
menting the first-phase release of immediately releasable 
(reserve) insulin from β-Cells. Unlike glucose-stimulated 
insulin release, there is little direct effect on insulin pro-
duction. First generation sulfonylureas, such as chlor-
propamide, were beset with unwanted effects including 
the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIADH) and 
flushing. These drugs have largely been replaced by more 
potent and shorter acting second and third generation 
drugs (e.g. gliclazide) that lack these unwanted effects.
Mechanism of action
Central to the release of insulin from secretory granules 
(but not the only mechanism involved) is the closure 
of an ATP-sensitive membrane-bound inwardly rectify-
ing 140 kDa K
+ channel, KATP. In β-Cells, this channel is a 
hetero-octamer of pore-forming units (KIR 6.2) together 
with regulatory ATP binding cassette (ABC) protein 
sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR-1) molecules. The regu-
latory subunit, SUR-1, contains 13–17 transmembrane 
domains with a large number of possible protein kinase 
A or C phosphorylation sites, together with a number 
of distinct binding sites for other molecules (includ-
ing the A and B sites to which sulfonylureas and other 
exogenous compounds attach, as discussed below). The 
existence or nature of the endogenous ligand at sulfonyl-
urea binding sites is not clear. Closure of KATP channels 
depolarizes the plasma membrane, causing rapid influx 
of calcium ions via voltage dependent calcium channels. 
The resultant increase in free ionized cytosolic calcium 
concentration ([Ca
2+]i) triggers cytoskeletal trafficking of 
secretory granules to the plasma membrane and release 
of insulin by a process of exocytosis. Amplification of the 
signal generated by KATP closure occurs via a number of 
incompletely understood mechanisms, including direct 
mobilization of calcium from intracellular stores (e.g. by 
the action of glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 analogues). 
The effects of KATP channel opening are terminated by 
extrusion of K
+ via a voltage gated K
+ channel.
The principal mechanism of action of the sulfonylurea 
drugs is to close the KATP channel by binding to the A and B 
sites on SUR-1. Conversely, diazoxide, used in the treatment 
of certain hyperinsulinaemic conditions, is a potent opener 
of KATP channels, and thiazide diuretics also open β-Cell 
KATP channels (causing impairment of glucose tolerance).
Adverse effects of sulfonylureas
Concern has existed for many years that sulfonylurea drugs 
may have harmful cardiovascular effects (mainly arrhyth-
mias). This concern was first raised in relation to tolbuta-
mide (the University Group Diabetes Programme, UGDP). 
The action of sulfonylureas on cardiac KATP channels sug-
gests a plausible mechanism for adverse cardiac effects.
In contrast to these predominantly theoretical reser-
vations, analysis of UKPDS data does not support the 
suggestion of adverse cardiovascular effects from sul-
fonylureas. At the present time, and in the light of the 
Diabetes Insulin–Glucose in Acute Myocardial Infarction 
(DIGAMI) study results, many physicians would agree 
TABLE 16.2  Cautions with and contraindications to the use of metformin
Caution or contraindication
Reason
Old age
Renal and other organ impairment
Tissue hypoxia
Increased lactate production via anaerobic glycolysis, reduced 
gluconeogenesis
Pulmonary disease
Increased lactate production via tissue hypoxaemia and anaerobic 
glycolysis
Liver failure, ethanol
Reduced lactate clearance via inhibition of gluconeogenesis
Iodinated radiological contrast media
Risk of acute kidney injury, competition for renal tubular secretion
Cardiac impairment
Increased lactate production via poor tissue oxygen delivery
Shock states, severe dehydration
Increased lactate production via poor tissue oxygen delivery
Advanced microvascular disease
Risk of chronic kidney disease
Severe infection
Increased lactate production
Drugs affecting tubular secretion of metformin
Contrast media, cimetidine, digoxin, others
Type 2 diabetes itself
Microcirculatory disturbances, peripheral vascular disease, increased 
incidence of cardiac and renal disease, reduced activity of pyruvate 
dehydrogenase in insulin resistance favouring anaerobic metabolism
	
16  The clinical management of diabetes mellitus	
315
that discontinuation of sulfonylurea drugs and substitution 
with insulin infusion is probably indicated in the setting of 
acute coronary syndromes. Some would also advocate the 
use of selective agents (e.g. nateglinide or glimepiride) in 
other cardiac patients, pending definitive data.
Other unwanted effects of sulfonylureas
Unwanted effects of the sulfonylureas include hypo-
glycaemia (particularly in elderly patients treated with 
longer-acting agents and in renal/hepatic failure), serious 
immunological reactions (Stevens–Johnson syndrome 
and other rashes), marrow dyscrasias, hepatitis, weight 
gain (typically 1–3 kg) and precipitation of acute por-
phyria. Contraindications to the use of these drugs in-
clude type 1 diabetes, pregnancy, lactation and significant 
hepatic and renal insufficiency.
Hypoglycaemia owing to deliberate or inadvertent 
overdose of sulfonylureas requires prompt and aggressive 
management. The first-line treatment is with a bolus of 
50% glucose followed by continuous infusion of 10% or 
20% glucose. If blood glucose cannot be maintained at 
safe levels with this treatment alone, hydrocortisone, glu-
cagon or octreotide may be useful.
Indications and clinical usage
Sulfonylurea and derivative drugs are used to treat 
­patients with type 2 diabetes who have adequate ­insulin 
reserve, but in whom lifestyle and dietetic improvements 
have failed to control hyperglycaemia. Doses are titrated 
to blood glucose and HbA1c responses; primary failure of 
either to improve may indicate advanced β-Cell failure. 
Because of their tendency to promote weight gain, sulfo-
nylureas are best used as first-line agents in ­non-obese pa-
tients, but may be added to metformin, ­thiazolidinediones 
or both in obese patients with secondary failure of these 
agents. Insulin therapy can be added if and when neces-
sary. Weight gain with repaglinide and nateglinide (see 
below) may be less than with conventional sulfonylureas, 
and severe hypoglycaemia may be less common.
The extent to which postprandial hyperglycaemia 
rather than fasting hyperglycaemia contributes to dia-
betic complications remains the subject of considerable 
debate. Nevertheless, because of its ability to augment 
glucose-stimulated insulin release (as opposed to basal 
insulin release), meglitinides may be useful when post-
prandial hyperglycaemia in a patient with type 2 diabetes 
is the dominant clinical problem.
Meglitinides
Repaglinide and nateglinide are prandial glucose regu-
lators that form the meglitinide class of drug. They are 
indicated in the treatment of patients with type 2 diabetes 
who have poor glycaemic control on diet control or met-
formin therapy. These agents are short-acting and act to 
increase insulin secretion by closing KATP channels of the 
β-Cell membrane via binding to a receptor distinct from 
that of sulfonylureas. Repaglinide binds to the B site of 
SUR-1 and nateglinide binds to the A site. The megli-
tinides are used in patients as monotherapy (repaglinide 
only) or in combination with metformin (repaglinide and 
nateglinide). Given the rapid onset and short duration of 
action, these agents are taken between 15 and 30 min be-
fore each meal to provide postprandial glycaemic control. 
As repaglinide and nateglinide are rapidly metabolized in 
the liver and excreted in bile, these agents should not be 
used in patients with hepatic impairment.
Adverse effects of meglitinides
Hypoglycaemia is a common adverse effect. Other reac-
tions include gastrointestinal effects such as abdominal 
pain, diarrhoea, constipation, nausea and vomiting; hy-
persensitivity responses such as pruritus, rashes and urti-
caria may occur.
Peroxisome proliferator activator γ 
analogues
Thiazolidinediones were originally developed as ligands 
for the orphan nuclear peroxisome proliferator activa-
tor receptor family (PPARα, PPARγ and PPARδ). The 
endogenous activators of the nuclear PPAR receptors 
are fatty acids and fatty acid-derived eicosanoids, and 
it is now known that the actions of the fibrate group of 
lipid-lowering agents are mediated via PPARα receptors. 
Activation of PPARs leads to the formation of heterodi-
mers with the retinoid X receptor (RXR), bound to its 
own endogenous ligand, retinoic acid. These PPAR–RXR 
dimers bind to specific gene regulatory sequences (per-
oxisome proliferator response elements, PPREs), modu-
lating the transcription of multiple (>40) target genes.
Thiazolidinediones are insulin sensitizers that act as li-
gands at the PPARγ receptors, which regulate gene expres-
sion and transcription of glucose transporter molecules 
GLUT-4, lipoprotein lipase, fatty acid transporter protein 
and fatty acyl CoA synthase. The PPARγ nuclear receptors 
are found in adipose tissue and also in liver and muscle. 
Their activation leads to improved insulin responsiveness 
by increasing glucose uptake, and adipose lipogenesis by 
regulating expression of adipose tissue adipokines.
Troglitazone, the first of these compounds to be in-
troduced, was withdrawn following cases of idiosyncratic 
hepatotoxicity leading to acute liver failure. At present, 
the only thiazolidinedione in clinical use is pioglitazone. 
The other drug in this class, rosiglitazone has been linked 
to an increased risk of cardiovascular disorders such as 
myocardial infarction and heart failure, and to bone frac-
tures. It is no longer recommended for use.
Mechanisms of action
It has been suggested that the insulin-sensitizing effects of 
PPARγ agonists are almost exclusively a result of a ‘fatty 
acid steal’ mechanism, owing to their effect on adipose tis-
sue, rather than direct effects on the pancreas, liver or pe-
ripheral insulin-sensitive tissues. This is because PPARγ 
receptors are expressed chiefly in adipose tissue, with only 
low levels of expression in other insulin-sensitive tissues. 
Thiazolidinediones, acting via PPARγ, increase free fatty 
acid uptake into adipose tissue (by ~60%) and also increase 
fatty acid oxidation in the liver, heart, kidneys and skeletal 
316	
Clinical biochemistry
muscle. These effects on adipose tissue are brought about 
by altering adipocyte gene expression, pre-adipocyte dif-
ferentiation and fat distribution (favouring redistribution 
from central to subcutaneous depots). By such actions, he-
patic NEFA uptake is reduced (by ~40%), rendering the 
liver more insulin-sensitive and giving these agents a po-
tential role in the treatment of hepatic steatosis. However, 
thiazolidinediones have multiple actions, and it is by no 
means established that ‘fatty acid steal’ is their dominant 
mechanism of action.
Peroxisome proliferator activator receptor α is expressed 
in tissues that metabolize fatty acids extensively such as 
liver, kidneys, heart, and muscle. Its activation increases 
plasma HDL-cholesterol concentrations by transcriptional 
induction of the HDL apolipoproteins, apoA-I and apoA-II 
(see Chapter 37). Triglyceride concentrations are reduced 
by decreased hepatic apoC-III production and increased 
lipoprotein lipase expression. Low density lipoprotein 
subclass distribution is shifted toward larger particle spe-
cies by changes in lipoprotein composition and interaction. 
Combination PPARα/γ agonists are being developed in the 
hope that a single tablet may be able to benefit both the 
adverse lipid and glycaemic profiles of type 2 diabetes.
Pioglitazone may be used alone or in combination with 
metformin or a sulfonylurea, or with both as ‘triple ther-
apy’. While this may delay the need for insulin in some pa-
tients, the usual scenario is that pancreatic reserve is failing 
and that further delays in introducing insulin treatment are 
potentially hazardous. Pioglitazone is also licensed in the 
UK for prescription with insulin when metformin cannot 
be used. The maximum effects of pioglitazone take some 
4–12 weeks to develop, and patients may experience a dete-
rioration in glycaemic control during this period if switch-
ing from another agent. Pioglitazone is also sometimes 
used in the treatment of hepatic steatosis (an unlicensed 
indication). This use, however, should be considered care-
fully in each patient because of the associated risks.
Adverse effects
As pioglitazone may cause fluid retention, it is contrain-
dicated in patients with heart failure; this risk may be in-
creased if it is used in combination with insulin. The use 
of pioglitazone is associated with a small increased risk 
of bladder cancer it is therefore not recommended in pa-
tients with a history of bladder cancer or uninvestigated 
haematuria and should be used with caution in the el-
derly, given that the risk of bladder cancer rises with age.
Contraindications to the use of pioglitazone also in-
clude severe renal insufficiency, pregnancy, breastfeeding 
and hepatic dysfunction, with the possible exception of 
that arising from steatohepatitis. Fears over the potential 
to cause liver damage requires that plasma aminotrans-
ferase activity should be monitored two-monthly over the 
first year after starting treatment. Weight gain of 1–4 kg 
is predictable from the mechanism of action, but the po-
tential for this to interfere with insulin sensitivity is more 
than offset by the favourable redistribution of adipose tis-
sue. Fluid retention may cause a mild dilutional anaemia 
(haemoglobin typically falls by 10–20 g/L) and ankle oe-
dema (in 5–10% of individuals, more when used in com-
bination with insulin).
Glucagon-like peptide 1 analogues
Proglucagon is a product of the glucagon gene, which un-
dergoes post-translational cleavage in pancreatic α-cells 
to form glucagon and in the L cells of the small bowel, to 
form glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1), which is produced 
in response to food in the gastrointestinal tract. Glucose-
dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP) is secreted by 
the K cells in the duodenum. The incretin effect occurs 
when oral glycaemic stimuli, in the form of food intake, 
stimulate insulin secretion. It is mediated by the gastroin-
testinal incretins GLP-1 and GIP, which stimulate insulin 
synthesis and secretion. In addition, GLP-1 delays gastric 
emptying and intestinal transit and reduces food intake 
by promoting satiety.
The incretin response is reduced in type 2 diabetes 
and the incretin analogues (called incretin mimetics) have 
been developed for use in its treatment. Human GLP-1 
has a short half-life because of the degradation of the N 
terminal by dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPP-4) and there-
fore synthetic GLP-1 analogues (exenatide and liraglu-
tide) have been developed that share the effects of GLP-1 
but are resistant to cleavage by DPP-4.
Mechanisms of action
The actions of GLP-1 include increasing the insulin 
secretion resulting from any given glycaemic stimulus, 
slowing the rate of gastric emptying and intestinal tran-
sit, increasing satiety and reducing the secretion of glu-
cagon. Glucagon-like peptide 1 also has trophic effects 
on β-Cells, stimulating differentiation and proliferation 
of progenitor cells in the pancreatic ductal epithelium 
and inhibiting β-Cell apoptosis. Glucagon and GLP-1 
both stimulate insulin secretion by raising cytosolic cal-
cium concentrations by mechanisms distinct from those 
involving the KATP channel of β-Cells. Receptor binding 
increases cyclic AMP generation, which impedes seques-
tration of calcium into intracellular organelles following 
glucose-stimulated KATP channel closure. Endogenous 
GLP-1 has a very short half-life (1–2 min) and is there-
fore not a practical therapy.
Exenatide is a synthetic analogue of a 39 amino acid 
exendin-4 peptide that was found in the saliva of the 
Heloderma suspectum (Gila monster) lizard. It requires 
twice daily subcutaneous injection. More recently, a 
once weekly preparation of exenatide has been approved. 
Liraglutide has a more prolonged duration of action 
compared to exenatide because of greater resistance to 
inhibition by DPP-4.
These agents are used in patients with type 2 diabetes 
who have inadequate glycaemic control on one or two 
oral agents who are intolerant of other oral agents, or in 
whom use of other oral agents is contraindicated. Their 
use should preferably be reserved for patients with a body 
mass index (BMI) >35 kg/m
2 or when BMI is <35 kg/m
2 
and insulin therapy is not appropriate for work-related 
reasons because of the risk of hypoglycaemia, or when 
weight loss is desirable. Recently both liraglutide and ex-
enatide have also been shown to be of benefit when used 
in combination with insulin, as they can help reduce in-
sulin doses and promote weight loss.
	
16  The clinical management of diabetes mellitus	
317
Adverse effects
The main side-effects that limit the tolerability of GLP-1 
analogues are gastrointestinal problems such as nausea, 
diarrhoea, vomiting and abdominal distension, and injec-
tion site reactions. Hypoglycaemia is possible when used 
in combination with a sulfonylurea or insulin. Renal fail-
ure has been reported with exenatide use. Pancreatitis has 
been reported, and should be considered in patients tak-
ing GLP-1 analogues who report severe abdominal pain. 
Liraglutide should not be used in patients with a history 
of medullary thyroid carcinoma or multiple endocrine 
neoplasia type 2 because of potential stimulation of thy-
roid C-cells, observed in rodent studies.
Dipeptidyl peptidase IV inhibitors
The GLP-1 and GIP incretins are metabolized by cleav-
age of the N-terminal by dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPP-
4), an enzyme that is ubiquitously expressed. Inhibiting 
DPP-4 activity prolongs the half-life and increases cir-
culating concentrations of the incretins, thereby stimu-
lating insulin secretion and inhibiting glucagon release. 
Members of the DPP-4 inhibitor class of drugs include: 
sitagliptin, saxagliptin, linagliptin and vildagliptin. These 
may be used as monotherapy or in combination with met-
formin, a sulfonylurea or pioglitazone in patients who fail 
to reach glycaemic targets with monotherapy; some can 
also be used in combination with insulin.
Adverse effects of DPP-4 inhibitors
Inhibitors of DPP-4 do not cause weight gain or weight 
loss. Hypoglycaemia is uncommon but may occur when 
they are taken with a sulfonylurea or insulin. Other ad-
verse effects include upper respiratory tract infections, 
headache and nasopharyngitis. Cardiovascular outcome 
studies are currently ongoing but thus far, have not shown 
any significant reduction in cardiovascular risk.
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors
This class of drugs (acarbose, miglitol) inhibit the α-
glucosidase enzymes that break down carbohydrates into 
monosaccharides at the intestinal border. By delaying the 
breakdown of carbohydrates in the small bowel, prandial 
absorption of glucose is reduced, resulting in improved 
control of postprandial blood glucose concentrations. The 
use of these drugs is limited by intolerance to the gastro-
intestinal effects of undigested carbohydrate in the bowel, 
causing, in particular, excessive flatulence and diarrhoea. 
The gastrointestinal symptoms do, however, discourage 
excessive carbohydrate consumption. Hypoglycaemia may 
occur in association with use of insulin or sulfonylureas.
Sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) 
inhibitors
This new class of drugs includes depagliflozin and cana-
gliflozin. These agents block the reabsorption of glucose 
by the SGLT2 transporter in the proximal renal tubules, 
resulting in 70-80 g of glycosuria per day. They have been 
shown to reduce HbA1c by between 7 and 11 mmo1/mo1 
when used as monotherapy or added to other agents such 
as metformin and sulfonylureas in dual or triple combina-
tions, or with insulin. They also result in modest weight 
loss (about 2-3 kg) and reductions in blood pressure. 
Because of their mode of action, they are less effective in 
patients with renal impairment.
Side effects include an increased risk of fungal genital 
infections and a slightly increased risk of urinary tract in-
fections. The intrinsic risk of hypoglycaemia is low. They 
should be avoided in patients taking loop diuretics be-
cause of the small risk of volume depletion.
Insulin use in type 2 diabetes
Insulin may be initiated in patients with type 2 diabe-
tes when glycaemic control is poor or at presentation if 
symptoms and signs are such that type 1 diabetes cannot 
be excluded. Patients with type 2 diabetes require insulin 
treatment after a median of seven years from diagnosis. 
The decision to start insulin treatment is often a difficult 
one, and will depend on many factors relating to individual 
patient preference and circumstances as well as ­glycaemic 
status. It is apparent from the UKPDS that type 2 diabe-
tes is a progressive condition, and that once fasting hyper-
glycaemia occurs, drug treatment, even when intensive, 
will improve glycaemic control only transiently, with the 
subsequent deterioration of ­β-Cell function and glycaemic 
control paralleling that of less intensively treated patients, 
albeit after some initial ­improvement. Many patients are 
reluctant to start insulin but are willing to take several oral 
hypoglycaemic agents. In some cases, the addition of a third 
oral hypoglycaemic (e.g. metformin, DPP-4 inhibitor plus 
thiazolidinedione or metformin, sulfonylurea plus DPP-4 
inhibitor) may be effective, at least for a while. Responses 
to the addition of a thiazolidinedione are variable, but in 
some cases worthwhile. However, treatment failures are 
also common, and failure to reduce HbA1c values by a pre-
determined amount (e.g. >10 mmol/mol (1%)) after six 
months should lead to reconsideration of insulin treatment, 
as adequate insulin reserve is required for thiazolidinedione 
action.
Initial insulin treatment in type 2 diabetes is usually with 
either a once daily intermediate acting insulin (isophane) 
or long-acting insulin (glargine or detemir). Some patients 
are commenced on a twice daily premixed insulin regimen 
(e.g. 30% short-acting insulin and 70% intermediate act-
ing insulin). Insulin treatment in individuals who are over-
weight may lead to further weight gain. This is because of: 
the anabolic effects of insulin; reduced energy loss through 
glycosuria; possibly increased oral intake because of need to 
avoid or treat hypoglycaemia, and altered lifestyle, exercise 
and diet with insulin therapy. With increased weight, these 
patients face problems of increased insulin resistance, and 
consequently, the required insulin doses needed to main-
tain glycaemic control rise, leading to further weight gain.
Bariatric surgery
Weight loss is an important component in the manage-
ment of overweight and obese subjects with type 2 diabe-
tes. Bariatric surgery may be performed in selected obese 
patients with diabetes, preferably before the development 
of irreversible complications and after the exhaustion of 
318	
Clinical biochemistry
conservative measures including diet, exercise and drug 
therapy. Surgery should be considered in patients with 
type 2 diabetes who have a BMI of >35 kg/m
2 (as rec-
ommended by NICE and the ADA). It is likely that this 
will be an increasingly considered option for patients 
with suitable psychological and medical reserves (see 
Chapter 11 for further details).
Bariatric surgery improves glycaemic control, de-
pending on the surgical procedure, with ‘remission’ rates 
of diabetes (defined as resolution of clinical and labora-
tory manifestations of type 2 diabetes) reported to be as 
high as 78% in a meta-analysis. Surgery is associated with 
restoration of first-phase insulin response in up to 80% 
of subjects. The Swedish Obesity Study compared the 
effects of bariatric surgery in 2010 obese subjects with 
2037 obese controls and found that bariatric surgery was 
associated with a decreased incidence of diabetes and, in 
those with type 2 diabetes at baseline, increased diabetes 
remission rates at two years and at ten years. Not only 
have improvements in glycaemia been reported well be-
fore weight loss becomes apparent, but they appear also 
to exceed those expected on the basis of the amount of 
weight lost. It has been proposed that increased secre-
tion of a number of gut peptides with insulinotropic ac-
tions such as GLP-1 and GIP, and decreased secretion of 
orexigenic peptides such as ghrelin, may be responsible 
for the success of bypass techniques, raising the intrigu-
ing possibility that operations of this kind have a partly 
endocrine mechanism of action. As energy intake fol-
lowing surgery is changed, it may be necessary to adjust 
glucose lowering therapy to avoid severe hypoglycaemia.
Pancreatic transplantation
Simultaneous pancreatic and kidney transplantation has 
been performed in patients with established renal failure, 
and is a reasonable option to consider at this stage in patients 
with glycaemic instability, who are physically fit and psycho-
logically well prepared. Pancreas-alone transplants have also 
been carried out and may sometimes be considered in pa-
tients with recurrent hypoglycaemia. Although complete in-
dependence from insulin medications is possible, this form 
of treatment requires immunosuppressive therapy and is 
limited by the availability of organs for donation.
Islet cell transplantation
Islet cell transplantation may be used in patients with 
severe hypoglycaemia unawareness. This uses cadaveric 
pancreatic islets cells that are infused though a catheter 
placed into the hepatic portal vein. However, it is lim-
ited by donor availability and low rates of independence 
from insulin medications because of graft attrition. 
The Clinical Islet Transplantation (CIT) consortium, 
a network of centres in North America and Europe, is 
conducting studies on islet transplantation in type 1 
diabetes, but the clinical outcomes are not yet known.
Immunotherapy for type 1 diabetes
Immunomodulatory therapies for type 1 diabetes are 
the subject of phase II and phase III clinical trials. These 
treatments target specific antigens or modulate the im-
mune system with the aim of establishing immune toler-
ance and preventing the destruction of pancreatic β-Cells. 
The concept of tolerance is important in that in autoim-
mune disease, the immune system loses its tolerance to a 
particular antigen, which may be a mechanism underly-
ing the autoimmune nature of type 1 diabetes. Different 
immune-targeted treatments that target pathogenetic 
cells and activate regulatory cells have been developed. 
Nutritional studies have investigated how exposure to 
different dietary components may influence disease 
initiation.
Glutamate decarboxylase (GAD65) immunization of 
young non-obese diabetic (NOD) mice has prevented de-
velopment of type 1 diabetes. However, in humans, there 
was no effect on β-Cell destruction. Inoculation with 
­human heat shock protein 60 (Hsp60) prevented disease 
progression in NOD mice, whilst in humans, it produced 
increased C-peptide concentrations. Studies in children 
have not shown an improvement in β-Cell function, how-
ever. Trial evidence for anti-CD3 and anti-CD20 mono-
clonal antibodies therapy in humans has shown improved 
C-peptide concentrations and reduced insulin demand. 
Monthly injections with CTLA4-Ig (a T  cell receptor 
that inhibits T cell activation) over two years in human 
trials also increased C-peptide concentrations. Trials of 
interleukin-2 showed favourable results in NOD mice. 
Trials with insulin therapy have not shown effects on cell 
function.
Nutritional studies in children showed that lower con-
centrations of islet cell antibodies were present in those 
who had been weaned in infancy onto a hydrolysed ca-
sein formula compared with those weaned to cows’ milk 
formula. A trial of the effects of ω-3 fatty acids showed 
reduced risk of islet autoimmunity in children with a ge-
netic risk of type 1 diabetes. In another trial, vitamin D 
did not protect β-Cell function in patients with recent 
onset of type 1 diabetes.
OBSTACLES TO ACHIEVING GLYCAEMIC 
CONTROL
Glycaemic management of diabetes is rarely as simple 
as making incremental additions to a patient’s therapy 
until normoglycaemia is achieved. Hypoglycaemia is 
the main barrier to tight glycaemic control. For the 
majority of patients, achieving good glycaemic con-
trol involves a complex trade-off between the potential 
benefits (most of which are long term) and risks or ob-
stacles (many of which are only too readily and imme-
diately apparent).
The patterns of endogenous insulin secretion, which 
vary rapidly in response to changes in blood glucose con-
centration, are not easily mimicked by the injection of 
exogenous insulin into a subcutaneous depot, from which 
there is prolonged release into the systemic rather than 
portal circulation, thus partially bypassing hepatic action 
and first-pass clearance. This leads to an inherently in-
creased risk of hypoglycaemia, which may be exacerbated 
by a number of factors related to the treatment, the indi-
vidual and his or her circumstances.
	
16  The clinical management of diabetes mellitus	
319
Intensive control
The ADA recommends an HbA1c concentration of 
<53 mmol/mol (<7%) as a treatment goal whereas the 
International Diabetes Federation (IDF) recommends an 
HbA1c of <48 mmol/mol (<6.5%).
The DCCT demonstrated that in type 1 diabetes, in-
tensive insulin treatment (multiple daily injections or CSII 
therapy) improved glycaemic control and reduced reti-
nopathy, nephropathy and neuropathy complication rates. 
Subsequently, the Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions 
and Complications (EDIC) study showed that this effect 
persisted for at least ten years in those subjects who had been 
in the intensive glycaemic control group of the DCCT.
In type 2 diabetes, the UKPDS showed reduced 
­microvascular complications with intensive glucose con-
trol. At long-term follow-up at ten years, early intensive 
glycaemic control continued to reduce the risk of micro-
vascular complications. However, a recent meta-analysis 
demonstrated that intensive glycaemic control in type 2 di-
abetes is associated with a 30% increase in the relative risk 
of severe hypoglycaemia. Several large trials have compared 
the effects of intensive versus standard glycaemic control 
on cardiovascular outcomes in type 2 diabetes. The Action 
in Diabetes and Vascular Disease: Preterax and Diamicron 
Modified Release Controlled Evaluation (ADVANCE) trial 
showed a significant reduction in microvascular outcomes 
(nephropathy and retinopathy) with tightly controlled dia-
betes but no significant reduction in cardiovascular out-
comes. The Veterans Affairs Diabetes Trial (VADT) trial 
found that intensive glycaemic control did not significantly 
lower the incidence of cardiovascular events compared 
with standard glycaemic control. The Action to Control 
Cardiovascular risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) trial found 
increased mortality associated with an intensive glycaemic 
control to a target HbA1c of <42 mmol/mol (<6%), leading 
to the early termination of the trial.
In both type 1 and type 2 diabetes, the effect of in-
tensive control of blood glucose on microvascular 
complications is therefore well established. Although 
the ACCORD, ADVANCE and VADT trials did not 
show any improvement in cardiovascular outcomes 
with intensive control, glycaemic goals should still be 
set because of the adverse microvascular consequences 
associated with poor glycaemic control. Both the ADA 
and the International Diabetes Federation recommend 
individualized targets for each patient and the need to 
balance the risks and benefits of tight control of HbA1c. 
Goals for patients with a history of frequent or severe hy-
poglycaemia, long standing diabetes, the elderly or those 
with limited life expectancy and patients with multiple 
comorbidities will need to be carefully considered. The 
established cardiovascular risk reduction measures such 
as blood pressure control, smoking cessation, lipid low-
ering therapy and healthy lifestyle should continue to 
be recommended as part of an individualized care plan.
Hypoglycaemia
The risk of hypoglycaemia often limits the achievement 
of good glycaemic control in diabetes. Although micro-
vascular and macrovascular complications of diabetes 
typically evolve over a period of several years, hypogly-
caemia may occur quickly, over a few minutes, and the 
consequences may be devastating or permanent. Some 
2–4% of deaths and a much greater proportion of quality 
adjusted life years (QALYs) lost in type 1 diabetes are at-
tributable to hypoglycaemia. Furthermore, the perceived 
danger, inconvenience, embarrassment and helplessness 
associated with hypoglycaemia is considerable, and the 
extent to which an individual patient will risk hypogly-
caemia often influences how they manage their glycaemic 
goals and how they view care for their diabetes. For some 
patients, the risk of hypoglycaemia conflicts with occu-
pational use of a motor vehicle (and hence possibly their 
livelihoods). In other patients (e.g. those with cancer or 
the very elderly), the primacy of goals such as freedom 
from osmotic symptoms and hyperglycaemic emergen-
cies do not necessitate tight glycaemic control.
In addition to the factors mentioned in Table 16.3, it is 
clear that reduced glucoregulatory responses to hypogly-
caemia in patients with type 1 diabetes and longstanding 
TABLE 16.3  Factors that may affect the effect of insulin on blood glucose concentration
Treatment-related factors
Comments
Insulin
Dose, chemical form (human, animal, analogue, lipophilia, tendency to form 
complexes, albumin binding), suspension (protamine zinc etc.), site and 
volume of injection (lipohypertrophy, exercising limbs vs abdominal wall), 
timing in relation to meal (30 min before, immediately before, after), time of 
day (insulin resistance higher in the morning), changes in insulin clearance 
(decreased GFR), accidental intravenous injection of insulin, warming (e.g. 
shower soon after injection), weather or massage of the injection site
Diet and absorption
Glycaemic index, carbohydrate and fat content, missed meals, gastric 
absorption (presence of gastroparesis, drugs causing rapid transit), changes 
in absorption (coeliac disease), extended interval between meals (e.g. 
overnight, special circumstances) and dialysis (glucose removal)
Gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis
Depletion of hepatic glycogen reserves after fasting, inhibitory effects of alcohol 
or other drugs, liver disease
Insulin resistance
Time of day, associated conditions and their treatment (Addison disease, 
hypothyroidism), exercise, intercurrent illness, sleep disturbance, 
mental/emotional/social stress, weight loss, improved metabolic control 
(glucotoxicity), obstetric delivery or intrauterine fetal death (sudden reduction 
in insulin resistance), cessation of steroid therapy
320	
Clinical biochemistry
type 2 diabetes can markedly increase the frequency and 
severity of hypoglycaemic episodes.
In persons without diabetes, the first response to a fall-
ing blood glucose concentration is a reduction in insulin 
secretion; this typically occurs at blood glucose concen-
trations <4.5 mmol/L. This response is not available to 
subjects with type 1 diabetes or to many subjects with 
type 2 diabetes (either insulin or secretagogue treated). 
Glucagon secretion forms the next layer of defence, stim-
ulating hepatic glycolysis and gluconeogenesis. However, 
most patients with either type 1 or type 2 diabetes are 
chronically hyperglucagonaemic and cannot respond to 
hypoglycaemia in this way.
The last level of defence against acute hypoglycaemia is 
activation of the sympathetico–adrenomedullary system, 
which normally occurs when blood glucose falls to <2.8–
3.0 mmol/L. This increases lipolysis and circulating NEFA 
production and utilization, and mobilization of substrates 
for gluconeogenesis further inhibits insulin secretion 
and acts as a stimulus to glucagon release. Importantly, 
activation of the sympathetico–adrenomedullary system 
gives rise to the first clear symptoms of hypoglycaemia. 
With still lower blood glucose concentrations, patients 
also experience symptoms of neuroglycopenia. Although 
neuroglycopenia usually manifests as a generalized phe-
nomenon, focal neurological deficits may occur in the 
setting of relatively normal consciousness and, for this 
reason, capillary blood glucose testing must be performed 
(and any low result confirmed by formal blood glucose 
measurement) in all cases of apparent stroke, confusion 
or other acute neurological disability, and in patients pre-
senting with unexplained seizures.
Patients with diabetes are advised to carry dextrose 
(glucose) tablets or quick acting carbohydrate in case of 
emergency. Parenteral correction of hypoglycaemia may 
be necessary in cases where the patient has lost conscious-
ness or is not able to eat food. An intramuscular glucagon 
injection may be used to correct insulin-induced hypo-
glycaemia. In severe cases of hypoglycaemia, for example 
where the patient is unconscious, intravenous glucose may 
need to be administered by medical personnel. Patients 
who have had recurrent episodes of hypoglycaemia should 
be reviewed by the diabetes team to assess potential causes 
and ways to avoid this from happening.
Hypoglycaemia-associated autonomic failure
Inability to reduce insulin secretion and failure of the glu-
cagon response are described above. At this point, only 
the sympathetico–adrenomedullary responses stand be-
tween the patient and the development of neuroglycope-
nia. Failure of sympathetico–adrenomedullary responses 
can also occur and will lead both to a reduced awareness 
of, and reduced conscious and unconscious response to, 
hypoglycaemia (hypoglycaemia unawareness). Its par-
ticular importance is that it is associated with a greatly 
increased risk (possibly by a factor of 25) of severe hy-
poglycaemia. This potentially serious situation is usually 
amenable to treatment (see below).
Drugs such as β-blockers may interfere both with the 
action of adrenaline (epinephrine) and also with the per-
ception of sympathetico–adrenomedullary activation, 
and should be used with great caution in the context of 
hypoglycaemia unawareness. Autonomic neuropathy may 
lead to reduced sympathetico–adrenomedullary function 
and reduced hypoglycaemia awareness. It is also associ-
ated with unpredictable glycaemic excursions owing to 
erratic intestinal transit times. Perhaps most importantly, 
functional impairment of sympathetico–adrenomedullary 
responses may occur in type 1 or long-standing type 2 dia-
betes in response to preceding hypoglycaemia. Recurrent 
hypoglycaemic episodes lead to altered body responses to 
hypoglycaemia and susceptibility to further episodes.
Hypoglycaemia-associated autonomic failure (HAAF) 
may occur after a single episode of hypoglycaemia, al-
though this is more frequently seen following ­recurrent 
hypoglycaemia. There is evidence to support a role 
for cortisol in mediating HAAF. The hypothalamo–­
pituitary–adrenal axis is stimulated by initial bouts of 
­hypoglycaemia, but the resulting hypercortisolaemia may 
result in impaired adrenaline (epinephrine), noradrena-
line (norepinephrine) and glucagon responses to subse-
quent hypoglycaemia. Muscle sympathetic nerve activity, 
an index of sympathetic ­nervous ­system outflow, is also 
impaired following hypoglycaemia. Infusion of pharma-
cological doses of cortisol in healthy subjects has a similar 
effect on their subsequent hormonal response to insulin-
induced hypoglycaemia. However, this effect has not 
been replicated using lower dose infusions that achieve 
plasma cortisol concentrations similar to those found in 
hypoglycaemia, and ­hypoadrenal subjects without dia-
betes who are treated with fixed physiological cortisol 
replacement doses demonstrate almost complete preser-
vation of counter-­regulatory responses to a subsequent 
episode of hypoglycaemia, calling this hypothesis into 
question. Regardless of the underlying mechanism, how-
ever, management of HAAF is based upon avoidance of 
hypoglycaemia for several days, by slightly relaxing gly-
caemic control, thereby allowing autonomic responses to 
recover.
The principle of antecedent glycaemia affecting subse-
quent responses is further illustrated by the converse phe-
nomenon of ‘clinical pseudohypoglycaemia’ This term 
denotes the observation that some patients with chronic 
hyperglycaemia experience symptoms of hypoglycaemia 
at blood glucose concentrations well in excess of those 
that would trigger responses in individuals with lower 
prevailing blood glucose concentrations. Management of 
this condition is empirical, and should involve measures to 
induce very gradual improvements in glycaemic control.
The Somogyi effect and the dawn phenomenon
After a counter-regulatory response to a hypoglycaemic 
episode (whether or not followed by the administration of 
(sometimes excessive) glucose to reverse the symptoms), 
rebound hyperglycaemia is common. Usual glycaemic 
control, glucose tolerance and insulin sensitivity may take 
several hours to be restored. A special variant of the re-
bound from hypoglycaemia is the Somogyi phenomenon, 
which occurs in patients with nocturnal hypoglycaemia. 
The patient may not be aware of the hypoglycaemia, even 
in retrospect, although awakening with malaise, headache 
and bedclothes damp from sweating are suggestive. The 
	
16  The clinical management of diabetes mellitus	
321
rebound from the nocturnal hypoglycaemia results in 
the patient waking with a blood glucose concentration 
higher than desirable, provoking a temptation to take at 
least as much (or even more) insulin the next night and 
thereby increasing the likelihood of a subsequent episode 
of hypoglycaemia. Detection of this problem requires a 
high level of suspicion and may involve measures such 
as setting the alarm clock in order to self-test, the obser-
vations of another person, or continuous blood glucose 
monitoring.
Subjects without diabetes show circadian changes 
in blood glucose concentration and glucose tolerance 
based upon changes in counter-regulatory hormones, 
insulin secretion and the availability of alternative fuels 
for metabolism. The most marked such circadian effect 
is the ‘dawn phenomenon’, which typically occurs be-
tween 04.00 h and 07.00 h and is an increase in plasma 
glucose concentration and decrease in insulin sensitiv-
ity consequent upon the increased secretion of counter-
regulatory hormones at that time. During this period, 
people with diabetes usually experience modest rises 
(1–2 mmol/L) in plasma glucose concentrations without 
recent ingestion of food. A larger rise is seen in patients 
in whom circulating insulin concentrations are too low 
at this time.
Owing to both the dawn phenomenon and the 
Somogyi effect, there is a risk of hypoglycaemia earlier 
in the night whenever longer-acting insulins, particularly 
when administered in the early evening, are titrated to 
pre-breakfast blood glucose concentrations.
Exercise
A patient’s usual balance between carbohydrate intake 
and insulin requirements may be influenced by physi-
cal activities. The metabolic effects of exercise vary with 
the intensity and duration of that exercise. For example, 
jogging typically elicits an increase in both glucose and 
lipid oxidation, and plasma glucose and NEFA turnover 
increase. In more strenuous exercise, muscle stores of 
glycogen and triglycerides will become depleted. Plasma 
glucose concentrations may increase or decline during 
exercise, depending on the counter-regulatory hormonal 
drive to hyperglycaemia, and whether glycogen reserves 
are adequate.
In healthy subjects, plasma insulin concentrations de-
crease, permitting increased hepatic glucose output to 
limit the fall in blood glucose. In subjects on exogenous 
insulin treatment, insulin concentrations may not fall 
(indeed, there may be a rise if increased skin blood flow 
during exercise increases insulin absorption from subcu-
taneous injection sites) and hence hepatic glucose output 
may not be sufficient to prevent hypoglycaemia. After ex-
ercise, there is a phase of glycogen repletion in liver and 
muscle, and in subjects with diabetes, delayed hypogly-
caemia may be a problem at any time up to several hours 
afterwards.
Strategies to control blood glucose concentrations 
during exercise include adjusting insulin doses that are to 
be taken prior to planned exercise, or ingestion of extra 
carbohydrate before, during or after the exercise. Because 
of the numerous physiological variables involved, it is 
often difficult to predict the best strategy in advance, and 
a system of trial and error with increased frequency of 
blood glucose monitoring may be necessary. Many pa-
tients with diabetes lead active lifestyles as regular physi-
cal exercise is important in improving insulin sensitivity 
and improving and maintaining cardiorespiratory fitness.
Ethanol
Ethanol (alcohol) may inhibit gluconeogenesis; in pa-
tients with diabetes, this may reduce hepatic glucose out-
put sufficiently to provoke hypoglycaemia. Typically, this 
does not occur while the patient is consuming ethanol, 
since most beverages contain adequate carbohydrate to 
prevent this (or the patient eats as well as drinks): ­instead, 
hypoglycaemia occurs during the first two hours after 
alcohol consumption. However, the inhibition of gluco-
neogenesis persists for several hours and a rebound hypo-
glycaemic episode may occur a few hours (typically 2–4) 
after consuming alcohol. If the clinical features of hypo-
glycaemia are dismissed as the consequences of inebria-
tion, then the failure to treat the hypoglycaemia may be 
serious. In addition, the effects of alcohol may impair the 
judgement of an individual with diabetes, who may forget 
to consume carbohydrate after heavy alcohol consump-
tion or fail to adjust their insulin dose in anticipation of 
planned alcohol consumption. It may even be a contribu-
tory cause of ketoacidosis when insulin doses are uninten-
tionally omitted.
Intercurrent illness, ‘sick day rules’  
and stress
Intercurrent illnesses such as viral infections usually cause 
hyperglycaemia in people with diabetes but may also give 
rise to hypoglycaemia. The effect on glycaemic control 
may persist for up to two weeks, and insulin require-
ments, even during simple infections (e.g. colds), may in-
crease by 100%, although increases of ~20% are perhaps 
more typical.
It is likely that many episodes of hyperglycaemic cri-
sis could be prevented by appropriate self-treatment and 
timely medical advice during times of intercurrent illness. 
Treatment plans should ideally be individualized and pre-
pared in advance. Several general principles apply to all, 
however. These include the concepts that:
•	 glycaemic treatment generally requires augmenta-
tion rather than reduction during times of intercur-
rent illness
•	 frequent (e.g. four-hourly) blood glucose testing is 
needed
•	 medical advice should be sought if blood glucose 
concentrations become and remain high despite ap-
propriate measures (e.g. >13–15 mmol/L)
•	 maintenance of good hydration is of the utmost im-
portance.
For patients with type 2 diabetes, metformin should 
probably be discontinued for the duration of any severe 
illness, and a sulfonylurea (or, if necessary, insulin) sub-
stituted in the short term. Patients taking a sulfonylurea 
may require dose increments or the short-term use of 
insulin.
322	
Clinical biochemistry
Patients with type 1 diabetes are at risk of keto-
acidosis and should therefore be advised to test their 
urine regularly (at least twice daily) to ensure no more 
than light to moderate ketonuria is present. Where 
blood ketone testing is available, testing for blood ke-
tones is preferred. Patients should be warned against 
the common misconception that if they are not eat-
ing (e.g. because of vomiting), they should stop taking 
insulin. Instead, essential fluid and glucose may be in-
gested in the form of regular small volumes of soup, re-
hydration fluid or proprietary sugar-­containing drinks. 
Usual doses of basal insulin are continued and the day’s 
bolus (rapid-acting) insulin divided into 4-hourly quo-
tas, which can be adjusted on the basis of self-testing. 
Persistently elevated or rising blood glucose concen-
trations, particularly in the context of ­increasing ke-
tonuria, should prompt contact with an appropriate 
medical advisor or admission to hospital for insulin 
infusion.
In patients with severe intercurrent illness such as sep-
ticaemia, pancreatitis or myocardial infarction (all these 
are more common in diabetes), intravenous insulin is of-
ten required, even in subjects not usually requiring ex-
ogenous insulin treatment. There are now good data to 
support the use of intravenous insulin infusion in such 
circumstances and during major surgery. It is not yet 
clear whether the infusion of insulin per se is of benefit or 
whether tight glycaemic control achieved by any means 
confers similar advantage. These issues are discussed in 
greater detail in a later section.
Emotional stress of many forms will result in changes 
in secretion of counter-regulatory hormones and auto-
nomic tone, which will alter glucose tolerance. Since 
emotional stress is often associated with alterations in 
sleep, eating and exercise patterns, it may be practically 
impossible for patients with diabetes under emotional 
stress to maintain usual glycaemic control.
CHRONIC COMPLICATIONS OF DIABETES
The complications of diabetes can be divided into acute 
and chronic complications. Acute complications include 
hypoglycaemia (discussed above), DKA and the hyperos-
molar hyperglycaemic state (see p. 326). Chronic com-
plications include macrovascular disease (see above), 
retinopathy, nephropathy and neuropathy.
Nephropathy
Diabetic nephropathy is the leading cause of established 
renal failure and the most common diagnosis at initia-
tion of renal replacement therapy. Glomerular damage 
is pathologically described as either diffuse or nodular 
glomerulosclerosis (Kimmelstiel–Wilson lesions). The 
pathological process involves thickening of the basement 
membrane and of the glomerular mesangium with the 
accumulation of extracellular collagen matrix material. 
There is glomerular podocyte loss and tubulointerstitial 
fibrosis. Glomerular hyperfiltration is followed by micro-
albuminuria, proteinuria and subsequent decline in renal 
glomerular function.
Some 20–30% of patients with type 1 diabetes will 
develop renal disease (most commonly 15–25 years af-
ter diagnosis). Risk factors for its development include 
longer duration of disease, an earlier age at diagno-
sis, earlier onset of puberty, poorer glycaemic control 
throughout the time course of the disease, smoking and 
a family history of diabetic nephropathy. Nephropathy 
is probably less prevalent among those with type 2 di-
abetes (10–20% lifetime risk), but seems likely to in-
crease substantially with the increasingly early mean 
age of onset of type 2 diabetes. Diabetic nephropathy 
is screened for by laboratory testing for urine albu-
min excretion (urine albumin/creatinine ratio), serum 
creatinine and estimated glomerular ­filtration rate 
(eGFR). Screening should be performed at least annu-
ally. (Formulae used for the calculation of eGFR are 
discussed further in Chapter 7.)
Microalbuminuria
The early stages of the disease are asymptomatic and 
include hyperfiltration (with urine albumin excretion 
(UAE) <30 mg/24 h or 20 μg/min) followed by progres-
sion through microalbuminuria (UAE 30–300 mg/24 h 
or 20–200 μg/min) to proteinuria (UAE >300 mg/24 h or 
200 μg/min). After proteinuria has become established, 
the glomerular filtration rate (GFR) begins to fall and 
progression to established renal failure is generally inevi-
table, although the rate of loss of renal function may still 
be usefully slowed by treatment.
Differences in historical ten-year progression rates 
from microalbuminuria to nephropathy (~80%), and 
more recent estimates (~30%), lend weight to the hy-
pothesis that aggressive treatment at the stage of mi-
croalbuminuria may be able to halt or even reverse the 
disease in many patients. Thus, the first and best oppor-
tunity to detect the disease clinically is at the stage of 
microalbuminuria. Some would even contend that risk 
associated with UAE is a continuous variable, with de-
tectable increases in morbidity above the normal median 
value of albumin excretion of approximately 2.5 mg/24 h. 
Conventional dip-stick testing of urine is not usually 
positive at such concentrations of albumin excretion. 
Neither this test nor the measurement of 24 h urinary 
protein excretion are now recommended as screening 
tools. Screening should probably take place at the time 
of diagnosis and annually thereafter in type 2 diabetes. 
Although it has traditionally been thought that screening 
could safely be delayed for five years in type 1 diabetes, a 
number of studies have shown significant prevalence be-
fore five years, especially where puberty has intervened 
or in the presence of poor glycaemic control, and many 
physicians now advocate annual screening from diagno-
sis in this group also.
Factors giving rise to falsely elevated results include 
unaccustomed exercise, intercurrent illness, other re-
nal disease, haematuria, acute deterioration in glycae-
mic control and urinary tract infection (which should 
be excluded whenever tests of microalbuminuria are 
positive, see Chapter  8). Furthermore, considerable 
day-to-day variations in urine albumin excretion rates 
mean that a minimum of two spot urine collections for 
	
16  The clinical management of diabetes mellitus	
323
albumin:creatinine ratio over a period of 3–6  months 
should be abnormal before a diagnosis of microalbumin-
uria can be made reliably. It should be noted that the oc-
currence of non-immunoreactive forms of albumin in the 
urine may result in underestimation of the true extent of 
microalbuminuria in some assays. Intermittently positive 
results, especially where occurring frequently without a 
discernible cause, do appear to increase the risk of pro-
gression to definite microalbuminuria. It is important to 
appreciate that microalbuminuria is not just a risk factor 
for the development of nephropathy, but is also an inde-
pendent risk factor for coronary artery disease (indeed, 
one of the most potent risk factors known), being also 
associated with dyslipidaemia, hypertension, endothe-
lial dysfunction and diabetic retinopathy. Patients with 
microalbuminuria should, therefore, undergo intensive 
risk factor modification, and low-dose aspirin is gener-
ally indicated for these patients. There is controversy as 
to whether an increase in blood pressure precedes or is a 
result of the development of microalbuminuria.
Management
Prevention of diabetic kidney disease is of paramount 
importance. It necessitates good metabolic control, ad-
equate treatment of hypertension, avoidance of smok-
ing, lipid-lowering therapy and avoidance of nephrotoxic 
drugs. Intensive glycaemic control delays onset and pro-
gression of albuminuria. However, even with these mea-
sures, data from the UKPDS and DCCT show that a 
significant number of patients will still develop the dis-
ease, albeit at a later stage and with slower progression. 
Thus, the second important feature of management re-
mains early detection of raised UAE, which is discussed 
in detail above.
Good metabolic control may delay the onset of micro­
albuminuria and, once this is present, may halt pro-
gression or even reverse it. In general, antihypertensive 
therapy, maintaining systolic BP <140 mmHg and dia-
stolic <80 mmHg, irrespective of the agent used, slows 
the development of diabetic nephropathy. The UKPDS 
provided evidence that blood pressure control could 
protect against nephropathy. Inhibitors of the renin– 
angiotensin system, i.e. angiotensin-converting-enzyme 
(ACE) inhibitors or angiotensin receptor antagonists 
(ARBs) confer superior long-term protection, probably 
because of a concomitant specific reduction of trans-
glomerular filtration pressure, preventing increases in 
albumin excretion and reducing the severity of protein-
uria. Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibitors reduce 
cardiovascular events and ARBs reduce progression of 
nephropathy. Combination ACE inhibition and ARB 
therapy lowers albuminuria further, but may increase 
the risk of hyperkalaemia and evidence for the clinical 
efficacy of this approach is limited. Increases in plasma 
creatinine concentrations of up to 20–30% from baseline 
are common on starting treatment and, although they do 
not mandate alternative treatments, monitoring of renal 
function is essential.
Dietary protein restriction to 0.8–1.0 g/kg body weight 
per day in early chronic kidney disease (CKD) or 0.8 g/kg 
body weight per day in advanced CKD is recommended. 
Blood pressure control with other agents such as diuret-
ics, calcium channel blockers and β-blockers may be used.
End-stage disease
Despite prevention, detection and aggressive treat-
ment of diabetic nephropathy, a significant proportion 
of patients will nevertheless progress towards estab-
lished renal failure (ERF). Early referral to a nephrol-
ogy service (usually before GFR has fallen to <30 mL/
min/1.73 m
2) will usually be appropriate. Occult cardiac 
disease is common in this group of patients, but its an-
giographic investigation is hazardous owing to the risk 
of contrast nephropathy. Many patients with anaemia 
other than that caused by specific haematinic deficien-
cies will benefit from erythropoietin treatment at hae-
moglobin concentrations of <110 g/L. Management of 
metabolic sequelae such as secondary hyperparathyroid-
ism, acidosis and hyperphosphataemia are, in general, as 
for patients with non-diabetic kidney disease. Treatment 
options for ERF include haemodialysis and renal trans-
plantation, depending on the availability of graft donors 
and compatibility.
Neuropathy
Neuropathy in diabetes has many different manifesta-
tions and can be focal or diffuse. The types of neuropa-
thy include chronic sensorimotor, autonomic, diabetic 
amyotrophy (proximal motor neuropathy) and mono-
neuropathies. An acute neuropathy may also occur in the 
presence of hyperglycaemia (hyperglycaemic neuropa-
thy), possibly as a result of damage to peripheral nerves.
Chronic sensorimotor neuropathy
This is most the common type of neuropathy in patients 
who have had diabetes for a long time. The longest nerves 
are usually affected, with sensory loss in a glove and stock-
ing distribution. The sensory loss is often accompanied by 
loss of power and autonomic involvement. There is loss 
of pain and light touch, with decreased reflexes and mus-
cle wasting in affected parts. Some patients may report 
painful symptoms (e.g. tingling, burning, hyperalgesia or 
allodynia).
Patients should be screened for diabetic neuropathy by 
pinprick tests, using a 10 g monofilament and a 128 Hz 
vibration fork applied to the distal aspects of both feet. 
The diagnosis is often made clinically without the need 
for electrophysiological studies, although these can be 
performed if the diagnosis is uncertain. It is important 
to screen for other, potentially reversible, causes of neu-
ropathy, e.g. vitamin B12 deficiency, alcohol excess, heavy 
metal poisoning and neurotoxic medications, and for 
conditions that may require specific treatment, e.g. de-
myelination. Patients with sensorimotor neuropathy are 
at increased risk of injury to and ulceration of the feet. 
Charcot neuroarthropathy (Charcot foot, see below) is a 
common complication. All patients with peripheral neu-
ropathy should receive regular podiatric assessment and 
advice regarding foot care because of the increased risk of 
foot ulceration.
324	
Clinical biochemistry
Besides optimizing blood glucose control, the treat-
ment for sensorimotor neuropathy includes symptomatic 
pain relief with agents for neuropathic pain such as dulox-
etine, amitriptyline, pregabalin and gabapentin.
Autonomic neuropathy
Autonomic neuropathy is seen in patients with diabe-
tes who have longstanding poor control. Manifestations 
include orthostatic hypotension (a major risk factor 
for falls), constipation, gastroparesis (with nausea and 
vomiting), loss of normal Valsalva response, gustatory 
sweating, resting tachycardia, bladder dysfunction, erec-
tile dysfunction and altered autonomic responses to 
hypoglycaemia.
Diabetic autonomic neuropathy may affect gastro-
intestinal motility: this condition may be occult, or 
manifest as constipation, diarrhoea, unexplained (or 
easily triggered) vomiting or malabsorption. Altered gas-
trointestinal motility may change the rate of absorption of 
nutrients from food. Rapid and unpredictable absorption 
is particularly unwelcome in diabetes and may completely 
undermine the attempts of even a well-motivated patient 
to maintain good glycaemic control. In some cases, dia-
betic ketoacidosis may be provoked as a result of repeated 
vomiting. If gastrointestinal motility can be improved, 
this renders glycaemic control somewhat easier; however, 
such amelioration is usually spontaneous rather than re-
lated to medical intervention. Investigations for gastro-
paresis include the use of isotope scintigraphy to assess 
solid phase gastric emptying. Prokinetic treatments such 
as metoclopramide, domperidone or erythromycin may 
be helpful in some cases to aid motility. Dietary changes 
may be necessary and in severe situations, parenteral nu-
trition may become necessary if adequate nutrition is not 
possible by the enteral route. A gastric pacemaker with 
electrodes that electrically stimulate gastric contractions 
may be used in severe cases.
Patients who are troubled with postural hypotension 
may be prescribed support stockings. In severe cases, 
fludrocortisone (a mineralocorticoid) or midodrine (an 
α-adrenergic agonist) may be used.
Autonomic neuropathy may impair hypoglycaemia 
awareness. This will often result in the patient (very sen-
sibly) avoiding the possibility of severe hypoglycaemia 
and, as a result, glycaemic control may be more difficult 
to achieve. Autonomic neuropathy may be associated 
with increased morbidity and mortality if it affects the 
cardiovascular system. This is manifested by postural hy-
potension and resting tachycardia and is associated with 
an increased risk of cardiovascular events.
Erectile dysfunction and retrograde ejaculation can 
occur in autonomic neuropathy. If the sacral nerves in-
nervating the bladder are affected, patients may suffer 
from bladder dysfunction, with bladder emptying diffi-
culties, incontinence problems and urinary tract infec-
tions. Erectile dysfunction may be caused by multiple 
factors such as vascular disease, neuropathy, medication 
or psychological problems. Besides reviewing these fac-
tors, treatments for erectile dysfunction may include 
phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors, prostaglandins and 
vacuum devices (see Chapter 23).
Mononeuropathies
Mononeuropathies may result from diabetes affecting 
single nerves or, where multiple nerves are affected, a 
mononeuritis multiplex. These include third cranial 
nerve palsies (that may have a vascular aetiology), lateral 
popliteal nerve palsy and carpal tunnel syndrome.
A form of multiple mononeuropathy called diabetic 
amyotrophy may occur. This is caused by a reduction in 
the blood supply to the nerves of the lower limbs, for ex-
ample the femoral nerve or the lumbar plexus, resulting 
in proximal weakness and wasting of muscles in the lower 
limbs. Amyotrophy is associated with poor glycaemic 
control, and optimum glycaemic control is important in 
attaining recovery, which is a slow process. Pain control 
and physiotherapy are helpful.
The feet in diabetes
Foot ulcers
Foot ulceration in patients with diabetes is a common 
cause of morbidity and its complications, such as sepsis, 
may be associated with mortality. Ulcers mainly occur in 
patients who have both diabetic neuropathy and periph-
eral vascular disease. Repeated trauma without recogni-
tion by the patient may cause infection. Foot architecture 
may become distorted because of callus formation, de-
formity and ulceration, leading to a condition called the 
Charcot foot (see below).
Concomitant infection of the feet does not heal 
well owing to repeated unrecognized foot trauma and 
poor vascular circulation. Infective organisms include 
Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus pyogenes and Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa.
Charcot foot
Charcot foot is a specific foot deformity, bilateral in 
approximately 20% of cases, which may arise on the 
background of severe sensory (and probably motor) neu-
ropathy. Often precipitated by minor trauma, the disease 
may progress very rapidly over weeks or a few months, 
beginning with an unstable, warm, red and swollen foot 
(stage 0), the point at which treatment should be initi-
ated for maximum benefit. A ‘fragmentation’ stage (stage 
1) follows, with periarticular fractures, joint dislocation, 
instability and deformity. In the ‘coalescence’ stage (stage 
2), reabsorption of bone debris occurs before finally a 
stable (stage 3), but deformed, foot is left at the end of 
the process.
The exact pathogenesis of this condition remains un-
clear, but abnormal protective motor reflexes may per-
mit the development of abnormal loading forces within 
the foot which, in the presence of sensory neuropathy 
and osteopenia, may damage bone, joints and ligaments. 
Subluxation, or even dislocation, of the metatarsal, tarso–
metatarsal or tarsal joints may occur and swelling may be 
caused by leakage of synovial fluid from joint capsules. 
Bone blood flow is usually substantially increased, per-
haps as a result of abnormal sympathetic control, and this 
may contribute to the osteopenia. Later in the course of 
the disease, bones may become sclerotic. Fractures may 
	
16  The clinical management of diabetes mellitus	
325
cause the tarsal bones to collapse, resulting in an out-
ward bowing of the arch (‘rocker-bottom foot’ defor-
mity), further adding to the abnormal loading and risk 
of ulceration. The foot can be so warm and red that os-
teomyelitis, cellulitis or gout is suspected. Osteomyelitis 
may be particularly difficult to distinguish when a plantar 
ulcer is present and, indeed, may be very likely if there 
are systemic signs of infection or if bone is encountered 
when the ulcer is probed. Plain radiographs usually show 
vascular calcification and bone changes; the latter may 
be difficult to distinguish from osteomyelitis. Magnetic 
resonance imaging or bone biopsy may be required to es-
tablish the correct diagnosis in some cases.
Intravenous bisphosphonates (e.g. pamidronate), total 
immobilization and offloading of the foot (e.g. bed rest, 
pending the fitting of a total contact cast, perhaps for four 
months or longer) and meticulous attention to metabolic 
control are helpful in the acute setting. Bone markers, 
such as serum carboxy-terminal telopeptide of type 1 col-
lagen, a marker of osteoclastic bone resorption, measured 
in venous blood taken from the dorsum of the foot, uri-
nary deoxypyridinoline and bone-specific alkaline phos-
phatase, have been used in studies alongside longitudinal 
measurements of foot temperature to assess the response 
to treatment.
Eye disease
Diabetes is a common cause of visual loss, especially in 
the developed nations. Risk factors for the development 
of diabetic retinopathy include duration of diabetes, poor 
glycaemic control (chronic hyperglycaemia), diabetic 
nephropathy, hypertension, hyperlipidaemia, smoking, 
obesity and rapidly improving glycaemic control, for ex-
ample in pregnancy or when commencing insulin pump 
therapy. Retinopathy is usually present after 20 years of 
diabetes, although the severity varies between patients. 
Patients with diabetic retinopathy are predisposed to cat-
aracts, glaucoma and macular disorders.
Patients with type 1 diabetes should have an eye exami-
nation within five years of diagnosis. The prevalence of 
retinopathy in type 1 diabetes after 10–15 years is 25–50%. 
All patients with type 2 diabetes should be screened when 
diagnosed, reflecting the fact that the presence of type 2 
diabetes may have not been recognized for some time. 
About 60% of patients with type 2 diabetes have non-
proliferative retinopathy. All patients should be screened 
annually, or more frequently depending on the findings. 
Women with diabetes are screened more frequently dur-
ing pregnancy and in the postpartum period because of an 
increased risk of progression of diabetic retinopathy.
Eye examinations should be carried out by an oph-
thalmologist or optometrist experienced at diagnosing 
diabetic retinopathy. In the UK, an annual retinopathy 
screening service is provided for all patients with diabe-
tes. Any patient with progressive retinopathy detected at 
screening is referred to an ophthalmologist for follow-
up investigation and, if necessary, treatment. The UK 
National Retinal Screening Committee classification is 
based on the presence or absence of both retinopathy 
(graded from R0 to R3) and maculopathy (graded M0 or 
M1) (see Box 16.1).
Initially, there is an increase in retinal perfusion. 
Background retinopathy denotes the formation of micro-
aneurysms and hard exudates. Flame-shaped or dot and 
blot haemorrhages may follow should the microaneu-
rysms rupture. Retinal capillaries may leak. Leakage into 
the macular region may cause maculopathy. Maculopathy 
is characterized by the formation of hard exudates in 
close proximity to the fovea, along with oedema and isch-
aemia of the macula region. It is more common in type 2 
than type 1 diabetes and is the commonest cause of loss 
of vision.
Preproliferative retinopathy is diagnosed on the ba-
sis of the presence of cotton wool spots (soft exudates), 
intraretinal microvascular anomalies and venous loops 
with arterial occlusion. Soft exudates occur when there 
is infarction of the nerve fibre layer. Intraretinal micro-
vascular anomalies result from dilated capillary beds from 
capillary occlusion. Continued retinal ischaemia and hy-
poxia resulting from small vessel occlusion triggers the 
release of angiogenic factors such as vascular endothelial 
growth factor (VEGF). Neovascularization of the reti-
nal vasculature leads to proliferative retinopathy. These 
newly formed vessels are vulnerable to rupture, leading 
to intraocular vitreal haemorrhages and visual loss. The 
neovasculature is associated with fibrous tissue that may 
cause traction on, and detachment of, the retina or cause 
haemorrhage from vessel tear. New vessel formation on 
the iris is known as rubeosis iridis and may lead to glau-
coma. Proliferative retinopathy is more common in type 
1 diabetes with a prevalence of ~25% after 15 years.
Tight glycaemic and blood pressure control reduces 
the incidence and progression of diabetic retinopathy. 
However, improving glycaemic control should be a 
gradual process as a transient worsening of retinopathy 
has been reported with rapid improvements in glycae-
mic control. Smoking should be discouraged. Treatment 
with xenon or argon laser photocoagulation is effective 
in reducing visual loss in proliferative retinopathy and 
maculopathy. The photocoagulation aims to destroy hy-
poxic retinal tissue. Pan-retinal photocoagulation may be 
performed in patients with severe proliferative retinopa-
thy. Focal laser photocoagulation is applied to macular 
oedema and leaking vessels. However, this treatment 
cannot reverse vision that has already been lost prior to 
treatment. Following therapy, some patients experience 
BOX 16.1	
The UK national screening 
programme for diabetic 
retinopathy classification system
  R0  –  No retinopathy
  R1  –  Background changes (microaneurysms, exudates not 
involving the macula)
  R2  –  Preproliferative changes (venous abnormalities, intra-
retinal microvascular anomalies (IRMA), soft exudates)
  R3  –  Proliferative retinopathy (new vessel formation, vitre-
ous haemorrhage, rubeosis iridis)
M0  –  No referable maculopathy
M1  –  Maculopathy requiring referral to ophthalmology 
(macular haemorrhages, macular exudates and macular 
oedema or ischaemia)
326	
Clinical biochemistry
visual field constriction and night blindness. Vitrectomy 
may be carried out in patients with vitreous haemor-
rhage and this improves visual recovery. New thera-
pies for macular oedema currently under investigation 
include intravitreal steroid injections and use of VEGF 
antagonists. Intravitreal steroid injections may be used 
where there is persistent loss of vision and when conven-
tional treatment has failed. This therapy is effective but 
the adverse effects include an increased risk of cataracts 
and raised intra-ocular pressure. Concerns about chronic 
VEGF inhibition relate to neurotoxicity and thrombo-
embolic events, such as myocardial infarction, stroke and 
thromboembolism.
Other complications
Brittle diabetes
Brittle diabetes is a term with no universally accepted 
definition. In 1977, Tattersall used a clinical definition, 
describing ‘The patient whose life is constantly being dis-
rupted by episodes of hypo- or hyperglycaemia, whatever 
their cause’. This definition has been modified by various 
workers.
Causes of brittle diabetes include: psychological ab-
normalities, such as eating disorders (e.g. bulimia), 
personality disorders, communication disorders and 
manipulative behaviour. Such factors are often inferred 
if good glycaemic control can be achieved in hospital by 
the use of intravenous or nurse-administered subcutane-
ous insulin. If intravenous insulin therapy fails to achieve 
good glycaemic control, then an organic cause should be 
sought. These include: an unsuitable insulin regimen, 
intercurrent illness such as thyroid disease, Addison dis-
ease, systemic lupus erythematosus (through antibodies 
to insulin or its receptor), disorders of intestinal motility 
(erratic absorption of food) and interactions with other 
drugs (prescribed or non-prescribed). Problems related 
to insulin injections, such as faulty technique, abnormali-
ties of local anatomy (e.g. lipohypertrophy) or subcutane-
ous tissue blood flow (e.g. during exercise) and changing 
insulin requirements in the various phases of the men-
strual cycle, are well-recognized causes.
Type 4 renal tubular acidosis
Hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism (type 4 renal tubu-
lar acidosis, RTA) may be a manifestation of diabetic ne-
phropathy, particularly in older patients. It presents with 
a hyperchloraemic, hyperkalaemic metabolic acidosis, 
which is out of proportion to any impairment in renal 
function. Type 4 RTA is frequently unmasked by inhibi-
tion of the renin–angiotensin system by ACE inhibitors 
or ARBs, particularly when used in combination with 
other agents that may increase plasma potassium concen-
trations (e.g. spironolactone). The precise nature of the 
defect in this condition is unclear. Failure of renin secre-
tion to increase in response to posture or sodium restric-
tion suggests an interstitial (juxtaglomerular) defect, but 
no anatomical correlate has been described to account for 
this. The failure of aldosterone release to be stimulated 
directly by the resulting hyperkalaemia suggests the pos-
sibility of concomitant dysfunction of the adrenal zona 
glomerulosa, although this may simply be a consequence 
of chronic hyporeninaemia.
When hyperkalaemia is modest and stable (serum po-
tassium concentration <6.0 mmol/L), close ­observation 
may be all that is required, but more marked elevations 
demand measures such as stopping offending drugs 
(ACE inhibitors/ARBs, β-blockers, non-steroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs, potassium-sparing diuretics etc.); 
prescription of a low potassium diet (potassium restric-
tion); use of potassium-wasting diuretics (thiazides, loop 
diuretics) and/or sodium bicarbonate (although this risks 
causing oedema). A differential diagnosis of autoimmune 
hypoadrenalism may require exclusion (especially in 
younger subjects with type 1 diabetes). In the occasional 
particularly severe and refractory case, treatment with 
fludrocortisone may be necessary.
EMERGENCIES IN DIABETES
General medical emergencies (e.g. stroke) in persons 
with diabetes are usually treated much in the same way 
as in subjects without diabetes, although frequent moni-
toring of blood glucose is necessary. Specific diabetic 
emergencies are discussed as specific entities, although 
mixed forms may occur. Diabetic emergencies are com-
mon in clinical practice and the approach to such patients 
requires an accurate diagnosis of the condition and ap-
propriate management.
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is a serious complication 
of type 1 diabetes and can be life-threatening. It is char-
acterized by hyperglycaemia, acidosis and ketonaemia. 
Approximately 30% of patients with type 1 diabetes mel-
litus present with ketoacidosis. Fortunately, the onset 
in newly presenting patients tends to be slower than in 
known diabetic subjects, perhaps because of retention of 
some residual insulin secretion. An infection is found in 
~35–55% of patients with ketoacidosis. Errors or omis-
sions in treatment account for another 30%. The clinical 
features include dehydration, shock, vomiting, abdominal 
pain, acidosis (with compensatory Kussmaul respiration 
and, in some cases, a breath odour of ketosis) and im-
paired consciousness.
Four mechanisms predispose to ketoacidosis: insulin 
deficiency, counter-regulatory hormone excess, fasting 
and dehydration. Of these, the most important is insu-
lin deficiency. Mechanisms of the development of DKA 
are shown in Figure 16.1. In a vicious cycle, hypergly-
caemia and excess lipolysis cause dehydration and high 
circulating concentrations of NEFAs. The resulting 
acidosis and dehydration further increase the secre-
tion of ­counter-regulatory hormones. The acidosis, 
dehydration, counter-regulatory hormones and excess 
lipolysis induce insulin resistance, thereby increasing 
hyperglycaemia and lipolysis. Protein catabolism and 
hypertriglyceridaemia also occur and compound the 
situation.
Rarely, patients may present with normoglycaemic 
ketoacidosis; typically, this occurs in situations where 
	
16  The clinical management of diabetes mellitus	
327
exercise, starvation or, occasionally, infection is the major 
precipitant of ketosis, but more often it is seen when a 
patient has taken enough insulin in a bolus to bring the 
blood glucose down but has not been exposed to suffi-
cient insulin over a long enough period to suppress keto-
genesis while existing ketones are cleared. The important 
differential diagnosis of alcoholic ketoacidosis should be 
considered under these circumstances (see below), par-
ticularly when a malnourished patient embarks on heavy 
alcohol consumption for a period of several days. Despite 
the unfortunate use of the term ‘diabetic coma’, it is rare 
for a patient with DKA to have true coma as opposed 
to some clouding of the sensorium. Where this occurs, 
alternative causes such as bacterial meningitis or a cere-
brovascular event should be actively considered in the 
differential diagnosis.
Biochemical features
Biochemical features of DKA include hyperglycaemia, 
ketosis (ketonaemia and ketonuria), metabolic acidosis 
and uraemia. Creatinine concentrations may not accu-
rately be measurable in the presence of heavy ketonaemia. 
The characteristic ketosis is a consequence of increased 
lipolysis and decreased fat synthesis. Excess acety1-CoA 
derived from β-oxidation of fatty acids is converted to the 
ketone bodies, acetoacetate and β-hydroxybutyrate with 
some decarboxylation of the former to acetone.
Bedside tests may demonstrate high blood glucose 
concentrations, glycosuria and ketonuria. Plasma β-
hydroxybutyrate concentrations are typically three times 
higher than those of acetoacetate and the ratio may be 
even greater if there is also an element of lactic acido-
sis, so that the degree of ketosis may be underestimated 
or not recognized by urine tests for acetoacetate (see 
Chapter 15). This is also important in charting the recov-
ery from ketoacidosis where ketonuria (detection of ace-
toacetate) may increase at a time when the patient is, by 
all other measures, improving and ketonaemia resolving. 
This effect occurs as mitochondrial redox state improves 
under conditions of increased tissue oxygen delivery and 
reduced acidosis, favouring the formation of acetoacetate 
from β-hydroxybutyrate. Some typical biochemical re-
sults in ketoacidosis are shown in Box 16.2.
Management
The key to successful management of ketoacidosis is 
early institution of therapy and repeated clinical and 
biochemical assessment of the patient. The essential el-
ements of the treatment of ketoacidosis are to replace 
fluid losses and to reverse the underlying metabolic dis-
order with continuous intravenous infusion of insulin. 
Ketone clearance occurs mainly through renal excretion 
and oxidation.
General measures. As with other medical emergencies, 
initial stabilization with attention to airway, breathing and 
circulation should precede detailed assessment. It is rec-
ommended that venous (rather than arterial) blood gases 
and hydrogen ion concentration (pH), and bicarbonate 
and potassium concentrations should be used to guide 
management. Appropriate investigations including blood 
culture and chest X-ray should be undertaken where in-
fection is suspected, but the finding of a neutrophil leu-
kocytosis does not, of itself, imply its presence. Although 
abdominal pain and a slightly elevated amylase activity 
FIGURE 16.1  ■ Vicious circles in ketoacidosis and hyperosmolar 
states. In both conditions, the trigger event(s) causes an initial 
inadequate insulin supply and hyperglycaemia. In ketoacidosis, 
both acidosis and dehydration cycles occur. Features in italics 
are restricted to ketoacidosis. GFR, glomerular filtration rate.
BOX 16.2	
Typical initial laboratory values in 
diabetic ketoacidosis
•	 Plasma [glucose] ~35 mmol/L
•	 Plasma [K
+] >5.3 mmol/L: whole body depletion typically 
6.0 mmol/kg body weight
•	 Plasma [Na
+] ~130 mmol/L: whole body depletion typi-
cally 8.0 mmol/kg body weight
•	 Plasma [urea] >15 mmol/L
•	 Plasma [creatinine] >150 μmol/L (if possible to measure 
in the presence of heavy ketonaemia)
•	 Plasma [ketones] (β-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate) 
>15 mmol/L
•	 Plasma [Mg
2+] <0.70 mmol/L: whole body depletion typi-
cally 0.5 mmol/kg body weight
•	 Plasma [phosphate] >1.2 mmol/L: whole body depletion 
typically 1.0 mmol/kg body weight
•	 Plasma amylase 500–1000 U/L
•	 Plasma osmolality ~325 mmol/kg: whole body water de-
pletion typically 75–100 mL/kg body weight, i.e. 7 L in 
typical adult
•	 Arterial blood gases:
•	 [H
+] >50 nmol/L (pH <7.30)
•	 PaCO2 <3.52 kPa
•	 PaO2 >12 kPa
•	 	
 <18 mmol/L
•	 Anion gap
	
>20 mmol/L
[HCO ]
3
−
([
]
[
])
[
]
Na
K
([Cl ]
HCO
)
3
+
+
−
−
+
−
+
328	
Clinical biochemistry
do not necessarily point to the presence of pancreatitis 
or other intra-abdominal emergency, the possibility that 
DKA may have been precipitated by abdominal disease 
should be borne in mind.
Fluids. Fluid replacement aims to restore circulatory vol-
ume (and thereby increase the rate of ketone clearance) 
and correct electrolyte imbalances. There is disagree-
ment as to the optimal rate and type of fluid replacement 
in DKA, partly based on fears of provoking cerebral oe-
dema. In the UK, 0.9% saline is commonly used as the 
fluid of choice for initial replacement as this is available 
readily and comes with ready mixed potassium at the 
­required concentrations if this is required. The disadvan-
tage of using 0.9% saline is that of hyperchloraemic met-
abolic acidosis, which may lead to a slower recovery from 
acidosis because of renal vasoconstriction. Hartmann’s 
solution is often less readily available and contains a fixed, 
relatively low, potassium concentration.
Paediatric guidelines recommend cautious fluid re-
placement over 48 h. For adults, initial fluid replacement 
is usually rapid in the first few hours, but this should be 
done with caution in young adults (see below, where their 
greater risk of cerebral oedema is explained).
When blood glucose concentrations fall below 
14 mmol/L, it is important to commence an infusion of 
10% glucose to prevent hypoglycaemia while the insulin 
infusion is continued (normoglycaemia is often attained 
before the ketosis and acidosis resolves).
United States’ authorities advocate a ‘correction’ of 
measured serum sodium concentration for the dilution 
that results from osmotic movement of intracellular 
water to the hyperglycaemic interstitial and intravas-
cular compartments. Various formulae have been sug-
gested, but perhaps the most widely accepted is to add 
1.6 mmol/L to measured serum sodium concentration 
for every 5 mmol/L that the plasma glucose concentra-
tion exceeds 5 mmol/L. If the corrected sodium starts to 
rise above the reference range, a switch to 0.45% saline 
should be considered. The possibility that the hypertri-
glyceridaemia sometimes encountered in DKA may give 
rise to pseudohyponatraemia should also be considered, 
particularly if the plasma is visibly lipaemic.
In general, fluid replacement of ~6 L over the first 
24 h with attention to correcting shock very rapidly at the 
outset, and thereafter reducing the replacement rate, is 
appropriate for most patients. Polyuria, if still present, 
will not abate immediately after the start of therapy, so it 
is important to infuse enough fluid to achieve a positive 
fluid balance.
Insulin. The objective is to provide sufficient insulin for 
suppression of ketogenesis without causing precipitate 
falls in blood glucose or unnecessary hypokalaemia as a 
result of the insulin-driven intracellular movement of po-
tassium. In practice, the insulin infusion rate required to 
achieve this objective will vary between patients, and over 
time in the same patient, as ketone clearance reduces ke-
tone body-induced insulin resistance. However, a starting 
rate of 0.1 U/h per kg body weight is typical. The rate can 
be increased if recovery is slow. Initial bolus insulin doses 
are no longer recommended.
Patients who are normally on a long-acting basal in-
sulin (detemir or glargine) should continue on their sub-
cutaneous injections in order to provide a basal supply of 
insulin; this will facilitate better glycaemic control when 
they eventually revert back to their normal subcutaneous 
insulin regimens when the intravenous insulin infusion is 
discontinued.
Previously used variable insulin infusion rates (‘slid-
ing scales’) are no longer used. They were designed to 
correct blood glucose as rapidly as possible, rather than 
to permit sufficient insulin to be infused to suppress ke-
togenesis for as long as it takes to oxidize or excrete the 
ketones already present in the circulation. The danger 
was, ­therefore, that large insulin doses were given in the 
first few hours, resulting in either too rapid a fall in blood 
glucose, and the need to switch to 10% glucose before 
sufficient saline replacement had been given or in a need 
to reduce the infusion rate to a level that is insufficient to 
suppress ketogenesis.
It should be noted that the major determinants of 
blood glucose reduction early in DKA are expansion of 
its volume of distribution and restoration of a normal 
glomerular filtration rate, rather than insulin-mediated 
glucose uptake into insulin-sensitive cells.
Potassium, magnesium and phosphate. Although 
whole body potassium depletion is universal in DKA, the 
initial serum potassium concentration may be low, nor-
mal or high. Potassium should not be given until it is clear 
that the patient is passing urine and renal function has 
been assessed. Potassium concentrations may fall precipi-
tously with insulin treatment and frequent monitoring is 
necessary, especially during the early stages of therapy. In 
general, initial replacement rates of 5–20 mmol/h (typi-
cally 10 mmol/h), depending on the serum potassium 
concentration, are appropriate if the serum potassium is 
within the reference range. Replacement should be with-
held if the potassium concentration is >5.5 mmol/L; if it 
is <3.3 mmol/L, a higher rate of infusion may be required 
(with cardiac monitoring), and insulin infusion may need 
to be suspended.
Phosphate and magnesium concentrations may also fall 
after the start of treatment. Although there is no hard evi-
dence to support the routine use of phosphate replacement 
in DKA, there is good reason to suppose that severe hy-
pophosphataemia (i.e. <0.35 mmol/L) may be deleterious. 
Consequences of severe hypophosphataemia include re-
spiratory and other muscle weakness, haemolytic anaemia 
and reduced cardiac systolic function; these probably re-
sult from reduced generation of ATP because of substrate 
limitation. Severe hypophosphataemia is more likely to 
occur when DKA is superimposed upon chronic malnutri-
tion. It seems reasonable to suggest that severe, symptom-
atic, hypophosphataemia should be treated under such 
circumstances, e.g. with 20 mmol in 1 L intravenous fluid 
over several hours. Some authorities recommend that po-
tassium replacement be given as a mixture of the chloride 
(2/3) and phosphate (1/3) salts throughout.
Bicarbonate. The use of bicarbonate to correct acido-
sis is not recommended. This is because of the risks of 
hypokalaemia, hypocalcaemia, paradoxical increase in 
	
16  The clinical management of diabetes mellitus	
329
­cerebrospinal fluid acidosis, worsening intracellular aci-
dosis and hypoxia (via a left shift in the oxygen dissocia-
tion curve), a possible increase in cerebral oedema risk 
(see below), delay in the fall in blood lactate concentra-
tion and increased ketogenesis.
Cerebral oedema. Cerebral oedema is one of the most 
feared complications of ketoacidosis, occurring particu-
larly frequently in children and adolescents in whom it is 
the leading cause of death in the condition. It occurs in ~1% 
of cases of DKA in children and adolescents and ­carries a 
mortality of up to 90%, despite aggressive ­treatment with 
mannitol, intubation and mechanical ventilation. The 
most consistent associations with the subsequent devel-
opment of cerebral oedema are more severe acidosis at 
presentation, the larger amounts of insulin administered 
in the first hour and higher volumes of fluid given in the 
first four hours. Contrary to popular suspicion, no asso-
ciation with initial serum sodium concentration (whether 
or not corrected for glucose) has consistently been shown, 
although it has been suggested that those who develop ce-
rebral oedema may have a tendency to lower corrected 
sodium concentrations as treatment progresses.
Resolution. 
Once 
serum 
bicarbonate 
exceeds 
­18–20 mmol/L, the focus of management should re-
vert to control of blood glucose, and intravenous insulin 
is continued using a sliding scale. Subcutaneous insulin is 
recommenced once the patient is eating and does not re-
quire intravenous insulin for other reasons (e.g. sepsis). As 
­discussed above, an apparent increase in ketosis, on the ba-
sis of urine dip-stick testing for ketones, is not necessarily 
significant, and need not direct therapy at this stage if all 
other parameters are satisfactory.
After an episode of ketoacidosis, patients should al-
ways be considered insulin dependent and treated with 
insulin (even if they were not originally). Steps to reduce 
the risk of further episodes should be taken if appropriate 
(e.g. reinforcement of education, change of therapy).
Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state
Presentation and clinical features
The hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state (HHS) was 
formerly known as hyperosmolar non-ketotic hypergly-
caemia. The clinical features are dehydration, severe hy-
perglycaemia (blood glucose usually >30 mmol/L) and a 
hyperosmolar state (serum osmolality >330 mmol/kg). By 
definition, ketosis is not significant with urine ketones of 
less than ‘+’ or blood ketones <1.0 mmol/L. Blood hydro-
gen ion concentration is usually <50 nmol/L (pH > 7.3) 
with a normal bicarbonate, although coexistent lactic 
acidosis from sepsis or myocardial infarction may lead to 
more severe acidosis. Patients may present with osmotic 
symptoms such as polyuria, polydipsia, thirst, weight loss 
and vomiting, and are dehydrated. Drowsiness and coma 
may occur as a result of the high plasma osmolality; inad-
equate volume replacement leads to acute kidney injury, 
and mortality is higher than in DKA.
The HHS occurs mainly in older subjects with type 2 
diabetes and most cases occur above the age of 60 years. 
About half of patients have not been previously diag-
nosed with diabetes. Many cases arise from late presenta-
tion of diabetes with coincident cardiovascular events or 
infections (most commonly pneumonia or urinary tract 
sepsis). The cycle of hyperglycaemia, dehydration and 
increased counter-regulatory hormones, coincident with 
a history of osmotic symptoms, is similar to that which 
occurs in DKA, but may be more severe because of later 
presentation owing to the absence of significant ketoaci-
dosis. The characteristic hypernatraemia (see Box 16.3) is 
caused by renal sodium resorption in response to hypo-
volaemia, together with osmotic diuresis and glycosuria 
causing persistent free water loss. The HHS usually oc-
curs in subjects with only marginal insulin deficiency, and 
their insulinaemia allows sufficient glucose uptake and 
anti-lipolytic effect to prevent the lipolytic and ketotic 
problems seen in ketoacidosis.
Management
The management of HHS is similar to that of DKA. 
Fluid replacement is the mainstay of treatment but 
careful monitoring is necessary in order to avoid fluid 
overload, which may result in complications such as pul-
monary oedema. Insulin requirements are usually less in 
HHS than in DKA. The plasma glucose concentration 
typically declines relatively quickly after the institution 
of insulin therapy, since patients are usually less acutely 
insulin-resistant than ketoacidotic patients. Rehydration 
will expand the volume of distribution of glucose, low-
ering its concentration, and restoration of a good urine 
output will permit glucose to be excreted in the urine in 
significant quantities (up to some 250 mmol/L). Together 
with insulin-independent uptake into tissues, the result 
is that blood glucose concentration tends to fall fairly 
rapidly with initial resuscitation, even if no insulin is ad-
ministered. Rapid falls in plasma glucose or osmolality 
may predispose to cerebral oedema by encouraging the 
movement of water from plasma into the central nervous 
system, and most authorities recommend that the blood 
BOX 16.3	
Typical initial laboratory values in 
the hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic 
state
•	 Glucose ~60 mmol/L
•	 Plasma [K
+] ~4.0 mmol/L: whole body depletion typically 
10.0 mmol/kg body weight
•	 Plasma [Na
+] ~155 mmol/L: whole body depletion typi-
cally 8.0 mmol/kg body weight
•	 Plasma [urea] ~55 mmol/L
•	 Plasma [creatinine] ~400 μmol/L
•	 Whole body water depletion typically 80–120 mL/kg 
body weight, i.e. 8 L in typical adult
•	 Arterial blood gases:
•	 [H
+] <50 nmol/L (pH >7.30)
•	 PaCO2: normal
•	 PaO2: normal (low if venous thromboembolism or 
pneumonia)
•	 [HCO ]
3
− ~18 mmol/L (typically mildly elevated blood 
lactate)
•	 Anion gap <20 mmol/L
330	
Clinical biochemistry
glucose concentration should if possible be reduced at 
a rate of no more than ~3 mmol/L/h. For this reason, 
insulin infusion is only required at very low rates (e.g. 
0.5–1 U/h) in the initial stages of treatment. Controversy 
exists as to the ideal choice of fluid replacement. While 
some advocate the use of hypotonic fluids (e.g. 0.45% sa-
line) after ­restoration of adequate intravascular ­volume, 
others argue that normal (0.9%) saline is, in effect, hy-
potonic to the patient’s plasma and is less likely than 
­hypotonic saline to cause rapid falls in plasma osmolality 
that may increase the risk of cerebral oedema.
One of the major problems in the treatment of HHS 
is the severe hypernatraemia that often supervenes in the 
hours after the initiation of therapy. Commencing treat-
ment with fluid and insulin usually induces a decrease in 
plasma glucose and urea concentrations, and, therefore, 
osmolality. However, hypernatraemia typically develops 
during this period, since the falling osmolality allows 
water to re-equilibrate into dehydrated cells while free 
water loss through the kidneys continues. Since there is 
less acidosis and more profound dehydration, plasma 
potassium deficits are typically less than those occurring 
in DKA. The intravascular volume depletion increases 
plasma viscosity, resulting in a hypercoagulable state and 
stroke, venous thrombosis and myocardial infarction are 
common causes of mortality. Heparin is, ­therefore, rec-
ommended as prophylaxis against thrombosis. Comor­
bidities that may have precipitated the episode should be 
treated; for example, infections may require antibiotic 
treatment.
After successful treatment of HHS, the severity of 
residual glucose intolerance may be very mild and the 
patient can often be successfully managed on diet alone, 
although many will be discharged on insulin initially. 
Patients should be educated on steps to avoid provoking 
factors in the future. At all stages, it is important to in-
volve the diabetes team in the management of patients 
with HHS.
Other metabolic acidoses
In diabetic subjects, the vast majority of episodes of acido-
sis are diabetic ketoacidosis. Other metabolic acidoses are 
comprehensively discussed in Chapter 5. The differential 
diagnosis of a metabolic acidosis in a diabetic subject may 
occasionally be troublesome if one forgets that patients 
with diabetes may sometimes develop acidosis as a result 
of other conditions, such as severe infection, renal failure 
and salicylate poisoning. Diagnostic problems may also 
arise where there is a mixed picture (e.g. diabetic keto-
acidosis and lactic acidosis secondary to sepsis, or alco­
holic ketoacidosis occurring in a patient with diabetes). 
Metformin-associated lactic acidosis and type 4 renal tu-
bular acidosis have been discussed earlier in this chapter.
Alcoholic ketoacidosis
Alcoholic ketoacidosis is included here, as it occasionally 
presents a difficult differential diagnosis from DKA (par-
ticularly given that the latter may occasionally present 
with an only marginally elevated blood glucose concen-
tration) and the treatment is different in several important 
regards. This condition presents with ketoacidosis and 
low, normal or slightly elevated plasma glucose concen-
trations (rarely >12 mmol/L). Patients usually have long-
standing poor nutritional intake with an alcohol binge of 
several days’ duration, often associated with vomiting.
Ketosis is promoted by lack of insulin action in the 
setting of starvation, permitting mobilization of NEFAs 
that provide the substrate for ketone body formation 
as an alternative fuel. Low insulin concentrations pre-
vent ketone body utilization by insulin-sensitive tissues 
and dehydration impairs ketone excretion by kidneys. 
Hypercortisolaemia and high growth hormone and cat-
echolamine concentrations enhance the fatty acid re-
lease and hepatic ketogenesis consequent upon insulin 
deficiency.
Ketogenesis is potentiated by inhibition of hepatic 
metabolism of acetylcoenzyme A, owing to the action 
of counter-regulatory hormones such as glucagon, cor-
tisol and catecholamines secreted in response both to 
the hypoglycaemia and also to extracellular fluid volume 
contraction (which also restricts urinary ketone elimina-
tion). In addition, alcohol metabolism depletes cellular 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD
+). An increased 
ratio of NADH to NAD
+ increases the proportion of β-
hydroxybutyrate relative to acetoacetate. It also restricts 
pyruvate formation from lactate, leading to accumulation 
of lactate and depletion of pyruvate, a gluconeogenic sub-
strate. As is the case in DKA, alterations in mitochondrial 
redox state favour β-hydroxybutyrate over acetoacetate 
production. A complex acid–base disorder ensues from 
the combined effects of ketosis causing metabolic acido-
sis, and a combination of extracellular fluid contraction 
and vomiting causing metabolic alkalosis, with the final 
[H
+] (pH) thus not necessarily reflecting the severity of 
the metabolic derangements present. Treatment differs 
from diabetic ketoacidosis in that insulin is not required 
(except if patients have coexistent diabetes), and glucose 
infusion (which must be preceded by thiamine repletion) 
forms the mainstay of therapy, together with fluid and 
electrolyte replenishment.
MANAGEMENT OF DIABETES IN THE 
HOSPITAL SETTING
The management of diabetes in the hospital setting pres-
ents a number of challenges and has the potential to af-
fect patient outcomes. Good glycaemic control has an 
established role in promoting recovery from infection, 
improving wound healing, and, in obstetric delivery, to 
prevent neonatal hypoglycaemia. In the first Diabetes 
Mellitus Insulin–Glucose Infusion in Acute Myocardial 
Infarction (DIGAMI 1) Study, insulin-based compared 
with conventional glucose-lowering management im-
proved survival in patients with acute myocardial infarc-
tion and type 2 diabetes. The benefit of insulin treatment 
was not confirmed in the second DIGAMI trial (DIGAMI 
2), in which insulin was associated with an increased risk 
of nonfatal cardiac events, while metformin appeared to 
be protective against risk of death. Therefore, the type of 
glucose-lowering treatment used may influence the clini-
cal outcome.
	
16  The clinical management of diabetes mellitus	
331
There is mixed evidence concerning mortality and the 
use of intensive insulin therapy in order to achieve tight 
glycaemic control in the hospital setting. Recent data sug-
gest that the use of intensive insulin therapy does not re-
duce mortality or length of hospital stay compared with less 
strict control, and may increase the risk of hypoglycaemia. 
This may reflect the increased prevalence of ‘stress hyper-
glycaemia’ in hospitalized patients, or be because altered 
insulin action per se in the seriously ill affects the prognosis.
Many patients admitted to hospital will require changes 
to be made to their diabetes treatment, at least temporar-
ily. These changes may be made necessary by the need to 
fast, the use of agents such as glucocorticoids or inotropes 
(which can directly affect blood glucose concentration), 
when receiving radiographic contrast material (requiring 
care in the use of metformin), where there is temporarily 
increased risk of acute kidney injury or other conditions 
associated with lactic acidosis (also with metformin, see 
Table 16.1) or during myocardial ischaemia (possibly pos-
ing a risk with some sulfonylureas). Some patients whose 
blood glucose concentrations are elevated during an 
acute illness, but who either were not previously known 
to have diabetes or whose blood glucose concentrations 
subsequently return to levels below the threshold for dia-
betes diagnosis may have ‘stress hyperglycaemia’.
Hospitalization presents the opportunity for a review 
of overall diabetes management and education: indeed, 
for some patients, such an opportunistic intervention may 
represent their only formal contact with diabetes services. 
It also presents an opportunity to screen for diabetes in a 
relatively high-risk population.
The perioperative management of patients with diabe-
tes is to minimize changes in glycaemia brought about by 
the stress of surgery. Most hospitals will have formal pro-
tocols for glucose control pre- and post-surgery. Patients 
with type 1 diabetes will need to be on insulin at all stages 
to prevent diabetes ketoacidosis. Patients with type 2 dia-
betes will usually be able to manage on their oral agents, 
but may require insulin depending on the nature of the 
surgical procedure. Following surgery, once oral intake is 
adequate, most patients will be able to recommence their 
original treatment regimens.
PREGNANCY
For both mother and fetus, diabetes can profoundly af-
fect the pregnancy in terms of metabolism and outcomes. 
Specific factors influencing the management of women 
who are pregnant include the presence of coexisting ill-
ness, whether they have gestational or pre-existing diabe-
tes and whether they are likely to deliver in the relatively 
near future.
With pre-existing diabetes, appropriate preconceptual 
counselling and care is vital if a baby is planned so that 
glycaemic control and blood pressure are optimized and 
medications not recommended in pregnancy (for example 
statins, ACE inhibitors) are replaced. The ADA recom-
mends a preconception HbA1c of <53 mmol/mol (7%). 
Lipid control is by dietary measures. Folic acid is pre-
scribed to reduce the risk of neural tube defects. These 
measures increase the chances of successful conception 
and lower the risk of complications such as congenital 
anomalies and miscarriage (Boxes 16.4 and 16.5).
In pregnancy, regular surveillance is important: gly-
caemic control should be monitored with regular mea-
surement of blood glucose concentrations. Pregnancy 
induces a state of insulin resistance, leading to hypergly-
caemia. This can lead to fetal malformation, macrosomia 
with attendant delivery complications, increased peri-
natal mortality and premature delivery. Strict glycaemic 
targets are set which increases the risk of hypoglycaemia. 
Retinal screening is important in patients because of the 
increased risk of progression of diabetic retinopathy. 
Tight preprandial and postprandial glycaemic targets are 
advised: NICE recommendations are <5.9 mmol/L fast-
ing and <7.8 mmol/L after meals.
Insulin requirements generally rise during pregnancy 
because, as the pregnancy progresses, there is a reduction 
in insulin sensitivity, driven by human placental lactogen. 
This change serves to divert nutrients and the products 
of maternal lipolysis (fatty acids and ketones) to the fetus. 
It is important to recognize that a sudden fall in usual in-
sulin requirements may be a sign of changes in placental 
function that herald impending delivery, and close liaison 
with the obstetric team is required.
During labour, it is important to monitor the mother’s 
blood glucose concentrations; maternal hyperglycaemia 
is treated by intravenous insulin and dextrose infusions. 
On delivery of the placenta, insulin resistance dramati-
cally declines towards non-pregnant values. Patients with 
type 1 diabetes and those with type 2 diabetes who were 
previously on insulin pre-pregnancy revert to their pre-
pregnancy insulin regimens. Those with pre-existing 
type 2 diabetes previously on oral glucose-lowering treat-
ment who wish to breast feed may wish to continue on 
either metformin or insulin (if they were taking this dur-
ing pregnancy). Patients with gestational diabetes or diet-
treated pre-existing type 2 diabetes do not require any 
medication postpartum, unless other factors, for example 
BOX 16.5	
Potential complications for the 
mother associated with diabetes in 
pregnancy
•	 Progression of diabetic retinopathy
•	 Worsening of gastroparesis
•	 Progression of diabetic nephropathy
•	 Complications at delivery owing to infant macrosomia
BOX 16.4	
Potential complications for the 
infant associated with diabetes in 
pregnancy
•	 Congenital malformation
•	 Polyhydramnios
•	 Macrosomia
•	 Intrauterine growth restriction
•	 Intrauterine mortality and still birth
•	 Neonatal hypoglycaemia
•	 Postpartum mortality
•	 Potentially, diseases such as obesity and diabetes in later life
332	
Clinical biochemistry
sepsis or surgery, dictate otherwise. Metformin is safe 
whilst breastfeeding. Arrangements should be made for 
women with gestational diabetes to have an oral glucose 
tolerance test approximately six weeks postpartum if pre-
discharge blood glucose values are satisfactory. Women 
with gestational diabetes have an approximately 50% life-
time risk of developing type 2 diabetes, and should be 
advised on diabetes prevention and recognition as well as 
being screened regularly for life.
CONCLUSION
Successful clinical management of diabetes mellitus re-
quires an understanding of the effects of diet and exercise 
on glycaemic control. Type 2 diabetes is responsible for 
most cases of diabetes, and as ~80% of patients will die 
from macrovascular disease, it is essential to provide opti-
mal management of all cardiovascular risk factors, includ-
ing dyslipidaemia and hypertension.
The long-term management of patients with diabetes 
also aims to reduce the risk of the microvascular compli-
cations that affect the kidneys, nerves and eyes. Clinicians 
need to be skilled in strategies that reduce these risks and 
in the identification and management of complications 
when they occur.
Optimization of treatment with the growing range of 
hypoglycaemic agents depends in part on having a good 
understanding of their mechanisms of action. Advances 
in the formulation of insulin and production of insulin 
analogues also offers patients the possibility of improved 
glycaemic control. Effective management of blood glu-
cose concentrations reduces risks of chronic complica-
tions and is particularly important during intercurrent 
severe illness and pregnancy.
The acute diabetic emergencies of diabetic ketoacido-
sis and the hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state are still 
associated with significant morbidity and mortality. Their 
management depends on careful adherence of treatment 
protocols that are based on clear pathophysiological prin-
cipals. Appropriate, frequent biochemical monitoring of 
patients with these emergencies is essential to a successful 
outcome.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The authors wish to acknowledge the contributions of Dr 
Victor Lawrence and Dr Simon Coppack, the authors of 
this chapter in the second edition of this book.
Further reading
Gardner DG, Shoback D, editors. Greenspan’s basic & clinical 
endocrinology. 9th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2011.
Holt RIG, Cockram C, Flyvbjerg A et al. editors. Textbook of diabetes: 
A clinical approach. 4th ed. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell Scientific; 
2010. 
A comprehensive account of all aspects of diabetes.
The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Research Group. 
The effect of intensive treatment of diabetes on the development 
and progression of long-term complications in insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus. N Engl J Med 1993;329:977–86. 
A report of a multicentre, randomized study, which supports the 
desirability of achieving near-normal plasma glucose concentrations in 
patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus.
United Kingdom Prospective Diabetes Study. Intensive blood-glucose 
control with sulfonylureas or insulin compared with conventional 
treatment and risk of complications in patients with type 2 diabetes 
(UKPDS 33). Lancet 1998;352:837–52. 
This study provides the evidence for the benefit of tight glycaemic control 
on the risk of microvascular complications in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Wass JAH, Stewart PM, Amiel SA et  al. editors. Oxford textbook 
of endocrinology & diabetes. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press; 2011.
333
C H A P T E R   1 7
Hypoglycaemia
Mourad H. Labib
CHAPTER OUTLINE
GLUCOSE HOMOEOSTASIS IN THE FED AND THE 
­POSTABSORPTIVE STATES  333
HYPOGLYCAEMIA  334
The neuroendocrine response to 
hypoglycaemia 
334
Symptoms of hypoglycaemia 
335
CLASSIFICATION OF HYPOGLYCAEMIC  
DISORDERS  335
PRACTICAL APPROACH TO THE INVESTIGATION 
OF HYPOGLYCAEMIA  336
Evaluation of hypoglycaemia in persons 
­without diabetes mellitus 
336
Investigation of hypoglycaemia 
336
Evaluation of hypoglycaemia in patients  
with diabetes mellitus 
340
EMERGENCY TREATMENT OF 
HYPOGLYCAEMIA  341
CAUSES OF HYPOGLYCAEMIA  341
Surreptitious administration of  
hypoglycaemic agents (factitious  
or felonious hypoglycaemia) 
341
Islet cell tumours (insulinoma) 
341
Non-insulinoma pancreatogenous 
­hypoglycaemia syndrome (NIPHS) 
343
Non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia 
(NICTH) 
343
Autoimmune hypoglycaemia 
344
Hypoglycaemia associated with renal 
impairment 
344
Hypoglycaemia associated with liver 
disease 
345
Hypoglycaemia due to endocrine 
deficiencies 
345
Drug-induced hypoglycaemia 
346
Alcohol-induced hypoglycaemia 
346
Hypoglycaemia due to deficient energy 
intake 
347
Septicaemia 
347
Exercise-related hypoglycaemia 
347
Postprandial (reactive) hypoglycaemia 
347
The postprandial syndrome 
347
Inherited metabolic disease 
348
CONCLUSION  348
GLUCOSE HOMOEOSTASIS IN THE FED AND 
THE POSTABSORPTIVE STATES
In healthy subjects, the blood glucose concentration 
is maintained within relatively narrow limits through a 
tightly controlled balance between glucose production 
and glucose utilization. Fundamentally, glucose is derived 
either from dietary intake (in the fed state) or from gly-
cogenolysis and gluconeogenesis (in the fasting or posta-
bsorptive state). It is metabolized by oxidation or stored 
either in the form of glycogen or through conversion to 
fat (Fig. 17.1).
Plasma glucose regulation is a complex process in-
volving both insulin-dependent and insulin-independent 
mechanisms. This regulation is a multi-organ process in-
volving the gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, liver, muscles, 
adipose tissue, brain and kidneys. In the gastrointestinal 
tract, incretin hormones (see below), secreted in response 
to meals, promote glucose-mediated insulin secretion 
and suppress glucagon production. In the liver, insulin 
regulates blood glucose concentrations by suppressing 
hepatic glucose output and increasing postprandial glu-
cose storage in the form of glycogen. In muscle and adi-
pose tissue, insulin binding to insulin receptors leads to 
increased expression of glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4) 
molecules in the cell membrane, facilitating glucose up-
take. Insulin-independent mechanisms that contribute 
to glucose ­regulation are located in different organs, 
but mainly in the gastrointestinal tract and the kidneys. 
Sodium–glucose cotransporters (SGLT), such as SGLT1 
in the gastrointestinal tract and SGLT2 in kidney, are im-
portant mediators of insulin-independent glucose trans-
port across cell membranes.
In response to nutrient ingestion, glucagon-like pep-
tide (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic 
peptide (GIP) are released from enteroendocrine cells. 
Glucagon-like peptide-1 enhances glucose-­dependent 
insulin secretion and inhibits glucagon secretion. 
334	
Clinical biochemistry
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic peptide also stimu-
lates glucose-dependent insulin release, and the com-
bined actions of GLP-1 and GIP account for up to 
60% of the overall postprandial insulin secretion. The 
increase in glucose and insulin concentrations results in 
stimulation of glycogen synthase and inhibition of gly-
cogen phosphorylase, causing a net increase in hepatic 
glycogen. Approximately 50% of an oral glucose load 
is taken up by the liver and 50% by peripheral insulin-
sensitive tissues. Three to four hours following a meal, 
glucose and insulin concentrations decline and the liver 
switches from net glucose uptake to net glucose release. 
Hepatic glucose release continues to increase over the 
next several hours until it equals glucose utilization. 
Initially, about 75% of glucose production is attribut-
able to glycogenolysis and 25% to gluconeogenesis, but 
as hepatic glycogen stores decline, the proportion from 
gluconeogenesis increases steadily.
During the early postabsorptive phase, glucose utiliza-
tion continues at the rate of 0.10–0.14 mmol/kg per min, 
of which 40–50% is due to obligatory uptake by the brain 
and other non-insulin-dependent tissues. With pro-
longed fasting, the decline in plasma insulin concentra-
tion is accompanied by increases in plasma free fatty acid 
and ketone body concentrations. These can be used as 
alternative fuels, thereby decreasing the need for glucose.
HYPOGLYCAEMIA
The definition of hypoglycaemia is somewhat arbitrary 
since the glycaemic threshold at which symptoms occur 
differs between individuals, and depends on the age of 
the patient and the prevailing plasma glucose concentra-
tion before the hypoglycaemic episode. A venous plasma 
glucose concentration <3.0 mmol/L, regardless of the 
presence or absence of symptoms, has been recom-
mended as the biochemical definition of hypoglycaemia 
by The Endocrine Society in the USA. However, many 
apparently healthy people, especially women, may have 
plasma glucose concentrations <3.0 mmol/L during a 
prolonged fast without experiencing any symptoms. 
Conversely, diabetic patients may develop hypoglycae-
mic symptoms at higher plasma glucose concentrations. 
Therefore, the diagnosis of pathological hypoglycae-
mia necessitates the demonstration of Whipple’s triad. 
This consists of: (1) either symptoms or signs, or both, 
consistent with hypoglycaemia in the presence of (2) a 
low plasma glucose concentration, with (3) the relief of 
symptoms or signs after the plasma glucose concentra-
tion is raised.
The neuroendocrine response 
to hypoglycaemia
Under normal metabolic conditions, in the unstressed 
state, the central nervous system (CNS) is wholly depen-
dent upon glucose as its primary source of energy. The 
brain requires approximately 150 g of glucose each day, 
which must be continuously available. The presence of 
hypoglycaemia triggers a complex and well-coordinated 
metabolic process aimed at limiting and preventing a 
further fall in blood glucose concentration. The extent 
and duration of hypoglycaemia are primary factors in de-
termining the magnitude of this counter-regulatory re-
sponse, but other factors, such as age, sex, rate of fall of 
blood glucose and insulin per se have also been shown to 
influence the response.
In healthy subjects, the initial response to prevent a 
decline in blood glucose concentration is a reduction 
in insulin secretion, which begins while the plasma 
glucose concentration is falling but still within the 
physiological range. This is followed by an increase 
in glucagon and adrenaline (epinephrine) secretion as 
the glucose concentration declines further. Glucagon, 
secreted by pancreatic α-cells, rapidly raises plasma 
glucose concentration by stimulating hepatic glucose 
production via glycogenolysis and gluconeogenesis. 
The activation of the autonomic nervous system, 
mainly the sympathetic, increases the concentrations 
of noradrenaline (norepinephrine) at nerve terminals 
and adrenaline in the circulation. Adrenaline acts on 
α- and β-adrenergic receptors at several end organs 
and results in a more sustained increase in blood glu-
cose concentration. It reduces insulin secretion from 
the pancreatic islets, increases glycogenolysis and 
gluconeogenesis in liver, increases glycolysis in mus-
cle and increases lipolysis in adipose tissue. Hepatic 
glycogen stores provide glucose, particularly for the 
brain, whereas the mobilization of fatty acids from 
fat depots provides energy for tissues that can utilize 
fatty acids as their basic fuel, for example skeletal and 
cardiac muscles, renal cortex and liver, thus sparing 
glucose for use by the CNS.
FIGURE  17.1  ■  Glucose homoeostasis in the fed and fasting 
states.
	
17  Hypoglycaemia	
335
As blood glucose concentration declines further, hypo­
thalamic sensing of hypoglycaemia results in increased 
secretion of growth hormone (GH) and adrenocorti-
cotropic hormone (ACTH) and, consequently, cortisol. 
The increase in GH and cortisol secretion induces meta-
bolic changes over longer periods of time by stimulating 
lipolysis in adipose tissue and ketogenesis and gluconeo-
genesis in the liver.
The glycaemic thresholds for the activation of these 
responses are higher than those for the development 
of symptoms or the impairment of cognitive function. 
With falling plasma glucose concentrations, the typical 
sequence of responses (and their glycaemic thresholds) 
is as follows: decrease in endogenous insulin secre-
tion (4.4 mmol/L); increase in glucagon and adrenaline 
(3.8 mmol/L); increase in GH secretion (3.7 mmol/L); 
increase in cortisol secretion (3.2 mmol/L); development 
of symptoms (3.0 mmol/L), and impairment of cognitive 
function (2.5 mmol/L).
Symptoms of hypoglycaemia
The symptoms of hypoglycaemia are non-specific and 
vary depending on the degree of hypoglycaemia, the ra-
pidity of the decline in blood glucose, the age of the 
patient, whether the hypoglycaemia is clinical or ex-
perimental, and on patients’ differing perceptions of 
­symptoms. The symptoms differ from one person to 
another, but are usually consistent from episode to epi-
sode for any one person. In some patients, symptoms 
are mainly due to activation of the sympathetic ­nervous 
system (neurogenic or autonomic), but in others only 
symptoms due to brain glucose deprivation per se 
may be observed. All the symptoms of hypoglycaemia, 
­however, reflect the effects of glucose deprivation on the 
CNS (neuroglycopenia).
Acute neuroglycopenia (neurogenic)
This is characterized by sweating, anxiety, hunger, tremor, 
palpitations and weakness (Box 17.1). These symptoms 
result mainly from activation of the sympathetic ner-
vous system and characteristically occur when there has 
been a rapid decline in blood glucose concentration. It 
may occur in patients with diabetes owing to excessive 
absorption of exogenous insulin, either from overtreat-
ment or from rapid mobilization from the injection site 
during exercise. In non-diabetic subjects, reactive hyper-
secretion of insulin may be responsible, for example after 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass for obesity. Awareness of hypo-
glycaemia is mainly the result of the perception of neuro-
genic symptoms which may be lost in patients with type 
1 diabetes mellitus (hypoglycaemia unawareness). The 
symptoms of acute neuroglycopenia may mimic those of 
anxiety attacks or hyperventilation.
Subacute neuroglycopenia
Symptoms range from a generalized decrease in spontane-
ous activity, poor concentration, episodic disorientation, 
confusion, incoordination, slurred speech and behavioural 
changes, to seizures, focal neurological signs and coma 
(Box 17.1). Patients with subacute neuroglycopenic symp-
toms have been misdiagnosed as having epilepsy, transient 
ischaemic attacks, psychosis, hysteria, chronic nervous ex-
haustion, personality disorder or inebriation.
Chronic neuroglycopenia
Chronic neuroglycopenia is very rare and may occur in 
patients with insulin-secreting tumours unsuspected for 
years. Symptoms include insidious progressive mental 
disturbance that may resemble personality disorders, 
schizophrenia, paranoid psychosis, depression or demen-
tia (Box 17.1).
CLASSIFICATION OF HYPOGLYCAEMIC 
DISORDERS
Several classifications of hypoglycaemia are possible, for 
example aetiological, ketotic or non-ketotic, a classifi-
cation based on the timing of symptoms in relation to 
meals (fasting or postprandial) or whether hypoglycae-
mia occurs in a healthy person or one who has an illness.
The usefulness of classifying hypoglycaemic disorders 
based on the timing of symptoms in relation to meals has 
been questioned because some conditions that are associ-
ated with fasting hypoglycaemia, such as insulinoma, may 
also produce symptoms postprandially, and post-gastric 
bypass patients, who typically have postprandial hypogly-
caemia, may have symptoms when fasting. Also, patients 
with factitious hypoglycaemia may have symptoms that 
have no clear relationship to food intake. In view of this, 
a classification which is based on the clinical characteris-
tics, i.e. on whether hypoglycaemia occurs in a seemingly 
well individual or an ill or medicated individual, is more 
useful (Box 17.2).
BOX 17.1	
Symptoms of hypoglycaemia 
(Neuroglycopenia)
Acute
Subacute
Chronic
Sweating
Anxiety
Hunger
Nausea
Tremulousness
Weakness
Palpitations
Restlessness
Reduction of spontaneous 
activity
Behavioural change
Tiredness/somnolence
Dizziness
Poor concentration
Incoordination
Headache
Blurred vision
Slurred speech
Disorientation/confusion
Amnesia
Paraesthesia
Weakness/transient 
hemiplegia
Seizures
Coma
Personality 
changes
Defective 
memory
Depression
Psychosis
Dementia
336	
Clinical biochemistry
PRACTICAL APPROACH TO THE INVESTIGATION 
OF HYPOGLYCAEMIA
Evaluation of hypoglycaemia in persons 
without diabetes mellitus
The direction of investigation will depend essentially 
on the clinical presentation and whether the patient ap-
pears ill or not. Hospitalized patients are often severely 
ill with multisystem disease. In such cases, the underly-
ing illnesses that can produce episodes of hypoglycae-
mia, such as severe renal or hepatic disease, congestive 
cardiac failure, sepsis and anorexia nervosa, are usually 
obvious clinically. A review of all medications is essential 
since drugs (see below) are a common cause of hypogly-
caemia in hospitalized patients, particularly in the pres-
ence of renal impairment. Non-islet cell tumours causing 
hypoglycaemia are usually, though not invariably, large 
mesenchymal tumours that are clinically apparent. In 
these cases, confirmation of the suspected mechanism of 
the hypoglycaemia may be sought by measuring plasma 
insulin, C-peptide, proinsulin and β-hydroxybutyrate 
(β-OHB) concentrations during an episode of hypogly-
caemia. Endocrine deficiencies such as hypopituitarism 
and adrenocortical insufficiency should be sought and ex-
cluded by appropriate investigations if necessary.
In a seemingly well individual, with no obvious co-
existing disease, the direction and extent of evaluation 
will depend on the clinical presentation. A thorough and 
detailed history of the symptoms (frequency, type, rela-
tionship to meals and exercise) is therefore essential. If 
symptoms are relieved by food ingestion, it is important 
to enquire about the type of food and speed of recov-
ery. All medications should be inspected to exclude a 
prescribing or dispensing error, and the possibility of 
surreptitiously induced hypoglycaemia should always 
be considered, especially in healthcare professionals and 
relatives and carers of diabetic patients. Assessment of 
alcohol intake and pattern of drinking is important, since 
alcohol can cause both fasting and reactive hypoglycae-
mia. A history of previous gastric surgery or Roux-en-Y 
gastric bypass surgery for obesity and a family history of 
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN 1) should be 
sought. Symptoms in individuals of Japanese or Korean 
ethnicity may point to autoimmune hypoglycaemia.
Investigation of hypoglycaemia
The aims of the investigation are, first, to demonstrate 
that hypoglycaemia is the cause of the symptoms and, 
second, to identify the cause of the hypoglycaemia 
(Fig. 17.2).
Demonstration of hypoglycaemia
Measurement of blood glucose during spontaneous 
symptoms. Measurement of the blood glucose concen-
tration (and collection of a suitable blood specimen for 
subsequent measurement of plasma insulin, C-peptide, 
proinsulin and β-OHB concentrations) during sponta-
neous symptoms, and before glucose is given, is without 
doubt the best test for the diagnosis of spontaneous hypo-
glycaemia. The most practical way to obtain an accurate 
glucose concentration is to measure glucose immediately 
in whole blood or to separate plasma from cells within 
30 min of collection, even if the specimen is collected in a 
tube that contains sodium fluoride. It is well recognized 
that the rates of decrease of glucose in the first hour after 
specimen collection in tubes with or without fluoride are 
virtually identical. The reduction in glucose after 2 h in 
a fluoride tube can sometimes exceed 0.5 mmol/L lead-
ing to a falsely low blood glucose concentration or ‘pseu-
dohypoglycaemia’. In addition, although arteriovenous 
plasma glucose concentration differences are negligible 
in the fasting state, antecubital venous plasma glucose 
concentrations are significantly lower than arterial glu-
cose ­concentrations after a glucose load owing to glucose 
extraction across the forearm. Therefore, arterialized 
blood collected from a vein at the back of the hand, which 
has been warmed by a heat pad, is preferred.
Often, however, patients referred for a medical opin-
ion are asymptomatic when seen in the outpatient clinic, 
and measuring their blood glucose concentration at such 
time is usually unhelpful. In this situation, reproduc-
ing the circumstances which may lead to hypoglycaemia 
should be attempted. In patients with a history sugges-
tive of fasting hypoglycaemia, a prolonged fast test should 
be performed, whereas in patients who only experience 
symptoms of hypoglycaemia within a few hours of hav-
ing a meal, a mixed meal test should be performed (see 
provocation tests, below).
Provocation tests
Prolonged fast test. The prolonged fast (up to 72 h) 
is the single most useful investigation employed in the 
evaluation of patients with suspected spontaneous hy-
poglycaemia. The aim of the investigation is to dem-
onstrate spontaneous hypoglycaemia in the presence 
of neuroglycopenic symptoms and the resolution of 
the symptoms when the plasma glucose concentration 
BOX 17.2	
Clinical classification of 
­hypoglycaemic disorders in adults
Ill, hospitalized or medicated individual
•	 Drugs (insulin or insulin secretagogues, alcohol, 
others)
•	 Major organ failure (chronic kidney disease, ­congestive 
cardiac failure, liver failure)
•	 Sepsis (including malaria)
•	 Inanition (anorexia nervosa or starvation)
•	 Non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia (NICTH)
•	 Hormone deficiencies: cortisol (Addison disease)
Seemingly well individual
•	 Insulinoma
•	 Non-insulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycaemia syn-
drome (NIPHS)
•	 Insulin autoimmune hypoglycaemia (antibody to insulin 
or insulin receptor)
•	 Factitious or accidental hypoglycaemia (induced by 
­insulin or insulin secretagogues)
	
17  Hypoglycaemia	
337
is raised to within normal limits. During a prolonged 
fast, normal subjects rarely develop plasma glucose 
concentrations <3.0 mmol/L and almost never de-
velop neuroglycopenic symptoms.
The fast must be conducted in hospital under strict 
medical supervision. Before initiation of the fast, a 
simple assessment of coordination, recent memory and 
calculations (e.g. counting down in sevens) should be 
performed as a baseline. The time for initiating the fast 
is determined depending on a reasonable estimate of 
the patient’s likely tolerance for fasting. If fasting starts 
after the evening meal or at midnight, the majority of 
patients with insulinoma will develop hypoglycaemia 
by the middle of the following day, when adequate 
staff and laboratory facilities are available. Patients 
should have an intravenous indwelling catheter, and 
an ampoule of 50% glucose solution should be readily 
available. During the test, the patient is allowed water 
and non-caloric beverages and should undertake brisk 
exercise under supervision. Blood, for glucose, insu-
lin, C-peptide, proinsulin and β-OHB measurements, 
is collected at the beginning of the test, and every 
4–6 h thereafter. Plasma glucose should be determined 
in the laboratory as soon as possible ­after collection, 
and plasma or serum should be stored at  –20 °C for 
subsequent analysis of insulin, C-peptide, proinsulin 
and β-OHB if required. Bedside glucose meters can 
be used to monitor the patient’s blood glucose con-
centration frequently, but low values, especially in the 
absence of symptoms of hypoglycaemia, should always 
be confirmed in the laboratory. When the plasma glu-
cose has fallen to <3.0 mmol/L, blood should be collected 
more frequently and the ­patient should be assessed for 
neuroglycopenia by repeating the same tests performed 
at the initiation of the fast. If neuroglycopenic symptoms 
develop and blood glucose is <3.0 mmol/L, several spec-
imens should be obtained for plasma glucose, insulin, 
C-peptide, proinsulin and β-OHB measurements 
Screen for sulfonylureas and 
insulin secretagogues  
Anti-insulin antibodies 
Localization studies 
Depend on clinical picture, e.g.
- Plasma β-OHB, alcohol
- Serum cortisol 
- Serum IGF-1/IGF-2
Plasma β-OHB  
Anti-insulin antibodies
Anti-insulin receptor antibodies
Exogenous insulin 
Autoimmune insulin syndrome 
(anti-receptor antibodies) 
Major organ failure
NICTH 
Endocrine deficiencies 
Drugs (including alcohol) 
Inanition
Insulinoma  
Insulin secretagogues 
NIPHS 
Post gastric bypass 
Autoimmune insulin syndrome 
During spontaneous symptoms or
during a mixed meal test  
During spontaneous symptoms or
during a prolonged fast  
History
Suggestive of postprandial
hypoglycaemia 
Suggestive of fasting
hypoglycaemia
Documentation of
hypoglycaemia 
Documentation of
hypoglycaemia  
Identification of the cause 
Insulin
C-peptide and proinsulin
Insulin, C-peptide
and proinsulin  
Insulin, C-peptide and 
proinsulin
b-OHB 
Further investigations 
FIGURE 17.2  ■  A practical approach to the investigation and diagnosis of hypoglycaemia (β-OHB, β-hydroxybutyrate; NIPHS, non-
insulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycaemia syndrome; NICTH, non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia; IGF-1 and IGF-2, insulin-like 
growth factors 1 and 2).
338	
Clinical biochemistry
before any remedial action, such as glucose adminis-
tration, is taken. At the end of the fast, a sample should 
be collected to screen for hypoglycaemic agents and 
to measure insulin antibodies. A glucagon test (1.0 mg 
intravenously) has also been recommended (see be-
low). The criteria to stop the test before 72 h are: (1) 
Whipple’s triad has been observed; (2) plasma glu-
cose concentration <3.0 mmol/L in a patient who 
had previously experienced Whipple’s triad, and (3) 
plasma β-OHB >2.7 mmol/L. The measurement of 
β-OHB concentrations in real-time during the fast 
is quite useful because a progressive rise in plasma 
β-OHB concentrations indicates indirectly that the 
circulating insulin concentration has been suppressed 
and that the fast can be terminated. However, blood 
should always be collected in this situation to confirm 
suppressed plasma insulin, proinsulin and C-peptide 
concentrations.
In patients with insulinoma, about 40% develop hypo-
glycaemia within 12 h, 75% within 24 h, 95% by 48 h and 
99% by 72 h.
Glucagon stimulation test. This test serves as a supple-
mental study in the diagnosis of hypoglycaemic disorders 
when results from the prolonged fast are inconclusive. 
The rationale is that, in patients with insulinoma, there 
is a greater increase in plasma glucose after intravenous 
glucagon due to the lesser depletion of hepatic glycogen 
during the fast as a consequence of the higher insulin 
secretion. The test is performed at the termination of 
a prolonged fast test, either at the time of occurrence 
of symptomatic hypoglycaemia with concomitant plasma 
glucose concentration <3.0 mmol/L, or after 72 h of fast. 
Glucagon 1 mg is injected intravenously over 2 min and 
plasma glucose is measured at baseline, 10, 20 and 30 min 
after the glucagon injection. An increase in plasma glu-
cose concentration of ≥1.4 mmol/L after intravenous 
glucagon indicates mediation of the hypoglycaemia by 
insulin. A disadvantage of this test is the danger of caus-
ing severe hypoglycemia after 90–180 min.
Mixed meal test. This test is used to investigate pa-
tients who experience only postprandial symptoms. 
The meal has not been standardized but, ideally, a meal 
similar in composition to the meal that usually provokes 
symptoms should be used. Plasma glucose concentration 
is monitored every 30 min for 5 h and also at any time 
while the patient is symptomatic. Capillary or arterial-
ized blood (see above) should be used, since postpran-
dial venous plasma glucose ­concentrations are about 10% 
lower than arterial concentrations owing to extraction 
of glucose by muscle. Samples should also be collected 
every 30 min for insulin, C-peptide and proinsulin mea-
surement but should only be analysed if they have been 
collected at the time when plasma glucose concentration 
was <3.0 mmol/L and before administering carbohy-
drates. Patients should be observed for symptoms, and 
the timing of these symptoms in relation to the meal, 
and to the blood glucose concentrations, should be docu-
mented. If Whipple’s triad is demonstrated, a sample for 
the measurement of oral hypoglycaemic agents and insu-
lin antibodies should be collected. Patients who develop 
neuroglycopenic symptoms during hypoglycaemia, but 
not at other times during the test, may be considered to 
have postprandial hypoglycaemia. However, in all patients 
with a positive mixed meal test, additional testing, includ-
ing a supervised 72 h fast, is recommended. Postprandial 
hypoglycaemia without fasting hypoglycaemia has been 
documented in some patients with insulinoma and in pa-
tients with non-insulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycae-
mia (see p. 343).
The diagnosis of postprandial hypoglycaemia should 
not be made on the basis of an oral glucose tolerance test 
(OGTT). At least 10% of ‘normal’ subjects may have 
plasma glucose nadirs of <2.6 mmol/L during an OGTT 
and 2.5% may have values <2.2 mmol/L. Moreover, 
symptoms during OGTT are often unrelated to the level 
of plasma glucose nadir or to the rate of decline of the 
glucose concentration.
Identification of the cause of hypoglycaemia
Plasma insulin, C-peptide and proinsulin. Although 
insulin and C-peptide are secreted in equimolar amounts 
by the β-Cells of the pancreas, the metabolic clearance 
of insulin is much more rapid than that of C-peptide. 
Therefore, C-peptide has a longer half-life and is pres-
ent in peripheral blood in higher molar concentrations 
than insulin, making it less prone to marked fluctuations. 
Consequently, the measurement of plasma C-peptide 
concentrations may be more reliable as an indication of 
endogenous insulin production. However, as C-peptide is 
cleared by the kidneys, raised concentrations may occur 
in renal impairment.
Intact proinsulin undergoes enzymatic process-
ing leading to production of des-31,32-proinsulin 
and des-64,65-proinsulin and then to insulin and 
C-peptide. Some proinsulin assays specifically mea-
sure intact proinsulin whereas others measure ‘total 
proinsulin’, i.e. intact and other molecules such as 
des-31,32-proinsulin. Therefore, proinsulin results 
depend strongly on the assay used and should be inter-
preted with caution. In islet cell tumours, the amount 
of circulating proinsulin is increased and, occasionally, 
tumours may secrete mainly or exclusively proinsulin. 
A plasma proinsulin concentration ≥5.0 pmol/L, when 
the plasma glucose concentration is <2.5 mmol/L dur-
ing a 72 h fast test, represents the best criterion for 
the diagnosis of endogenous hyperinsulinaemia with 
100% specificity and sensitivity. In view of this, the 
Endocrine Society has now recommended the mea-
surement of plasma proinsulin as a first-line test, in ad-
dition to insulin and C-peptide.
Insulin and C-peptide can be measured in either 
plasma (lithium heparin) or serum, as long as the se-
rum or plasma is separated within 15 min of collection 
and frozen immediately following separation. Plasma 
insulin concentrations can be artefactually modified 
by heterophilic antibodies, endogenous anti-insulin 
antibodies or haemolysis, as red blood cells contain an 
insulin-degrading enzyme, which may lead to underes-
timation of the actual insulin concentrations in haemo-
lysed samples.
The measurement of plasma insulin, C-peptide and 
proinsulin concentrations, in the presence of hypogly-
caemia, is the most useful test in identifying the cause 
	
17  Hypoglycaemia	
339
of hypoglycaemia (see Fig. 17.2). Raised plasma insulin 
(≥18 pmol/L), C-peptide (≥200 pmol/L) and proinsulin 
concentrations (≥5.0 pmol/L) in the presence of hy-
poglycaemia (plasma glucose <3.0 mmol/L) indicate 
­endogenous hyperinsulinaemia. Causes of endogenous 
hyperinsulinaemia include insulinoma, non-insulinoma 
pancreatogenous hypoglycaemia syndrome (NIPHS), 
autoimmune 
insulin 
syndrome, 
­sulfonylurea- 
or 
­meglitinide-induced hypoglycaemia, non-islet cell insulin-
secreting tumours and reactive insulin-mediated hypogly-
caemia in post-gastric bypass surgery patients. Factitious 
­sulfonylurea-induced and meglitinide- (glinide-) induced 
hypoglycaemia may produce an identical clinical and bio-
chemical picture to insulinoma. Therefore, screening for 
these drugs is essential if a false positive diagnosis of insu-
linoma is to be avoided.
Inappropriately raised plasma insulin concentrations 
in the presence of low or suppressed plasma C-peptide 
and proinsulin concentrations will identify patients 
with exogenous insulin administration. Therefore, it is 
important to use insulin assays that can detect the pres-
ence of insulin analogues. Another rare cause of raised 
plasma insulin but suppressed C-peptide and proinsulin 
concentrations is hypoglycaemia mediated by insulin 
receptor antibodies (IR-A). The diagnosis should be 
considered in patients with other autoimmune diseases 
and requires the demonstration of IR-A in the serum.
Other causes of hypoglycaemia are associated with 
suppressed plasma insulin, C-peptide and proinsulin 
concentrations. In many of these conditions, the diag-
nosis is usually obvious on clinical grounds. In others, 
the measurement of plasma β-OHB, GH and insulin-
like growth factor (IGF-1 and IGF-2) concentrations 
may be required to establish the cause of hypoglycaemia 
(Fig. 17.2).
Plasma β-hydroxybutyrate (β-OHB). Lipolysis is very 
sensitive to circulating insulin concentrations. During 
fasting, normal individuals will show a gradual decline 
in insulin concentration and a progressive increase in 
lipolysis and hence ketone bodies, for example β-OHB 
(Fig. 17.3). In patients with hypoglycaemia due to hy-
perinsulinaemia, lipolysis is suppressed and β-OHB 
concentrations are low. A plasma β-OHB ­concentration 
of ≤2.7 mmol/L during a prolonged fast, and when 
plasma glucose concentration is <3.0 mmol/L, indicates 
mediation of hypoglycaemia by insulin. Conversely, in 
hypoglycaemia associated with suppressed insulin se-
cretion, such as liver disease, β-OHB concentrations 
are usually raised, the only exception being in severe 
inanition, when fat stores are depleted. Therefore, the 
measurement of plasma β-OHB provides an indirect 
measure of the prevailing insulin concentration dur-
ing the hypoglycaemia. The main advantage, however, 
is that β-OHB is easy to measure and the result can be 
made available long before those of insulin or C-peptide 
measurements.
Insulin antibodies. The presence of circulating anti-
bodies to insulin, due to previous exposure to exogenous 
insulin, may give falsely high plasma insulin concentra-
tions (see p. 295). However, this is less common now with 
the use of human insulin, which is less antigenic than the 
previously used animal insulin preparations. The detec-
tion of insulin antibodies is considered to be the criterion 
for the diagnosis of the insulin autoimmune syndrome 
(see below), but antibodies may be detected in persons 
without hypoglycaemia and even, rarely, in patients with 
insulinoma. Because C-peptide does not cross-react with 
insulin antibodies, the measurement of C-peptide in 
these situations can be used as an index of β-Cell func-
tion. Autoantibodies to insulin receptors cause a particu-
larly refractory type of fasting hypoglycaemia (see below) 
and the diagnosis requires the demonstration of IR-A in 
the serum.
Screening for oral hypoglycaemic agents. In a seem-
ingly well individual, screening for oral hypoglycaemic 
agents (sulfonylureas and meglitinides) should always 
be considered to exclude the possibility of a prescrib-
ing or dispensing error, and of surreptitiously induced 
hypoglycaemia.
Evaluation of hypoglycaemia in patients  
with diabetes mellitus
Definition
The American Diabetes Association (ADA) has 
­published criteria for the definition and clinical classifi-
cation of hypoglycaemia in patients with diabetes melli-
tus (Box 17.3). In patients with diabetes, hypoglycaemia 
is defined as all episodes of an abnormally low plasma 
In normal subjects after prolonged fasting or in hypoglycaemia 
with hypoinsulinaemia
A
Adipose tissue
triglycerides
Liver
acetyl-CoA
TCA
FFA
insulin
glucagon
FFA
(plasma β-hydroxybutyrate >2.7 mmol/L)
ketones
+
+
In hypoglycaemia due to hyperinsulinaemia
B
Adipose tissue
triglycerides
Liver
acetyl-CoA
TCA
FFA
Key
+ Stimulation 
– Inhibition
FFA = Free fatty acids 
TCA = Tricarboxylic acid cycle
insulin
FFA
(plasma β-hydroxybutyrate £2.7 mmol/L)
ketones
–
–
FIGURE 17.3  ■  Changes in the concentrations of hormones and 
metabolites in normal subjects after prolonged fasting and in 
hypoglycaemia with hypoinsulinaemia (A), and in hypoglycae-
mia due to hyperinsulinaemia (B).
340	
Clinical biochemistry
glucose concentration (with or without symptoms) that 
expose the individual to harm. The workgroup recom-
mended that persons with diabetes become ­concerned 
about the possibility of hypoglycaemia at a self-­
monitored blood glucose concentration ≤3.9 mmol/L. 
While that value is higher than the value used to 
­diagnose hypoglycaemia in people without diabetes, it 
approximates the lower limit of the physiological fast-
ing non-diabetic range and the glycaemic threshold 
for ­activation of counter-regulatory mechanisms. This 
­cut-off value has been debated, with some favouring a 
value of <3.5 mmol/L to avoid over-diagnosis of hypo-
glycaemia in asymptomatic patients.
Pathophysiology and risk factors
Hypoglycaemia in persons with diabetes is essentially the 
result of therapies that raise plasma insulin concentra-
tions, such as insulin, sulfonylureas and non-sulfonylurea 
insulin secretagogues (e.g. nateglinide or repaglinide). 
The relative or absolute insulin excess during treatment, 
together with compromised physiological and behav-
ioural defences in type 1 diabetes and longstanding type 
2 diabetes, can result in hypoglycaemic episodes. In many 
patients with fully developed type 1 diabetes or with 
longstanding type 2 diabetes, the glucagon response to 
hypoglycaemia is lost and the adrenaline response is of-
ten reduced, leading to defective counter-regulation and 
‘hypoglycaemia unawareness’.
Factors that may increase risk of hypoglycaemia in-
clude: missed or irregular meals; incorrect use of hypo-
glycaemic medication (dose or timing); decreased insulin 
clearance (e.g. renal impairment); increased glucose uti-
lization (e.g. excessive exercise); excessive alcohol intake, 
and concurrent medications (Box 17.4).
Incidence
The rates of hypoglycaemia with insulin therapy vary 
according to the insulin regimen and the type and dura-
tion of diabetes. Overall, hypoglycaemia is less frequent 
in type 2 diabetes than in type 1 diabetes, but the risk of 
hypoglycaemia increases substantially later in the course 
of type 2diabetes. According to the UK Hypoglycaemia 
Study Group (2007), the rate of severe hypoglycaemia in 
insulin-treated type 1 patients of <5 years’ duration was 
22%, rising to 46% in patients with duration of >15 years. 
In comparison, the rates in patients with type 2 diabetes 
treated with insulin were 7% for patients taking insulin for 
<2 years and 25% for patients taking insulin for >5 years. 
Diabetic patients who are treated with insulin are particu-
larly prone to exercise-induced hypoglycaemia. In normal 
subjects, glucose uptake in skeletal muscles is increased by 
20–30 times during exercise. This is compensated for by 
an increase in hepatic glucose release mediated by a fall in 
circulating insulin concentrations. In patients treated with 
insulin, the continuous release of insulin from subcutane-
ous depots inhibits glucose output from the liver. In addi-
tion, increased absorption of insulin from the injection site 
may occur if the site is near the muscles being exercised.
Hypoglycaemia rates with the third-generation sulfo-
nylureas (e.g. glimepiride, glipizide and gliclazide) and 
the meglitinides (e.g. repaglinide and nateglinide) appear 
to be lower than those of previous generation sulfonyl-
ureas (e.g. glibenclamide and chlorpropamide). Elderly 
diabetic patients, especially those with renal or liver im-
pairment, are particularly susceptible to hypoglycaemia 
BOX 17.4	
Risk factors for hypoglycaemia in 
diabetes
•	 Excessive or incorrect use of insulin or insulin secreta-
gogues (e.g. dose or timing)
•	 Impaired drug clearance (e.g. renal impairment, liver 
failure, hypothyroidism)
•	 Impaired counter-regulatory capacity (e.g. GH 
­deficiency, Addison disease)
•	 Decreased exogenous glucose delivery (e.g. missing 
meals, anorexia)
•	 Impaired glucose absorption (e.g. malabsorption)
•	 Decreased endogenous glucose production (e.g. liver 
failure, alcohol)
•	 Increased peripheral glucose utilization (e.g. exercise)
•	 History of severe hypoglycaemia, hypoglycaemia 
­unawareness or recent antecedent hypoglycaemia
•	 Concurrent medications (e.g. aspirin, warfarin)
BOX 17.3	
American Diabetes Association classification of hypoglycaemia in individuals with diabetes
Severe hypoglycaemia
•	 An event requiring assistance of another person to 
actively administer carbohydrate, glucagon or other 
resuscitative actions. These episodes may be associ-
ated with sufficient neuroglycopenia to induce sei-
zure or coma. Plasma glucose measurements may not 
be available during such an event, but neurological 
recovery attributable to the restoration of plasma 
glucose to normal is considered sufficient evidence 
that the event was induced by a low plasma glucose 
concentration.
Documented symptomatic hypoglycaemia
•	 An event during which typical symptoms of hypogly-
caemia are accompanied by a measured plasma glucose 
concentration ≤3.9 mmol/L.
Asymptomatic hypoglycaemia
•	 An event not accompanied by typical symptoms of hy-
poglycaemia but with a measured plasma glucose con-
centration ≤3.9 mmol/L.
Probable symptomatic hypoglycaemia
•	 An event during which symptoms of hypoglycaemia are 
not accompanied by a plasma glucose determination 
(but that was presumably caused by a plasma glucose 
concentration ≤3.9 mmol/L).
Relative hypoglycaemia
•	 An event during which the person with diabetes reports 
any of the typical symptoms of hypoglycaemia and in-
terprets those as indicative of hypoglycaemia, but with a 
measured plasma glucose concentration >3.9 mmol/L.
	
17  Hypoglycaemia	
341
and a reduction in sulfonylurea dosages is often required. 
The hypoglycaemia is usually prolonged, especially as the 
duration of action of the sulfonylureas is generally much 
longer that their plasma half lives, and may last between 
36 h and seven days, despite continuous infusion of glu-
cose. Additional treatment with glucagon and/or diazox-
ide may be required to prevent a fatal outcome.
The risk of hypoglycaemia with metformin and thia-
zolidinediones (e.g. pioglitazone) is negligible. These 
agents act by sensitizing peripheral tissues to insulin but 
do not directly alter insulin secretion. They rarely cause 
hypoglycaemia when used as monotherapy, but may con-
tribute to hypoglycaemia when used concomitantly with 
insulin, sulfonylureas or other insulin secretagogues.
Glucagon-like peptide-1 analogues (such as exenatide 
or liraglutide) and the dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 inhibitors 
(such as sitagliptin, vildagliptin and saxagliptin) do not 
appear to be associated with increased risk of hypoglycae-
mia when used as monotherapy, or in combination with 
insulin sensitizers (such as metformin and thiazolidine-
diones) in short-term clinical studies, but the risk of hy-
poglycaemia appears to increase when GLP-1 analogues 
are used with sulfonylureas.
Management
In patients with documented symptomatic or asymptom-
atic hypoglycaemic events, excessive dosing, wrong type 
or ill-timed dosing of insulin or insulin secretagogues 
should be first considered. Conditions that may affect 
exogenous glucose delivery (e.g. missed meals), endog-
enous glucose production (e.g. alcohol), glucose utiliza-
tion (e.g. exercise), insulin sensitivity (e.g. weight loss) 
or clearance (e.g. renal impairment) should be explored. 
Recurrent hypoglycaemic episodes or a history of hypo-
glycaemia unawareness should prompt a detailed review 
of the treatment regimen.
EMERGENCY TREATMENT OF 
HYPOGLYCAEMIA
Hypoglycaemia should be suspected in all patients 
presenting to the emergency department with altered 
mental state. In these patients, the diagnosis of hypogly-
caemia should be expeditiously investigated by bedside 
glucose measurement; blood sampling for laboratory 
glucose testing should always be performed to confirm 
the results, though therapy should never be withheld 
pending laboratory confirmation. If hypoglycaemia is 
present, glucose should be administered immediately, 
preferably orally if the patient is awake and can swallow 
water safely with no risk of aspiration. The dose of oral 
glucose should be 10–20 g in an adult patient, and this 
dose may be repeated three times (if required) before 
giving a meal containing complex carbohydrates, to en-
sure long-lasting effects.
If the patient’s conscious level does not allow oral ther-
apy, parenteral glucose is indicated: the dose of glucose 
for an average adult is 25–50 g given as an i.v. bolus of 
50–100 mL of 50% dextrose. This should be followed by 
a maintenance dose of 10% dextrose i.v. at 3 mL/kg per h. 
Failure to respond to glucose is an indication to give glu-
cagon subcutaneously, intramuscularly or intravenously 
(1 mg in adults). Steroids (e.g. hydrocortisone 1–2 mg/kg 
i.v. every 6 h) are given if the patient remains refractory 
to standard hypoglycaemia therapy or if adrenal insuffi-
ciency is suspected. Sulfonylureas are an important cause 
of refractory hypoglycaemia. They act by stimulating in-
sulin secretion, and the administration of glucose to treat 
the hypoglycaemia further increases insulin release, thus 
tending to perpetuate the hypoglycaemia. Therefore, di-
azoxide or octreotide may be indicated for patients with 
sulfonylurea-induced hypoglycaemia.
CAUSES OF HYPOGLYCAEMIA
Surreptitious administration of hypoglycaemic 
agents (factitious or felonious 
hypoglycaemia)
Surreptitious or self-induced factitious hypoglycaemia 
should always be considered in patients presenting with 
spontaneous hypoglycaemia. The diagnosis should be 
suspected in individuals with access to insulin, sulfonyl-
ureas or meglitinides, such as diabetic patients (and their 
relatives, friends and carers) and healthcare professionals. 
Patients often vehemently deny self-administration and 
rarely show signs of psychiatric disturbances. Patients 
with diabetes may claim to have hypoglycaemic attacks 
despite omitting their insulin or sulfonylurea drugs. 
Some have the characteristics of Munchausen syndrome, 
with a history of frequent hospitalizations, previous sur-
gical procedures and extensive travel.
Once suspected, the patient should be admitted to 
hospital for detailed observation and blood should be 
collected during hypoglycaemia for the measurement of 
plasma insulin, C-peptide, proinsulin, insulin antibodies 
and oral hypoglycaemic agents. A raised plasma insulin 
concentration and a suppressed C-peptide concentration 
will confirm the diagnosis of self-administration of insu-
lin. If plasma insulin and C-peptide concentrations are 
both inappropriately raised, a drug screen (ideally for all 
available sulfonylureas and meglitinides) should be per-
formed, in order to avoid an incorrect diagnosis of insu-
linoma. Once the diagnosis of factitious hypoglycaemia is 
made, the patient should be referred for counselling and 
psychiatric therapy.
Accidental intake of sulfonylurea drugs or meglitinides 
is rare but should be considered in all patients present-
ing with spontaneous hypoglycaemia. The finding that a 
spouse or a relation is taking these drugs should alert the 
physician to the possibility of accidental intake. The pos-
sibility of a prescription or dispensing error should also 
be considered.
Islet cell tumours (insulinoma)
Insulinomas are rare, with an annual incidence of about 
four cases per million persons. They can occur at any 
age, with approximately 80% occurring between the 
ages of 20 and 60  years and with, probably, a slight 
preponderance in women. In approximately 80% of 
342	
Clinical biochemistry
patients, there is a solitary benign adenoma. Benign 
adenomas are generally small (1–2 cm in diameter) and 
occur with equal frequency in the head, body and tail of 
the pancreas. Multiple tumours occur in about 10% of 
patients and approximately 10% of insulinomas are ma-
lignant, with regional or distant metastases. About 8% 
of insulinomas are associated with multiple endocrine 
neoplasia type 1 (MEN1). Diffuse islet cell hyperpla-
sia and non-­insulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycae-
mia syndrome (see below) have been reported in adults. 
Many insulinomas contain and secrete other hormones 
in addition to insulin (glucagon, gastrin, somatosta-
tin and pancreatic polypeptide), but hypersecretion of 
these hormones is not usually associated with clinical 
symptoms.
Clinical features
Hypoglycaemia is the clinical hallmark of insulinomas. 
Neuroglycopenic symptoms, especially confusion, weak-
ness, slurred speech, blurred vision and irrational behav-
iour, typically occur before breakfast, though 50% of 
patients may also have symptoms late in the afternoon. 
More than 50% of patients have amnesia and therefore 
the history should always be corroborated. Nocturnal 
hypoglycaemia is not uncommon and can manifest as 
nightmares and morning headaches. Symptoms may be 
provoked by exercise, missing a meal or by following a 
restricted calorie diet. Transient hemiplegia, grand mal 
seizures, focal neurological signs and coma can occur, 
but permanent brain damage is rare and is only seen with 
profound hypoglycaemia that goes unrecognized and un-
corrected for several hours.
Diagnosis
Insulinoma is a rare cause of spontaneous hypoglycae-
mia. More common causes, such as surreptitious or inad-
vertent administration of insulin or oral hypoglycaemic 
agents, should be excluded first. The diagnosis of insu-
linoma requires the demonstration of hypoglycaemia, 
unsuppressed or elevated plasma insulin concentrations 
during hypoglycaemia and a pancreatic tumour. Patients 
with suspected insulinoma should have a prolonged fast 
with monitoring of plasma glucose, insulin, C-peptide, 
proinsulin and β-OHB concentrations followed by a 
glucagon stimulation test (if indicated). In patients with 
insulinoma, plasma insulin, C-peptide and proinsulin 
concentrations fail to suppress despite the presence of 
hypoglycaemia. Diagnostic cut-off values in the pres-
ence of hypoglycaemia are plasma insulin ≥18.0 pmol/L, 
C-peptide ≥200 pmol/L, proinsulin ≥5.0 pmol/L, β-
OHB concentrations ≤2.7 mmol/L and an increase in 
plasma glucose concentration of ≥1.4 mmol/L after in-
travenous glucagon. The plasma insulin/C-peptide molar 
ratio is of the order of 1:5, compared with approximately 
1:10 in normal subjects, owing to decreased hepatic ex-
traction of insulin. Plasma proinsulin concentrations are 
significantly higher in patients with insulinoma than in 
normal subjects, and the molar ratio of insulin/proinsulin 
is about 1:1 compared with approximately 6:1 in normal 
subjects.
Localization
Preoperative localization should only be attempted if a 
definitive biochemical diagnosis has been established. 
The mean diameter of insulinomas is usually <2.0 cm, 
and non-invasive imaging techniques may fail to local-
ize them. Computerized tomography (CT) detects 70–
80% and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning 
about 80% of insulinomas. A substantial percentage of 
insulinomas express cell surface receptors for soma-
tostatin, and somatostatin receptor scintigraphy has 
been reported to have a sensitivity of 80%. However, 
false localization is not uncommon with non-invasive 
modalities (i.e. the location suggested by these proce-
dures may not correspond to the tumour found at oper-
ation). Invasive imaging procedures, such as endoscopic 
pancreatic ultrasonography, selective coeliac axis angi-
ography and trans-hepatic portal venous sampling, have 
been reported to have sensitivities of >90%. Selective 
intra-arterial calcium stimulation with hepatic venous 
sampling (arterial stimulation and venous sampling, 
ASVS), using plasma C-peptide and insulin gradients, 
has been shown to have a high sensitivity of 94% and 
is used when other imaging procedures are equivocal 
or negative. However, it is the procedure of choice for 
confirming non-insulinoma pancreatogenous hypogly-
caemia syndrome and post-Roux-en-Y gastric bypass 
hypoglycaemia, as other imaging techniques are nega-
tive in those disorders.
Treatment
Surgical resection is the treatment of choice for insulin-
secreting tumours and is curative in over 90% of patients. 
In about 5–10% of patients, no tumour can be found at 
laparotomy. In these cases, the patient needs to be sent to a 
centre of excellence for further imaging and re-operation. 
The previous practice of a blind distal two-thirds pan-
createctomy is no longer recommended. In some cen-
tres, the measurement of intraoperative plasma insulin 
concentrations has been used to ensure complete tumour 
removal. This may be important in patients with MEN1, 
who may harbour multiple insulinomas. The recurrence 
rate after surgical resection is 7% but is much higher, at 
21%, for those with MEN1.
If surgery is contraindicated, medical treatment using 
diazoxide or a somatostatin analogue, such as octreotide, 
can reduce insulin release. Diazoxide, a non-diuretic 
benzothiazide, suppresses insulin release in about 50% 
of patients. It can also be useful, in responsive cases, in 
preoperative management. It directly inhibits insulin re-
lease via its effect on the K
+-ATP channel. The standard 
dose is 150–450 mg daily but may be increased to as much 
as 800 mg/day. Its main side-effect is sodium and water 
retention, which can be prevented by giving a thiazide 
diuretic. About 50% of patients with insulinoma benefit 
from octreotide. The usual dose is 100 μg injected three 
times daily, and side-effects, such as diarrhoea and steat-
orrhoea, are rare. However, the effect of octreotide is de-
pendent on the presence of somatostatin receptor subtype 
2 on insulinoma tumour cells. A positive OctreoScan™ 
is not a prerequisite before starting octreotide treatment 
	
17  Hypoglycaemia	
343
since studies have shown that, in patients with insulin-
oma and a negative scan, somatostatin decreased insulin 
concentrations significantly and reduced the incidence of 
hypoglycaemic episodes. In malignant insulinoma, cyto-
toxic chemotherapy with streptozotocin, doxorubicin and 
5-fluorouracil can be used. When systemic chemotherapy 
is unsuccessful in patients with unresectable metastatic 
disease to the liver, embolization of the hepatic artery 
and intra-arterial chemotherapy may be used to control 
symptoms, to inhibit tumour growth and to improve 
survival.
Non-insulinoma pancreatogenous 
­hypoglycaemia syndrome (NIPHS)
A rare syndrome of endogenous hyperinsulinaemic hy-
poglycaemia has been described in adult patients who 
suffer from postprandial insulin-mediated hypoglycae-
mia. The syndrome is characterized by neuroglycopenic 
episodes within 4 h of meal ingestion, negative prolonged 
fast tests, negative perioperative localization studies for 
insulinoma but positive intra-arterial calcium stimulation 
tests. Histologically, the pancreas shows diffuse islet hy-
pertrophy, sometimes with hyperplasia, and enlarged and 
hyperchromatic β-Cell nuclei (nesidioblastosis). Patients 
do not have mutations of the SUR1 (ABCC8) or KIR6.2 
(KCNJ11) genes, which encode the subunits of the pan-
creatic ATP-sensitive potassium channel responsible for 
glucose-induced insulin secretion, and have been de-
scribed as a cause of hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia 
in children. Therefore, it has been proposed that adult 
patients with endogenous hyperinsulinaemic hypogly-
caemia may have mutations at other genes, as yet un-
identified, that are involved in the regulation of insulin 
secretion.
Some patients who have undergone Roux-en-Y gastric 
bypass surgery for obesity develop postprandial neuro-
glycopenic symptoms, as a result of endogenous hyper-
insulinaemia. These symptoms are different from those 
ascribed to the dumping syndrome, which are character-
ized by sweating, dizziness and flushing, but not neuro-
glycopenia. The precise mechanisms of hypoglycaemia in 
these patients have not yet been determined but increased 
secretion of GLP-1 and decreased ghrelin concentrations 
have been implicated. Nesidioblastosis was reported in 
some patients but not in others and, therefore, whether 
gastric bypass-induced hypoglycaemia is the result of a 
structural pancreatic abnormality or a functional dysreg-
ulation of postprandial insulin secretion remains to be es-
tablished. Some patients respond to dietary measures or 
medications (α-glucosidase inhibitor, diazoxide, calcium 
channel blockers, octreotide) but others require partial 
pancreatectomy.
Non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia (NICTH)
Non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia (NICTH) is the 
term applied to hypoglycaemia caused by tumours other 
than insulinomas. A wide variety of tumours have been 
associated with hypoglycaemia (Box 17.5). Most patients 
are elderly and present with predominantly neuroglyco-
penic symptoms that may antedate the recognition of the 
existence of the tumour by many years. In most cases, 
especially those due to large mesenchymal tumours, the 
tumour is readily detectable by physical or radiological 
examination, but in others the tumour may be small and 
difficult to detect.
The pathogenesis of hypoglycaemia has been related 
to the secretion of incompletely processed insulin-like 
growth factor 2 (pro-IGF-2) by these tumours. This form 
of IGF-2 binds poorly to its binding proteins and pene-
trates more freely into tissue spaces. Normally, both IGF-1 
and IGF-2 circulate almost completely bound to specific 
IGF-binding proteins (IGFBPs). They can be found 
as binary complexes (IGF-1 or IGF-2 with IGFBP-3) or 
ternary complexes (IGF-1 or IGF-2 with IGFBP-3 and an 
acid-labile subunit, ALS). In normal human plasma, 70–
80% of IGF-2 is associated with a ternary 150 kD IGFBP 
complex, consisting of IGF-2, IGFBP-3 and an ALS, 
while 20–30% is bound to a binary complex of <60 kD 
consisting of IGF-2 and IGFBP-3, and <2% is present in 
the free form. Ternary complexes appear to be confined 
to the circulation, whereas binary complexes appear to 
leave the circulation almost as rapidly as the free form. In 
NICTH, IGFBP-3 and ALS production is decreased and 
the ability of the binary complex to form the more stable 
ternary complex is impaired; thus tumour-derived IGF-2 
appears mainly as binary IGF-IGFBP complexes, which 
have greatly increased turnover compared with ternary 
complexes. Although circulating concentrations of IGF-2 
are usually normal, the ratio of pro-IGF-2 to IGF-2 is 
raised. Pro-IGF-2 interacts with insulin receptors and 
BOX 17.5	
Non-islet cell tumours associated 
with hypoglycaemia
Tumours of the connective tissues (mesodermal)
•	 Fibroblastoma
•	 Fibroma
•	 Fibrosarcoma
•	 Haemangioendothelioma
•	 Histiocytoma
•	 Leiomyosarcoma
•	 Liposarcoma
•	 Mesenchymal tumours of the diaphragm, pancreas and 
pleura
•	 Mesotheliomas
•	 Rhabdomyosarcoma
Tumours of epithelial origin
•	 Adrenal carcinoma
•	 Carcinoma of the breast and cervix
•	 Carcinoma of the gastrointestinal tract and lung
•	 Carcinoma of the prostate
•	 Hepatoma
•	 Phaeochromocytoma
•	 Wilms tumour and hypernephroma
Tumours of haemopoietic origin
•	 Leukaemia (chronic myelocytic)
•	 Lymphoma
•	 Myeloma
Apudomas
•	 Carcinoid tumours
344	
Clinical biochemistry
IGF-1 receptors and inhibits GH secretion, which in 
turn leads to a decreased plasma IGF-1 concentration. 
The low GH concentrations also result in a reduction 
in IGFBP-3, contributing to the greater bioavailability 
of pro-IGF-2. The hypoglycaemia of tumours secret-
ing pro-IGF-2 is therefore characterized by suppressed 
insulin and C-peptide, inappropriately low GH and 
β-OHB concentrations, and the molar ratio of total 
plasma IGF-2/IGF-1 is usually >10.
Surgical removal of a benign or locally invasive tumour 
usually results in complete remission of hypoglycaemia. 
Treatment with human GH (hGH) and/or prednisolone 
has also been used with good effect. Growth hormone is 
thought to exert its beneficial effect by stimulating glu-
coneogenesis and hepatic glycogenolysis, and by increas-
ing IGFBP-3 production and redistribution of plasma 
IGFBP-3 from binary to ternary form, potentially re-
ducing the bioavailability of pro-IGF-2. However, this 
effect is induced only at supraphysiological GH doses. 
Prednisolone, at daily doses of 30 mg or more, alleviates 
hypoglycaemia by direct stimulation of gluconeogenesis 
and glycogenolysis, and may also suppress tumour produc-
tion of pro-IGF-2. Although both treatments are effective 
in relieving hypoglycaemia, prednisolone may have greater 
long-term benefit through suppression of pro-IGF-2.
Autoimmune hypoglycaemia
Two autoimmune syndromes that can cause hypoglycae-
mia have been described. In one of these, antibodies bind 
insulin receptors and mimic the action of insulin. The 
hypoglycaemia may be either fasting or postprandial and 
is often severe. Some patients may have a preceding phase 
of hyperglycaemia and significant insulin ­resistance, 
whereas in other patients, the onset of hypoglycaemia 
may be the first manifestation of the syndrome. Most pa-
tients with this syndrome also have evidence, either in 
the laboratory (elevated titres of antinuclear, antithyroid, 
antimitochondrial or antiplatelet antibodies) or clinically, 
of other autoimmune diseases such as systemic lupus 
erythematosus, primary biliary cirrhosis or Hashimoto 
thyroiditis (Box  17.6). Laboratory investigations show 
high plasma insulin concentrations (as a result of inter-
ference with the insulin assay) but suppressed C-peptide 
and proinsulin concentrations, similar to the findings 
with surreptitious administration of insulin. Therefore, 
the demonstration of the presence of antibodies directed 
against the insulin receptor (IR-A) is essential to make the 
diagnosis. The hypoglycaemia seems to respond rapidly 
to high doses of steroids but not to immunosuppression 
or plasmapheresis. Prognosis is poor, but in those who 
survive, the antireceptor antibodies disappear and remis-
sion ­occurs over several months or years.
The other syndrome, the autoimmune insulin syn-
drome, in which antibodies are directed towards insulin, 
has been reported mainly in Japan and is extremely rare. 
Most patients are middle-aged, with no history of previous 
administration of insulin, and may have evidence of other 
autoimmune diseases such as Graves disease, rheumatoid 
arthritis or systemic lupus erythematosus (see Box 17.6). 
An association with administration of certain drugs such 
as carbimazole, hydralazine, procainamide, penicillamine, 
glutathione and captopril has also been reported. The 
hypoglycaemia is most often postprandial, although 
fasting hypoglycaemia has been reported. Presentation 
can often be dramatic owing to severe neuroglycopenia 
with confusion and even coma. Paradoxically, hypergly-
caemia may occur immediately following a meal or oral 
glucose challenge. Several possible mechanisms for the 
hypoglycaemia have been suggested. Sudden dissocia-
tion of insulin from the antibodies is the most plausible 
one. Laboratory investigations reveal high plasma insulin 
concentrations but, because the insulin is produced en-
dogenously, C-peptide concentrations are not completely 
suppressed. The majority of circulating insulin is bound 
to antibodies, and the demonstration of the presence of 
anti-insulin antibodies is essential to make the diagnosis. 
In most cases, the hypoglycaemia is usually transient and 
resolves spontaneously. In severe cases, dietary treatment 
with frequent low-­carbohydrate meals and acarbose has 
produced some benefit in alleviating the hypoglycaemia.
Hypoglycaemia associated with renal 
impairment
Renal impairment is a common predisposing factor for 
hypoglycaemia and is probably the second most common 
BOX 17.6	
Conditions associated with 
­autoimmune hypoglycaemia
Conditions associated with insulin receptor antibodies
Autoimmune diseases
•	 Alopecia
•	 Autoimmune thrombocytopenia
•	 Hashimoto thyroiditis
•	 Primary biliary cirrhosis
•	 Systemic lupus erythematosus
•	 Sjögren syndrome
Malignancy
•	 Hodgkin disease
Conditions associated with insulin antibodies
Autoimmune diseases
•	 Graves disease
•	 Rheumatoid arthritis
•	 Systemic lupus erythematosus
•	 Polymyositis
Medications
•	 Insulin (human, animal)
•	 Drugs containing sulfhydryl or thiol groups (captopril, ­ 
carbimazole, d-penicillamine, gold thioglucose, 
glutathione)
•	 Hydralazine
•	 α-Interferon
•	 Isoniazid
•	 Procainamide
Others
•	 Alcoholic liver disease
•	 Benign monoclonal gammopathy
•	 Multiple myeloma
•	 Post-pancreatic transplant
	
17  Hypoglycaemia	
345
cause of hypoglycaemia, after insulin therapy, in hospi-
talized patients. The most important predisposing factor 
for hypoglycaemia in chronic kidney diseases (CKD) is 
caloric restriction, whether acute, due to anorexia and 
vomiting, or chronic. Other predisposing factors include 
concomitant liver disease, congestive heart failure, sep-
sis and drug therapy such as insulin, oral hypoglycaemic 
agents and β-blockers. The pathogenesis of hypoglycae-
mia in renal failure is complex and several mechanisms 
have been proposed. In normal subjects, the kidneys 
play a major role in gluconeogenesis and may supply as 
much as 45% of glucose during prolonged starvation. In 
uraemic patients, who are often malnourished, renal glu-
coneogenesis may not be able to maintain an adequate 
glucose supply, even if hepatic gluconeogenesis is normal. 
Other mechanisms include impaired hepatic glycogenol-
ysis and gluconeogenesis; increased insulin half-life due 
to decreased renal degradation; diminished availability of 
alanine, and impaired counter-regulatory mechanisms.
Therapy for diabetes mellitus, with insulin or oral 
hypoglycaemic drugs, is by far the most common cause 
of hypoglycaemia in patients with renal impairment. 
Decreased renal degradation of insulin, frequently lead-
ing to a reduction in insulin or sulfonylurea requirements, 
is the main reason. Iatrogenic hypoglycaemia may be a 
consequence of haemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis. In 
patients undergoing haemodialysis, the mechanism may 
be due, in part, to post-dialysis glucose-induced hyper-
insulinaemia caused by high glucose content of the di-
alysate and partly due to impaired insulin degradation by 
the kidneys.
The symptoms of uraemic hypoglycaemia are mainly 
neuroglycopenic (drowsiness, headache, lethargy, confu-
sion, convulsions and coma) and may be confused with 
the symptoms of the dialysis dysequilibrium syndrome. 
Spontaneous hypoglycaemia in renal failure, not as-
sociated with hypoglycaemic agents or dialysis, carries 
a grave prognosis, with over half of the patients dying 
within months of onset.
Since the clearance of insulin, C-peptide and proinsu-
lin is impaired in CKD, these parameters are unreliable 
in excluding the diagnosis of insulinoma in such patients. 
In these situations, β-OHB, measured during a prolonged 
fast test, and the glucose response to glucagon have been 
reported to be the best diagnostic parameters.
Hypoglycaemia associated with liver disease
Although the liver plays a central role in normal glucose 
homoeostasis, hypoglycaemia is rare in patients with liver 
disease. Glucose homoeostasis can be maintained with 
the mass of functioning hepatocytes reduced to <20% of 
normal, and hypoglycaemia does not occur until the liver 
is extensively damaged. Hypoglycaemia is not usually a 
feature of chronic hepatic failure nor is it implicated in 
the production of hepatic coma. Conversely, it may oc-
casionally be associated with mild liver disease, and has 
been reported in a wide variety of liver disease such as 
fatty infiltration, portal cirrhosis, infective hepatitis and 
hepatocellular carcinoma.
Frank hypoglycaemia is also uncommon in acute 
­(fulminant) hepatic failure, whether due to viral infection or 
hepatotoxic drugs. When it does occur, it can be severe and 
persistent. The diagnosis of hepatogenous ­hypoglycaemia 
may be difficult since the extent of liver disease, as assessed 
by standard liver function tests, does not ­correlate with 
the degree of hypoglycaemia. Therefore, other causes of 
hypoglycaemia should always be sought in a patient with 
hypoglycaemia and abnormal liver function tests. The 
hypoglycaemia associated with congestive heart failure, 
sepsis and Reye syndrome is thought to be due to hepatic 
mechanisms.
Hypoglycaemia due to endocrine 
deficiencies
Endocrine deficiencies, especially those involving the 
­pituitary and the adrenal glands, can result in low blood 
glucose concentrations but these are rarely <3.0 mmol/L 
unless associated with other disorders. Spontaneous hy-
poglycaemia due to pituitary insufficiency is more com-
monly seen in neonates and children than in adults but 
may occasionally be the presenting feature, especially 
in the elderly. The hypoglycaemia is mainly due to GH 
deficiency, but the associated deficiency of ACTH ac-
centuates the tendency to hypoglycaemia. Spontaneous 
hypoglycaemia is also recognized in isolated ACTH de-
ficiency and isolated GH deficiency, particularly after 
prolonged fasting. The diagnosis is usually suspected 
on clinical examination and is confirmed by appropri-
ate combined pituitary function tests (see Chapter 18). 
Plasma insulin and C-peptide concentrations are both 
appropriately suppressed, but β-OHB concentrations 
are not, indicating that ketogenesis may not be impaired 
in the absence of growth hormone. The hypoglycaemia 
in this setting should be treated with both glucose and 
hydrocortisone.
Hypoglycaemia is uncommon in primary adrenal insuf-
ficiency (Addison disease). It can be precipitated by miss-
ing a meal and by exercise and is mainly due to impaired 
gluconeogenesis. Alcohol, by further impeding gluco-
neogenesis, may also provoke hypoglycaemia in these pa-
tients. A plasma cortisol concentration at the lower end 
of the reference range, during a spontaneous hypoglycae-
mic episode, is not sufficient evidence of adrenocortical 
insufficiency as it may be the result of a lower glycaemic 
threshold to stimulate cortisol secretion in patients with 
recurrent hypoglycaemia but without adrenal insuffi-
ciency. Plasma insulin and C-peptide concentrations are 
appropriately low and β-OHB concentrations are high. 
Hypoglycaemia occurring in acute adrenal insufficiency 
(Addisonian crisis) is a medical emergency and requires 
immediate correction by intravenous infusion of glucose 
in addition to hydrocortisone and other measures.
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is a rare cause of neo-
natal hypoglycaemia. In the majority of patients, cortisol 
deficiency is not severe owing to a compensatory increase 
in ACTH secretion.
Although untreated hypothyroidism is associated with 
some lowering of fasting blood glucose concentrations, 
symptomatic hypoglycaemia has only been reported in a 
few cases and its existence has been questioned. Deficiency 
of other glucogenic hormones, such as adrenaline and 
glucagon, does not seem to cause hypoglycaemia.
346	
Clinical biochemistry
Drug-induced hypoglycaemia
Insulin, insulin analogues or insulin secretagogues (sul-
fonylureas and meglitinides) are by far the most com-
mon causes of hypoglycaemia. Precipitating factors are 
restricted carbohydrate intake and liver and renal im-
pairment. Sulfonylurea drugs can cross the placental 
barrier and stimulate insulin secretion in the fetus. Life-
threatening hypoglycaemia has been reported in new-
born infants of diabetic mothers who were treated with 
chlorpropamide during the third trimester. Sulfonylurea-
induced hypoglycaemia may be prolonged, especially 
in those with renal impairment, lasting for up to seven 
days and necessitating continuous treatment. Mortality is 
high, ranging from 7.5 to 8.4%, and in attempted suicide 
with sulfonylurea drugs, the mortality is even higher with 
seven deaths out of 20 reported cases.
Salicylate overdose has been associated with hypo-
glycaemia in children. In adults, therapeutic doses of 
salicylates have been shown to lower blood glucose con-
centration in both diabetic and non-diabetic patients. The 
mechanisms by which salicylates produce hypoglycaemia 
are unknown. Enhancing insulin secretion and inhibiting 
hepatic gluconeogenesis are possible mechanisms.
Non-selective β-blockers (e.g. propranolol), in thera-
peutic doses, may induce hypoglycaemia, particularly in 
the presence of other precipitating factors such as liver 
disease, fasting or strenuous exercise. Hypoglycaemia has 
also been reported in newborn infants of mothers who 
were treated with propranolol until hours before delivery. 
The mechanism is thought to be through the prevention 
of the normal glucagon-mediated glycogenolytic and glu-
coneogenic responses by the liver. In diabetic patients, 
β-blockers may change the pattern of adrenergic symp-
toms of hypoglycaemia by diminishing the occurrence of 
tremor and palpitations and by increasing the occurrence 
of sweating. In addition, because glycogenolysis and glu-
coneogenesis in liver are stimulated through β2-receptors, 
blockade of these receptors by non-selective β-blockers 
could prolong recovery time from hypoglycaemia. 
Selective β1-blockers (e.g. atenolol and bisoprolol), how-
ever, do not impair the recovery from hypoglycaemia in 
patients treated with insulin or oral hypoglycaemic agents.
Quinine stimulates insulin secretion and its intrave-
nous use in the treatment of falciparum malaria has been 
associated with profound hypoglycaemia. Plasma insulin 
and C-peptide concentrations are both elevated, indicat-
ing increased endogenous secretion. Falciparum malaria, 
especially in children, can itself cause hypoglycaemia. 
This, however, is associated with suppressed plasma in-
sulin concentrations and is probably due to high glucose 
uptake by the parasitized erythrocytes. Acute kidney in-
jury, hepatic dysfunction and starvation are common in 
malaria and may be additional factors in precipitating 
the hypoglycaemia. Symptoms of hypoglycaemia may 
be mistaken for those of cerebral malaria, and blood 
glucose should always be monitored in these patients. 
Life-threatening, quinine-induced hypoglycaemia can be 
treated with octreotide, which blocks the insulinotropic 
effect of quinine.
Pentamidine, a drug used for the treatment of trypano-
somiasis and leishmaniasis, has a direct toxic effect on 
β-Cells, causing release of preformed insulin and hence 
hypoglycaemia. This can be followed by β-Cell destruction 
with ultimate insulin deficiency and diabetes. Pentamidine 
is also used for the treatment of Pneumocystis carinii infec-
tion, and there are at least 30 case reports of severe pentam-
idine-induced hypoglycaemia in undernourished patients 
with AIDS (acquired immune deficiency syndrome).
Disopyramide, an antiarrhythmic drug, has also been 
associated with severe hypoglycaemia, particularly in el-
derly patients with renal or hepatic impairment. Patients 
with non-functional endocrine tumours and liver metas-
tases may be at risk of developing hypoglycaemia when 
treated with long-acting somatostatin analogues, as a re-
sult of reduced glucagon and GH secretion.
Other drugs that have occasionally caused hypogly-
caemia include angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors, angiotensin–receptor antagonists, haloperi-
dol, lidocaine, p-aminobenzoic acid, phenylbutazone, 
propoxyphene, saquinavir, tricyclic antidepressants, ty-
rosine kinase inhibitors and sulphonamides.
Alcohol-induced hypoglycaemia
Alcohol can be associated with both fasting and reactive 
hypoglycaemia. Several mechanisms may be operational 
in alcohol-induced fasting hypoglycaemia but the most 
important is direct inhibition of gluconeogenesis. This 
is mainly due to accumulation of NADH and increased 
NADH/NAD
+ ratio resulting from the oxidation of 
ethanol.
Alcohol-induced fasting hypoglycaemia characteristi-
cally occurs 6–36 h after ingestion of moderate to large 
amounts of alcohol. Most patients are aged between 20 
and 40  years, but occasionally it can occur in children 
after a relatively small amount of alcohol. Patients pres-
ent with neuroglycopenic symptoms including stupor 
and coma. The patient’s breath may smell of alcohol and 
the symptoms may be mistaken for acute alcoholic in-
toxication. Therefore, delayed recovery from a presumed 
alcoholic intoxication should alert the doctor to the pos-
sibility of hypoglycaemia.
The blood glucose concentration is usually <2.2 mmol/L 
and alcohol is nearly always detectable in the blood, though 
the concentration is not necessarily very high. Severe met-
abolic acidosis with high blood lactate concentration is a 
characteristic feature. Hyperketonaemia and ketonuria are 
almost invariably present but predominantly in the form 
of β-OHB, since the accumulation of NADH suppresses 
the conversion of β-OHB to acetoacetate. Ketosis may, 
therefore, go unrecognized if methods that only detect 
acetoacetate are employed (e.g. Ketostix
®). Plasma insulin 
and C-peptide concentrations during the hypoglycaemia 
are usually appropriately suppressed. Prompt diagnosis 
and treatment, with intravenous glucose, is essential since 
mortality is relatively high. Glucagon is not effective be-
cause hepatic glycogen stores are depleted by the time hy-
poglycaemia ensues.
Alcohol potentiates the hypoglycaemic effect of insu-
lin and sulfonylurea drugs. In insulin-treated patients, in-
gestion of alcohol may produce profound hypoglycaemia, 
which can be fatal. Hypoglycaemia resulting from the 
combined effect of alcohol and sulfonylurea drugs tends 
	
17  Hypoglycaemia	
347
to be less profound, possibly because diabetic patients re-
ceiving these drugs tend to be obese and, therefore, are 
in part protected from the hypoglycaemic effects of alco-
hol. This is because alcohol does not inhibit the release of 
glucose from pre-existing glycogen stores, and in obese 
subjects, these stores are generally sufficient to meet the 
need for glucose during fasting for 12 h or more.
Alcohol has been shown to potentiate the insulin-
stimulating effect of glucose and thus increases the 
risk for reactive hypoglycaemia. This reaction can be 
demonstrated in 10–20% of healthy subjects who have 
­consumed a mixture of alcohol and sucrose, such as ‘gin 
and tonic’, on an empty stomach and who refrained from 
eating for a few hours afterward. This effect is not ob-
served, however, when saccharin or fructose is substi-
tuted for sucrose as the sweetening agent. Starchy foods, 
such as nibbles and bread, increase the risk for reactive 
hypoglycaemia, whereas foods providing mainly fat or 
protein have the reverse effect.
Hypoglycaemia due to deficient  
energy intake
Symptomatic hypoglycaemia is well recognized in starva-
tion and has been observed in patients with protein-calorie 
malnutrition and anorexia nervosa. The hypoglycaemia is 
usually due to reduced hepatic glycogen reserves as well 
as a reduced supply of gluconeogenic substrates. In addi-
tion, the reduction in ketosis due to markedly depleted fat 
stores deprives the central nervous system of an alterna-
tive source of energy. The major risk factors are low body 
weight and intercurrent infection. Compulsive excessive 
exercise in patients with anorexia nervosa may also be a 
factor. Plasma insulin and C-peptide concentrations are 
appropriately suppressed. Despite low circulating insulin 
concentrations, β-OHB concentrations are low, owing to 
depleted fat stores. Hypoglycaemia in anorexia nervosa 
has a poor prognosis.
Septicaemia
Bacterial septicaemia, especially Gram-negative, can oc-
casionally cause hypoglycaemia. It has been postulated 
that cytokines produced by macrophages, in response to 
endotoxin stimulation, may induce hypoglycaemia by in-
creasing insulin secretion. The endotoxins released may 
also have a direct hypoglycaemic effect, probably by in-
hibiting gluconeogenesis. Acute kidney injury, which is 
often associated with septicaemia, may also be an impor-
tant factor in the pathogenesis of the hypoglycaemia.
Exercise-related hypoglycaemia
Exercise is associated with a marked increase in glucose 
uptake by muscles. During the first 5–10 min of severe 
exercise, glucose is supplied by the breakdown of mus-
cle glycogen, but by 40 min, 75–90% of the glucose is 
supplied by the blood, mainly from increased hepatic 
glucose production. Initially, 75% of increased hepatic glu-
cose output is derived from glycogenolysis and 25% from 
gluconeogenesis. With prolonged exercise, gluconeogen-
esis becomes more important and contributes up to 45% 
of the total hepatic glucose output. Decreased plasma 
insulin and increased catecholamines, glucagon, cortisol 
and GH concentrations all contribute to the increased 
hepatic glucose output. If hepatic glucose production is 
inadequate, blood glucose cannot be maintained during 
exercise and hypoglycaemia ensues.
Hypoglycaemia following excessive exercise is well 
recognized and may be severe enough to cause seizures. 
Although exercising to exhaustion can produce hypogly-
caemia, the symptoms of exhaustion are not related to 
hypoglycaemia and glucose administration does not 
modify the time of exercise to exhaustion.
Postprandial (reactive) hypoglycaemia
Rarely, hypoglycaemia occurs only in response to in-
gestion of a meal. Symptoms are usually neurogenic or 
autonomic and generally occur 2–4 h after ingestion of 
food and last for about 10–20 min. These symptoms are 
different from those of the dumping syndrome (flushing, 
sweating, abdominal cramps and hypotension), which oc-
cur within half an hour of eating. The diagnosis of post-
prandial hypoglycaemia requires the demonstration of 
the Whipple’s triad.
Postprandial hypoglycaemia may occur in patients 
who have undergone major gastric surgery, such as 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass, and is also a feature of the 
auto­immune insulin syndrome, non-insulinoma pancrea-
togenous hypoglycaemia, or may be alcohol induced or 
idiopathic (see below). Postprandial hypoglycaemia is also 
seen in patients with hereditary fructose intolerance after 
ingestion of fructose. It is worth noting that conditions 
that are usually associated with fasting hypoglycaemia, 
such as insulinoma, may occasionally produce symptoms 
only postprandially.
‘Idiopathic’ postprandial reactive hypoglycaemia 
has been documented in a small number of patients in 
whom no obvious other cause for hypoglycaemia was 
found. In these patients, a diet low in refined carbo-
hydrates and high in ­soluble fibres is usually sufficient 
to relieve the symptoms. The addition of snacks in the 
middle of the morning and the afternoon may also pre-
vent the fall in blood glucose. Patients should avoid 
rapidly absorbable sugars and should replace sucrose 
with either saccharin or fructose, a non-­insulinotropic 
carbohydrate. If symptoms persist despite following 
the above dietary modifications, the use of an intes-
tinal ­α-glucosidase inhibitor, such as acarbose, has 
been shown to be successful in alleviating symptoms 
in some patients with idiopathic postprandial reactive 
hypoglycaemia.
The postprandial syndrome
Patients who have postprandial symptoms but without 
documented hypoglycaemia should be referred to as 
having ‘the postprandial syndrome’. Symptoms are gen-
erally non-specific, such as feelings of vague ill health, 
lightheadedness, dizziness, anxiety, palpitations, fatigue, 
hunger and ‘inner trembling’, which may resemble 
the autonomic symptoms of hypoglycaemia. Many pa-
tients, especially those who are well informed about 
348	
Clinical biochemistry
hypoglycaemia from the lay literature, state that symp-
toms are relieved by eating, thereby suggesting hypo-
glycaemia. However, detailed questioning often reveals 
that symptoms are relieved either immediately or within 
a few minutes of eating foods such as cheese or bread, 
which are unlikely to raise blood glucose concentrations 
in such a short period of time. Many patients complain 
of generalized weakness and inability to concentrate in 
between attacks. The symptoms are not progressive but 
usually persist for many years. Reliance on the use of the 
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) in the investigation 
of this condition in the past has led to the misdiagnosis 
of ‘reactive’ hypoglycaemia in many of these patients. 
The OGTT should not be used in this context since 
10% of healthy individuals may have low blood glucose 
concentrations (<2.6 mmol/L) during the test. In addi-
tion, in many patients with postprandial symptoms, the 
symptoms do not correlate with the nadir blood glucose 
concentrations and some individuals may even experi-
ence symptoms after a placebo oral glucose tolerance 
test. Self-monitoring of blood glucose at home, to docu-
ment hypoglycaemia, using glucose meters should not 
be encouraged, since self-diagnosis by patients them-
selves is seldom confirmed by accurate investigations.
Inherited metabolic disease
Several inborn errors of metabolism can produce hypogly-
caemia as one of their major clinical manifestations. These 
disorders are almost invariably diagnosed in childhood 
(see Chapter 24), but in mild cases, the diagnosis may not 
be made until middle life. The hypoglycaemia is usually of 
the fasting type, but in some disorders, for ­example galac-
tosaemia and hereditary fructose intolerance, it only oc-
curs following the ingestion of certain types of food.
CONCLUSION
Hypoglycaemia literally means low blood glucose con-
centration. Many apparently healthy subjects may have 
low blood glucose concentrations during a prolonged 
fast, or 3–5 h after ingestion of glucose. Pathological 
hypoglycaemia should, therefore, be defined as a clini-
cal syndrome in which symptoms or signs of hypogly-
caemia occur in the presence of low plasma glucose 
concentration and that the symptoms or signs are re-
lieved after the plasma glucose concentration is raised 
(Whipple’s triad). Although it is frequently suspected as 
a cause of symptoms, hypoglycaemia is rare, other than 
in diabetic patients who are being treated with insulin 
or oral hypoglycaemic drugs.
The diagnosis of a hypoglycaemic disorder requires a 
high level of suspicion, a thorough history and a care-
ful assessment of possible underlying illnesses or drugs. 
A healthy-appearing patient with hypoglycaemia requires 
a different diagnostic approach from a patient who has 
a concurrent illness or is hospitalized. Generally, the 
measurement of plasma glucose, insulin, C-peptide and 
proinsulin concentrations during symptoms may be suf-
ficient to confirm the diagnosis and establish the cause of 
hypoglycaemia. In the majority of patients, however, fur-
ther investigations (insulin autoantibodies, screening for 
hypoglycaemic agents) and provocation tests (prolonged 
fast or a mixed meal test) may be necessary. An inability 
to demonstrate a low plasma glucose concentration when 
the patient is symptomatic virtually excludes the diagno-
sis of hypoglycaemia.
Further reading
Cryer PE, Axelrod L, Grossman AB et al. Evaluation and management 
of adult hypoglycemic disorders: an endocrine society clinical practice 
guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2009;94:709–28. 
The most up-to-date evidence-based guidelines produced by the Endocrine 
Society and co-sponsored by the American Diabetes Association, European 
Association for the Study of Diabetes and European Society of Endocrinology.
Service GJ, Thompson G, Service FJ et  al. Hyperinsulinemic 
hypoglycemia with nesidioblastosis after gastric bypass surgery. N 
Engl J Med 2005;353:249–54. 
A report of six patients with postprandial neuroglycopenia after 
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass surgery.
Tesfaye N, Seaquist E. Neuroendocrine responses to hypoglycemia. 
Ann N Y Acad Sci 2010;1212:12–28. 
A comprehensive review of the counterregulatory response to hypoglycaemia.
UK Hypoglycaemia Study Group. Examining hypoglycaemic risk 
in diabetes: effect of treatment and type of diabetes. Diabetologia 
2007;50:1140–7. 
An observational prospective study commissioned by the Department for 
Transport to compare rates of hypoglycaemia between patients with type 2 
diabetes and type 1 diabetes in relation to treatment modalities and their 
duration.
Vezzosi D, Bennet A, Maiza JC et  al. Diagnosis and treatment of 
insulinomas in the adults. In: Akin F, editor. Basic and clinical endo­
crinology up-to-date. Intech Open Access Publishing; 2011. http://
www.intechopen.com/books/basic-and-clinical-endocrinology-
up-to-date/diagnosis-and-treatment-of-insulinomas-in-the-adults 
[Accessed October 2013].
An excellent and detailed up-to-date review of the diagnosis, 
differential diagnosis and the medical management of adult patients 
with insulinoma.
349
C H A P T E R  1 8
Hypothalamic, pituitary 
and adrenal disorders
Miles J. Levy  • Trevor A. Howlett
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  349
CLINICAL ANATOMY OF THE PITUITARY AND 
HYPOTHALAMUS  350
PHYSIOLOGY OF HYPOTHALAMO–PITUITARY–END 
ORGAN AXES  350
CLINICAL ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF THE 
ADRENALS  352
ASSESSMENT OF NORMAL PITUITARY 
FUNCTION  352
Basal hormonal investigations  352
Dynamic tests of ACTH–adrenal  
function  354
Cortisol normal ranges, borderline  
responses, assay precision and dynamic 
test reproducibility  355
Assessment of growth hormone reserve  355
Releasing hormone tests  356
Other tests of gonadotrophin secretion  356
Dynamic tests of posterior pituitary 
function  357
Summary  357
A clinical approach to assessment of the 
whole ACTH–adrenal axis  358
Monitoring of pituitary function in disease 
states  359
OTHER DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES IN PITUITARY 
DISEASE  360
Clinical assessment  360
Pituitary imaging techniques  360
PITUITARY HYPERSECRETION STATES  360
Pituitary adenomas  360
Prolactinoma  360
Acromegaly  362
Diagnosis and differential diagnosis of 
Cushing syndrome  363
Imaging  366
Outline of management  366
Thyroid stimulating hormone-secreting 
­adenomas  366
Gonadotrophin-secreting adenomas  367
HYPOTHALAMIC AND PITUITARY DEFICIENCY  
STATES  367
Diseases that may lead to generalized 
hypopituitarism  367
Growth hormone deficiency  367
Gonadotrophin deficiency  368
Other isolated anterior pituitary 
deficiencies  369
Diabetes insipidus  369
ADRENAL DISEASE  369
Clinical features of Addison disease  369
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia  370
Assessment of adrenal incidentaloma  370
MONITORING PITUITARY AND ADRENAL 
­REPLACEMENT THERAPY  370
CONCLUSION  371
APPENDIX  371
INTRODUCTION
The investigation of disorders of the pituitary and hy-
pothalamus and of adrenocortical function frequently 
causes great apprehension among non-endocrinologists, 
whether they are clinical biochemists or general phy-
sicians, because of their supposed complexity and the 
frequency of atypical, borderline or artefactual results. 
It is certainly true that the hypothalamo–pituitary axis 
plays the central role in the control of a large number 
of hormonal systems and of many other important as-
pects of homoeostasis. However, the clinically relevant 
physiology of each hormonal axis is well understood and 
the plasma concentrations of the majority of the hor-
mones secreted by both the pituitary and the relevant 
peripheral endocrine glands can now be readily and ac-
curately measured in most clinical biochemistry labora-
tories. Thus, a logical approach to the measurement of 
the relevant plasma hormone concentrations, applying 
basic physiological principles, can result in a relatively 
simple and efficient assessment of pituitary function in 
the majority of cases.
This chapter will outline a clinically relevant and effi-
cient approach to the assessment of pituitary and adrenal 
350	
Clinical biochemistry
function. In many cases, simple measurement of basal, 
unstimulated plasma concentrations of the appropriate 
hormone(s) will give all the information required for clinical 
management. Some of the traditionally used dynamic en-
docrine tests can now be reasonably discarded, while others 
remain essential, and the choice of these will be discussed 
critically. Recommendations for clinical management of 
borderline or contradictory results will also be discussed.
CLINICAL ANATOMY OF THE PITUITARY 
AND HYPOTHALAMUS
The pituitary gland (Fig. 18.1) lies within a bony com-
partment, the pituitary fossa or sella turcica, beneath the 
hypothalamus to which it is connected by the pituitary 
stalk. The fossa is separated from the subarachnoid space 
and cerebrospinal fluid by the diaphragma sellae. The 
adult human pituitary consists of two lobes (the third, 
neurointermediate lobe of other species is not present 
except in fetal life). The anterior lobe (adenohypophysis) 
is embryologically derived from cells of Rathke’s pouch. 
It contains a variety of cell types differentiated to secrete 
the majority of the peptide and glycopeptide hormones 
that control the function of peripheral endocrine organs: 
corticotrophs (adrenocorticotrophic hormone, ACTH), 
lactotrophs (prolactin, PRL), gonadotrophs (luteiniz-
ing hormone and follicle stimulating hormone: LH and 
FSH), thyrotrophs (thyroid stimulating hormone, TSH) 
and somatotrophs (somatotrophin or growth hormone, 
GH). The anterior lobe has no direct arterial blood sup-
ply but is supplied by the portal vessels that arise in the 
median eminence of the hypothalamus. The secretion 
of anterior pituitary hormones is controlled by releasing 
and inhibiting factors, which are predominantly peptides, 
released into the portal circulation from the nerve termi-
nals of a variety of hypothalamic neurons. These neurons 
in turn are subject to the effects of the modulatory neuro­
transmitters of other neurons, within the hypothalamus 
and beyond.
The critical role of the portal circulation in the ­control 
of anterior pituitary function means that any disease pro-
cess that interferes with this blood supply, for example 
non-functioning tumours of the pituitary or hypothala-
mus, will often result in severe pituitary dysfunction, 
even if the actual hormone-secreting cells of the anterior 
­pituitary have not themselves been destroyed.
The posterior lobe (neurohypophysis), in contrast, is 
embryologically derived from the brain, has a direct arte-
rial blood supply and is not controlled via a portal circula-
tion. Hormonal secretion occurs directly from the nerve 
terminals of vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH) 
and oxytocin neurons, whose cell bodies lie within the 
hypothalamus, primarily in the supraoptic and paraven-
tricular nuclei.
Both the anterior and posterior lobes contain a vari-
ety of other cell types. These are not directly responsible 
for hormonal secretion into the peripheral circulation, 
although they may have important modulatory or para-
crine roles in the control of pituitary function.
Many other important neural structures lie within or 
adjacent to the hypothalamus, notably the optic chiasm 
and the neural centres controlling thirst, osmoregula-
tion, appetite, temperature homoeostasis and circadian 
rhythm. Diseases of the pituitary and hypothalamus can 
result in dysfunction of any of these structures, in addi-
tion to the hormonal syndromes described here. In par-
ticular, visual field loss due to compression of the optic 
chiasm is a frequent finding with large pituitary tumours.
These anatomical relationships indicate that the pitu-
itary gland is truly at the interface of the mind and body, 
with a central role in homoeostasis, explaining its source 
of fascination for physiologist and physician alike.
PHYSIOLOGY OF HYPOTHALAMO– 
PITUITARY–END ORGAN AXES
The basic physiology of the important endocrine axes is 
summarized diagrammatically in Figures 18.2 and 18.3. 
Many additional releasing, inhibiting and modulating 
factors have been identified, primarily in animal experi-
ments, but none of these has yet been shown to be of 
relevance clinically, nor for the understanding of the 
principles of pituitary function testing. Hormones that 
can be measured in the laboratory are indicated in the fig-
ures. Peripheral plasma concentrations of hypothalamic 
releasing factors can also be measured (with difficulty), 
but for the most part do not reflect hypothalamic activity 
and are not of clinical relevance.
Adrenocorticotrophic 
hormone 
(ACTH) 
stimu-
lates adrenal cortisol secretion and is itself controlled 
by hypothalamic corticotrophin releasing factor (CRF). 
Corticotrophin releasing factor is now known to be a 
complex of factors including a 41-residue peptide (CRF-
41 or corticotrophin releasing hormone, CRH) and vaso-
pressin, which act synergistically. Adrenocorticotrophic 
hormone, and therefore cortisol, are secreted with a 
pronounced circadian rhythm: concentrations are low, 
typically undetectable, at midnight (if asleep), rise in the 
final hours of sleep to reach a peak shortly after waken-
ing in the morning and steadily decline throughout the 
Hypothalamus
Diaphragma
sellae
Artery
Artery
Posterior
lobe
Anterior
lobe
Portal
vessels
Optic
chiasm
Median
eminence
Vein
Vein
FIGURE  18.1  ■  Functional anatomy of the human pituitary and 
hypothalamus.
	
18  Hypothalamic, pituitary and adrenal disorders	
351
rest of the day with superimposed peaks of secretion 
with meals, exercise and stressful events. ‘Stress’ (‘fight 
and flight’, illness, hypoglycaemia, surgery etc.) is a ma-
jor determinant of ACTH and cortisol secretion, which 
therefore means that basal concentrations in a well in-
dividual may not always reflect the ability to respond to 
illness, and conversely that high concentrations in an in-
dividual with other significant disease do not always im-
ply oversecretion.
Secretion of growth hormone (GH) is controlled by 
complementary stimulatory and inhibitory factors, GH 
releasing hormone (GHRH, a 44-residue peptide) and so-
matostatin (SMS, a cyclic, 14-residue peptide), respectively. 
Growth hormone secretion occurs in pulses, predominantly 
at night during the early hours of sleep. Only infrequent, 
small pulses occur during the day when plasma concentra-
tions are usually undetectable, although GH secretion also 
occurs in response to stress. Growth hormone’s effects on 
growth are mediated via synthesis of insulin-like growth fac-
tor 1 (IGF-1 – previously called somatomedin C), which is 
synthesized mostly in the liver but also in peripheral tissues.
Prolactin secretion is unique in being predominantly 
controlled by an inhibitory hypothalamic factor, dopa-
mine. This fact explains why PRL deficiency is rare and 
why any disease that interferes with pituitary anatomy, 
and thus the flow of portal blood, may be associated with 
hyperprolactinaemia. Plasma PRL is raised physiologi-
cally during pregnancy and lactation, and release also oc-
curs in response to stress. The physiological role of PRL 
in non-lactating women and in men is unknown.
Hypothalamic 
thyrotrophin 
releasing 
hormone 
(TRH), a tripeptide, controls TSH secretion, which in 
turn stimulates the synthesis and secretion of thyroid 
hormones thyroxine (T4) and tri-iodothyronine (T3). 
Secretion is regulated primarily to maintain normal cir-
culating concentrations of thyroid hormones, although 
there is also a slight circadian rhythm.
Luteinizing hormone and FSH are both controlled by 
a single stimulatory decapeptide, gonadotrophin releas-
ing hormone (GnRH or luteinizing hormone releasing 
hormone, LHRH). The major role of LH in the male is 
to stimulate testosterone secretion by testicular Leydig 
cells, and in the female to stimulate ovulation at mid-
cycle. Follicle stimulating hormone controls spermato-
genesis in the male and ovarian follicular development, 
GH
PRL
TSH
LH
FSH
ACTH
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
T4
Inhibin
Cortisol
IGF1
Adrenal
Liver
Breast
Thyroid
(Milk)
Pituitary
Hypothalamus
GnRH
TRH
Dopamine
GHRH/SMS
CRH
'Stress'
Circadian
rhythm
Pulse
generator
Sperm
Testosterone
Testis (male)
Oestradiol
Ovulation
Ovary (female)
FIGURE 18.2  ■  Physiological relationships of the anterior pituitary. Hormones (in bold) can be readily measured in most clinical bio-
chemistry laboratories. See text for explanation of abbreviations.
FIGURE 18.3  ■  Physiological relationships of the posterior pitu-
itary. Osmolalities (italicized) can be readily measured in most 
clinical biochemistry laboratories. Hormones (emboldened) can 
be measured with difficulty in a few centres.
352	
Clinical biochemistry
and therefore oestradiol secretion, in the female, and in 
both sexes stimulates gonadal secretion of inhibin, which 
is responsible for some negative feedback control. The 
most important feature of the secretion of GnRH, and 
thus LH and FSH, is its pulsatile nature, imposed by the 
hypothalamic pulse generator. It is likely that differen-
tial secretion of LH and FSH is achieved by modulation 
of the frequency and amplitude of pulsatile GnRH se-
cretion, and the peripheral effects of LH and FSH are 
critically dependent on appropriate pulsatile variation 
in concentrations. Gonadotrophin releasing hormone 
pulses occur, on average, every 90 min, but in the female 
are more rapid in the follicular phase and slower in the 
luteal phase of the menstrual cycle. During early puberty, 
the majority of pulses occur at night, during sleep.
Vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone, ADH) secretion 
is controlled primarily by osmotic and blood volume 
sensing mechanisms (osmoreceptors and baroreceptors, 
respectively). High plasma osmolality and hypovolae-
mia or hypotension are the major stimulatory factors. 
Vasopressin acts directly on the kidney to increase water 
reabsorption in the renal collecting ducts and thus reduce 
urine volume. Corticosteroids are necessary for the ex-
cretion of free water, so deficiency may mask the symp-
toms of ADH deficiency.
Oxytocin is released during labour and during suck-
ling, but mechanisms controlling its secretion have not 
been studied extensively in humans and there appears to 
be no clinical syndrome related to oxytocin deficiency.
Secretion of all pituitary hormones is controlled, to a 
greater or lesser extent, by negative feedback. This occurs 
at all levels, including the direct inhibition by a hormone 
of its own secretion (‘ultra-short-loop’), but the most 
important negative effects are generally those of the pe-
ripheral ‘end hormone’ on hypothalamic and/or pituitary 
secretion. The existence of such negative feedback is of 
crucial importance to the interpretation of basal hormone 
concentrations in pituitary disease and is the basis of a 
number of dynamic tests of pituitary function.
CLINICAL ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY  
OF THE ADRENALS
The two adrenal glands lie superior to the kidneys and are 
composed of the inner catecholamine-secreting medulla, 
which is controlled centrally by direct innervation, and 
the outer cortex, which is controlled by classic endocrine 
pathways. Glucocorticoid and androgen secretion is pre-
dominantly from the zona fasciculata and zona reticularis 
and controlled by pituitary ACTH secretion, while miner-
alocorticoid secretion is predominantly from the zona glo-
merulosa and controlled via the renin–­angiotensin system 
(see Chapter 4). This means that the patterns of adrenal 
deficiency vary with aetiology: thus a disease that destroys 
the adrenal itself (e.g. autoimmune Addison disease, ad-
renal tuberculosis or bilateral adrenalectomy) results in 
deficiency of both glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid 
secretion, whereas ACTH deficiency from pituitary dis-
ease results in glucocorticoid deficiency alone and, thus, 
less marked disturbances of salt and ­water balance. Even 
complete adrenalectomy does not seem to cause a clinical 
deficiency of catecholamines, since secretion by the rest 
of the sympathetic nervous system appears to compensate 
for the loss of adrenal secretion.
Adrenal steroid synthesis involves a complex and in-
tersecting sequence of enzymatic steps within the cyto-
plasm and mitochondria of the adrenal cell. Pathways are 
illustrated in Figure 18.4. The initial, rate-limiting, step 
in steroidogenesis in the normal subject is the conversion 
of cholesterol to pregnenolone. Adrenocorticotrophic 
hormone has rapid effects on cholesterol transport into 
mitochondria and longer-term effects on transcription 
of genes encoding a number of enzymes in the synthetic 
pathway. These pathways are of clinical significance in 
congenital adrenal hyperplasia, where inherited defects 
in a variety of these enzymes give rise to the various 
subtypes and clinical syndromes (see Table 18.1), and in 
clinical pharmacology, since metyrapone, a drug that in-
hibits 11β-hydroxylase, can be used to decrease cortisol 
synthesis in Cushing syndrome.
ASSESSMENT OF NORMAL PITUITARY 
FUNCTION
Basal hormonal investigations
A single, basal blood sample, especially if taken at 09.00 h, 
can give extensive and, for some purposes, complete in-
formation regarding pituitary function. The blood should 
ideally be taken under resting, unstressed conditions but, 
while the stress of major illness or surgery significantly 
alters results and thus might cause diagnostic errors when 
investigating pituitary hyperfunction, minor anxiety re-
garding hospital attendance or venepuncture probably 
has little effect.
The pituitary–thyroid axis is fully assessed by the 
simultaneous measurement of plasma free thyroid hor-
mone concentrations and TSH. Thyroid stimulating 
hormone deficiency is characterized by a low plasma 
free T4 concentration without the expected elevation 
of plasma TSH. In hypopituitarism, TSH may be low 
(although rarely undetectable) or within the normal 
range (inappropriately for the low T4), which rep-
resents the most potent argument against the use of 
TSH as the sole screening test for thyroid function in 
a laboratory.
Basal plasma PRL gives full physiological informa-
tion regarding the function of its axis. Concentrations 
frequently vary from day to day (particularly minor el-
evations), so that 2–3 basal samples are usually necessary 
before any treatment is instituted.
In the male, a normal basal plasma testosterone 
(preferably taken at 09.00 h, in view of the significant 
circadian rhythm) effectively demonstrates normal 
LH secretion, and demonstration of a normal sperm 
count would confirm normal FSH secretion (­although 
this is rarely performed unless infertility is an issue). 
Gonadotrophin deficiency is diagnosed by the com-
bination of a low plasma testosterone with low or 
inappropriately ‘normal’ (rather than elevated) concen-
trations of LH and FSH. The significance of border-
line testosterone concentrations – near or just below 
	
18  Hypothalamic, pituitary and adrenal disorders	
353
the lower end of the reference range – together with 
normal LH and FSH, particularly in the ageing male, 
is an area of growing clinical interest but still with con-
siderable controversy and is discussed more fully later 
in this chapter.
Assessment of the pituitary–gonadal axis in the female 
is complicated by the physiological changes during the 
menstrual cycle. A normal luteal phase plasma progester-
one is the ultimate biochemical test of the adequacy of 
the entire axis. Spontaneous, normal, regular menstrua-
tion also excludes gonadotrophin deficiency without the 
need for additional biochemical tests. Gonadotrophin 
deficiency is suggested in the context of amenorrhoea by 
the presence of a consistently low plasma oestradiol in the 
absence of elevation of plasma LH and FSH, although 
a variety of ‘hypothalamic’ causes of amenorrhoea also 
show this combination (see below). In postmenopausal 
women (or, in the context of longstanding amenorrhoea, 
arbitrarily women aged >50 years), who are not on oes-
trogen replacement, the simple absence of the usual 
menopausal elevation of LH and FSH is sufficient to di-
agnose gonadotrophin deficiency.
Basal plasma cortisol is not always sufficient to di-
agnose ACTH deficiency or normality, because of the 
circadian rhythm and since concentrations that need to 
be achieved during physiological stress are much higher 
than those found under normal basal circumstances. 
A
B
Cholesterol
Pregnenolone
17-Hydroxypregnenolone
17a-hydroxylase
p450SCC
p450C17
(∆5 steroids)
(∆4 steroids)
Progesterone
17-Hydroxyprogesterone
21-hydroxylase
11 b-hydroxylase
18-oxidase
3  b-hydroxydehydrogenase
∆5-isomerase complex
3βHSD
p450C21
p450C17
3βHSD
p450C21
p450C11
p450C11
Deoxycorticosterone
11-Deoxycortisol
Corticosterone
Cortisol
p450C11
Aldosterone
Mineralocorticoids
Glucocorticoids
p450C17
3βHSD
17βHSD
Androstenedione
Testosterone
Oestrone
Oestradiol
Sex steroids
p450aro
17βHSD
p450C17
17,20-lyase
Dehydroepiandrosterone
1
2
3
4
5
10
9
8
7
6
11
12
13
14
17
16
15
p450aro
FIGURE 18.4  ■  (A) The pathways of steroid hormone synthesis within the adrenals (and gonads). Enzymes are named by reaction 
catalysed (e.g. 21-hydroxylase) or by enzyme name (e.g. p450C11). p450 enzymes are in mitochondria and other enzymes are in the 
cytoplasm; steroid synthesis involves repeated passage of precursors between these cellular compartments. (B) Basic structure of the 
steroid molecule (from Kumar and Clark 2012 Clinical medicine. 8th ed. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone, with permission).
TABLE 18.1  Subtypes of congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia
Enzyme defect
Frequency
Clinical features
21-hydroxylase 
p450C21/CYP21
95% of cases  
1 in 15 000 
live births
Ambiguous 
genitalia in 
females
Virilization, some 
salt losing
11-β-hydroxylase 
p450C11/CYP11B
<5% of cases
Ambiguous 
genitalia in 
females
Virilization, 
hypertension
17-α-hydroxylase 
p450C17
Rare
Ambiguous 
genitalia and lack 
of virilization in 
males
Hypertension
3β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase 
3βHSD/HSD3B2
Rare
Ambiguous 
genitalia in  
males
Mild virilization in 
females
Occasional 
Addisonian  
crises
Cholesterol 
desmolase 
p450SCC/CYP11A
Rare
Addisonian crises
354	
Clinical biochemistry
Nevertheless, a basal cortisol >550 nmol/L in an un-
stressed individual certainly excludes ACTH deficiency 
and, in our experience, a 09.00 h cortisol <100 nmol/L is 
never, and >400 nmol/L is always, associated with a nor-
mal ACTH reserve (see below).
Basal concentrations of GH are usually unhelpful in 
the diagnosis of deficiency, since basal concentrations in 
normal individuals are usually undetectable. A low serum 
IGF-1 (using age-related normal ranges) is a good pre-
dictor of severe GH deficiency but, conversely, an IGF-1 
in the normal range does not exclude severe deficiency 
that might respond to replacement therapy.
Plasma vasopressin and oxytocin concentrations are 
measured by only a few centres and are not used rou-
tinely in the assessment of basal pituitary function. 
Measurement of paired plasma and urine osmolality on a 
basal early morning sample does, however, give valuable 
information. A urine osmolality >600 mmol/kg excludes 
diabetes insipidus (DI) as long as plasma osmolality is 
normal (280–295 mmol/kg). Conversely, DI is suggested 
by an elevated plasma osmolality (>300 mmol/kg) with a 
urine osmolality <600 mmol/kg. Other combinations are 
non-diagnostic and require a water deprivation test if DI 
is suspected clinically. Oxytocin secretion is never inves-
tigated clinically.
The order of progression of hypopituitarism with 
progressively severe pituitary disease is usually predict-
able. Growth hormone and gonadotrophin secretion are 
usually most susceptible to damage, followed by ACTH 
and TSH, with PRL deficiency occurring only rarely and 
usually only after extensive pituitary damage by disease 
or surgery. It is thus unusual, although not impossible, 
for a patient with regular menstruation or normal male 
gonadal function to develop ACTH deficiency first in the 
course of their disease. Diabetes insipidus usually only 
occurs with inflammatory or invasive pituitary disease, 
after surgery or with diseases primarily involving the hy-
pothalamus. Thus clinical background may influence the 
degree of investigation considered appropriate in an in-
dividual patient with borderline or equivocal results in a 
single axis.
Dynamic tests of ACTH–adrenal function
Insulin stress test
The insulin stress test (IST) (or insulin tolerance test, ITT) 
has traditionally been the ‘gold standard’ test to assess the 
adequacy of the ACTH–adrenal axis. After adequate hy-
poglycaemia (blood glucose <2.2 mmol/L), a normal rise 
of plasma cortisol (traditionally to >550 nmol/L) excludes 
ACTH and cortisol deficiency. Patients with such a re-
sponse are capable of producing a normal adrenocortical 
response to stressful illness, without the need for replace-
ment therapy. The increment of plasma cortisol does not 
add additional information. Patients with borderline peak 
responses (400–550 nmol/L) may only require steroid 
replacement during stressful illnesses, but patients with 
lower responses will typically be symptomatic and almost 
always require standard replacement therapy.
An IST is contraindicated by cardiac disease (an ECG 
should be normal) and by epilepsy (or other unexplained 
blackouts) and always requires close medical and nursing 
supervision to maintain safety. For this reason, alterna-
tive, simpler tests have been sought, although none has 
yet achieved universal acceptance. A retrospective audit 
of 230 ISTs in our own laboratory indicated that patients 
with a basal cortisol <100 nmol/L never, and >400 nmol/L 
always, demonstrated a normal cortisol response, so that 
an IST is probably unnecessary in such patients (repre-
senting 50% of ISTs performed in our study) if the only 
aim is to assess pituitary–adrenal reserve. In our experi-
ence, patients who have recently discontinued steroid re-
placement with a basal cortisol <200 nmol/L also never 
have a normal response.
Short tetracosactide (synacthen, tetracosactrin, 
ACTH) test
This test, involving administration of tetracosactide 
(synthetic ACTH1–24), is the cornerstone for diagnosis 
of primary adrenal failure, but is increasingly used in the 
context of pituitary disease. It has long been accepted 
that a normal cortisol response to tetracosactide excludes 
Addison disease, but to test for ACTH deficiency by ad-
ministration of ACTH is clearly illogical on purely physi-
ological grounds, since it directly tests only the adrenal 
response and not that of the pituitary or higher centres. 
However, presumably since ACTH deficiency leads to 
adrenal atrophy, a number of workers have shown close 
correlations between the cortisol responses to a simple 
intravenous tetracosactide test and to an IST, and have 
suggested that the former is a satisfactory test of the 
ACTH–adrenal axis as long as the test is not done within 
four weeks of the pituitary insult.
A majority of UK endocrinologists now accept that a 
normal plasma cortisol response, 30 min after tetracos-
actide (250 μg), adequately excludes ACTH deficiency, 
and several long-term clinical observational studies have 
confirmed the safety of such an approach. This test was 
originally validated with i.v. tetracosactide but responses 
to i.m. injection are equivalent. However, normal re-
sponses are different (typically 150 nmol/L or so higher) 
at 60 min, so an appropriate normal range is needed for 
each time point and, in practice, we recommend only 
measuring the 30 min value to avoid confusion.
Since the standard 250 μg dose of tetracosactide is 
substantially supraphysiological, many workers have ad-
vocated use of a lower dose stimulation test (typically 
1 μg). However, this approach is more complicated since 
no suitable dose preparation exists, and it has not been 
demonstrated to be significantly superior in clinical prac-
tice to the traditional test.
Other tests
The glucagon test (1 mg i.m.) has been advocated to 
assess ACTH and GH reserve when an IST is con-
traindicated (usually with the same criteria for a nor-
mal response). Glucagon frequently causes nausea and 
vomiting, normal individuals sometimes fail to show a 
‘normal’ response and sampling must continue over a 4 h 
period, making this test relatively unattractive as a rou-
tine alternative.
	
18  Hypothalamic, pituitary and adrenal disorders	
355
The metyrapone test (750 mg orally, four-hourly for 
24 h) has been widely used as a test of ACTH reserve, 
particularly in North America; it measures the response 
of urinary cortisol precursors or, more recently, plasma 
11-deoxycortisol, to blockade of adrenal cortisol synthe-
sis by this drug. The test is time consuming, often un-
pleasant for the patient and does not test the response to 
physiological stress.
An intravenous short tetracosactide test is now recog-
nized by most endocrinologists to be a more appropriate 
and simpler alternative to either of these tests, unless in-
formation on GH reserve is also required.
Cortisol normal ranges, borderline  
­responses, assay precision and 
dynamic test reproducibility
Normal ranges for cortisol, particularly for dynamic tests, 
were predominantly developed and validated using old 
assay technologies (e.g. fluorimetry), which are no longer 
in use, and although a variety of adjustments (typically 
lowering of cortisol cut-off concentrations for a normal 
response) have been suggested, these have rarely been 
completely validated.
Detailed studies of normal responses to tetracosac-
tide have shown substantial differences with gender and 
between commonly used cortisol assays (see Clark et al. 
in Further reading, below). Most workers and most as-
says report a lower limit of the normal response between 
500 and 600 nmol/L, but some other published studies 
report lower peak responses than this in some appar-
ently healthy individuals (lowest values ~400 nmol/L). 
Similarly, some recent studies reporting cortisol re-
sponses to IST in healthy volunteers have reported peak 
responses in some individuals on some occasions between 
400 and 500 nmol/L.
Studies of test–re-test variability for both the tetraco-
sactide and IST tests have mostly reported a coefficient 
of variation (CV) of around 10%. External quality con-
trol schemes also frequently report an interassay/inter-
method CV for cortisol of 10% or higher. Therefore, if 
we assume conservatively that the combined variability 
from these two sources is represented by an overall CV of 
10%, then simple statistics show that the 95% confidence 
limits for a test response with a ‘true’ value of 500 nmol/L 
actually extends from 400 to 600 nmol/L. These consid-
erations potentially apply to both the tetracosactide test 
and the IST.
All of these factors lead the authors to define basal 
cortisol and cortisol responses to tetracosactide and other 
dynamic tests broadly rather than using a single precise 
cut-off, and to recognize a group with borderline or 
equivocal responses who cannot be clearly classified as 
‘normal’ or ‘abnormal’:
•	 100 nmol/L: a basal cortisol below this value almost 
always represents severe hypoadrenalism (or treat-
ment with steroids)
•	 400 nmol/L: a basal cortisol above this value in-
dicates a normal hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal 
(HPA) axis – unless the patient is acutely unwell or 
has ongoing unexplained symptoms consistent with 
hypoadrenalism. A cortisol response to tetracosac-
tide or IST below this concentration usually means 
that routine steroid replacement is required
•	 600 nmol/L: a cortisol response to tetracosactide to 
above this concentration at 30 min almost always 
means that ACTH deficiency or primary adrenal 
failure is excluded. A cortisol response to above this 
concentration in an IST certainly excludes the need 
for steroid replacement even during severe intercur-
rent illness
•	 100–400 nmol/L: basal cortisol concentrations in 
this range need a dynamic test to confirm the ab-
normality of the axis; a tetracosactide or IST peak 
response in this range usually indicates a require-
ment for routine steroid replacement
•	 400–600 nmol/L: peak responses to tetracosactide 
or IST in this range in patients with known pitui-
tary disease may not require the patient to receive 
regular replacement, but do require education of 
the patient about the possible need for replacement 
and symptoms of hypoadrenalism during intercur-
rent illness (and often provision of an emergency 
supply of hydrocortisone). Responses to tetracos-
actide in this range can sometimes be seen in nor-
mal individuals, so if there is no other evidence of 
adrenal or pituitary disease, further investigation 
may be required (e.g. renin and ACTH concentra-
tions, possibly followed by IST to exclude isolated 
ACTH deficiency if the former are normal). In-
terpretation of isolated responses in this range are 
further complicated by the fact that patients with 
chronic fatigue syndrome may show borderline re-
duced cortisol dynamic responses, although in most 
cases they do not respond symptomatically to ster-
oid replacement.
Assessment of growth hormone reserve
There are several biochemical tests that are used in 
clinical practice to confirm growth hormone deficiency 
(GHD). The clinical features of GHD are non-specific, 
and the different GH stimulation tests have different de-
grees of ability to stimulate GH release. For this reason, 
there continues to be debate about the most appropri-
ate test and what extent of GH response constitutes true 
deficiency.
Insulin stress test
The insulin stress test (IST) remains the gold standard 
test of GH deficiency. In adults, a peak GH response to 
adequate hypoglycaemia (serum glucose <2.2 mmol/L) 
of >7 μg/L indicates a normal GH reserve, whilst a peak 
GH <3 μg/L, as defined by the UK National Institute 
for Health and Care Excellence (NICE), indicates severe 
deficiency. In children, a peak GH <6.7 μg/L after two 
provocative tests supports a diagnosis of growth hormone 
deficiency, although only one dynamic test is required in 
children with known hypothalamo–pituitary disease. The 
IST is unpleasant for patients and requires close medical 
supervision as it is potentially hazardous and is contrain-
dicated in ischaemic heart disease and epilepsy. As well as 
356	
Clinical biochemistry
being a reliable GH stimulus, the IST is also a good as-
sessment of ACTH reserve so it a useful way of assessing 
GH and ACTH reserve simultaneously.
Children of both sexes may show subnormal GH re-
sponses to hypoglycaemia (and other dynamic tests) in the 
years immediately preceding puberty (objectively when 
the bone age is >10 years). At the present time, there is 
no consensus with respect to the practice of ‘priming’ 
with gonadal steroids prior to such tests.
Other pharmacological tests
The glucagon test can be useful in the assessment of 
GHD when an IST is contraindicated, but it is a less reli-
able stimulus of GH and a poorer test of ACTH reserve 
than the IST, and its mechanism of action is not well un-
derstood. The criteria for diagnosing GHD in the gluca-
gon test are the same as for the IST described above.
Other provocative tests of GH reserve include 
the GH-releasing hormone (GHRH) + arginine and 
GHRH + GH-releasing hexapeptide (GHRP-6) test, both 
of which have now been evaluated in large numbers of 
patients. The GHRH + arginine test may be particularly 
useful for young patients with radiation-induced GHD 
as occasionally the IST can give false negative results. 
Because GHRH + arginine is a more powerful GH stimu-
lus, the cut-off point for diagnosing GHD is <9 μg/L.
In an attempt to avoid an IST, a variety of other phar-
macological tests of GH reserve have also been used, 
particularly in children, including clonidine (0.15 mg/
m2) and arginine infusion (0.5 g/kg). Use of these tests 
tends to be a matter of local preference; all are associ-
ated with rather variable responses and the peak GH val-
ues used to diagnose deficiency vary from laboratory to 
laboratory.
Exercise testing
Growth hormone is released during exercise and some 
laboratories have used an exercise test to assess GH re-
serve. Intensive, well controlled exercise (bicycle ergom-
eter or treadmill) may exclude GH deficiency (by a peak 
GH response >6.7 μg/L), but less well controlled exercise 
(‘run up and down the stairs’) is unreliable.
Assessment of physiological growth 
hormone secretion
Because GH is secreted in a pulsatile fashion with in-
creased pulses at night, serial blood tests, which can be 
done overnight or over 24 h, can be used to monitor 
the frequency and amplitude of GH pulses. Because 
this approach is labour intensive, requiring hospital 
admission with multiple blood samples, it is mainly a 
research tool.
Measurement of urinary GH is not part of routine clin-
ical practice because of its low concentration in urine, but 
sensitive assays may make this possible in the future, par-
ticularly for the surveillance of GH replacement therapy.
Insulin-like growth factor 1 is produced by the liver in 
response to GH and, although measurement of its con-
centration is a useful diagnostic adjunct to provocative 
GH stimulation tests, it should not be used alone to di-
agnose GHD. However, the finding of a low IGF-1 in 
patients with three or four other pituitary deficiencies 
makes the likelihood of GHD sufficiently high that a for-
mal provocative test may not be necessary.
Re-evaluation of GH status in young adults
In patients with isolated GHD that developed in child-
hood, it can be difficult to know whether GH replace-
ment should be continued into adulthood. Patients with 
genetic hypopituitarism or multiple hormone deficien-
cies are highly likely to need to continue GH replace-
ment. However, it may be able to be discontinued in 
patients with isolated or less severe GHD. In this situa-
tion, patients are re-tested during the period of transition 
between childhood and adulthood and the current con-
sensus guidelines suggest a cut-off of <6 μg/L during an 
IST to indicate a continuing need for GH replacement. In 
this situation, the presence of clinical symptoms can also 
help the decision about whether to continue GH, which 
is best done by evaluation of the Adult Growth Hormone 
Deficiency Assessment (AGHDA) score. Consensus 
guidelines suggest that young adults with GHD should 
continue GH until the age of 25 years, when peak bone 
mass is likely to have been achieved.
Releasing hormone tests
Thyrotrophin releasing hormone (200 μg i.v.) and LHRH 
(100 μg i.v.) tests have been used traditionally in combina-
tion with the IST to assess pituitary reserve in the com-
bined pituitary function test. Growth hormone releasing 
hormone testing (100 μg i.v.) and CRH testing (100 μg i.v.) 
have also more recently been advocated as additional tests.
All these releasing hormone tests assess only the 
readily releasable pituitary pool of their relevant hor-
mones and do not assess the ability of the axis to respond 
to appropriate physiological stimuli. When the cause 
of hypopituitarism is at the hypothalamic level (which 
is frequently the case), then ‘normal’ TRH, LHRH, 
GHRH or CRH responses may be seen in the presence 
of deficiency documented by other means. Conversely, 
‘subnormal’ responses are often seen when the axis is 
otherwise felt to be normal. Furthermore, a ‘delayed’ 
TRH test response (peak TSH at 60 min rather than 
20 min), initially considered to be characteristic of hy-
pothalamic disease, is not infrequently seen in primary 
pituitary disease.
For these reasons, the authors believe that all these re-
leasing hormone tests should now play no part in routine 
pituitary function testing, but be reserved (if used at all) 
for the rare cases requiring differentiation between pitu-
itary and hypothalamic deficiency states.
Other tests of gonadotrophin secretion
Clomifene test
When the differentiation of gonadotrophin deficiency 
from other causes of ‘hypothalamic amenorrhoea’ is in 
doubt, a clomifene test (3 mg/kg, maximum 200 mg, daily 
	
18  Hypothalamic, pituitary and adrenal disorders	
357
for seven days) may give additional information. Patients 
with organic gonadotrophin deficiency show no in-
crease in LH and FSH (measured on days 0, 4, 7 and 10), 
whereas some patients with hypothalamic amenorrhoea, 
weight-related amenorrhoea or delayed puberty show a 
gonadotrophin rise, usually followed by menstruation 
(about 28 days later). In early puberty, LH and FSH may 
show a characteristic fall rather than a rise.
Assessment of luteinizing hormone pulsatility
Measurement of plasma LH every 10–15 min for 6–8 h 
or more, when analysed by an appropriate computer 
algorithm, allows detailed assessment of LH pulse 
frequency and amplitude. This may give considerable 
insight into pituitary physiology but, in view of the 
time and number of assays involved, is essentially a 
research tool.
Dynamic tests of posterior pituitary function
Water deprivation test
Water deprivation is the standard physiological test of 
vasopressin secretion. The patient is observed, without 
access to water, with serial measurements of plasma and 
urine osmolality, urine volumes and body weight over a 
period of up to 8 h. If only borderline deficiency is sus-
pected then it is wise, in order to shorten the procedure, 
to ask the patient to take no fluids from midnight before 
a morning test; otherwise the patient should be allowed 
free fluids prior to the test to avoid severe dehydration. 
Simple measurement of 24 h urine volume prior to the 
test may guide which approach is most appropriate; if 
this is <2 L/24 h then DI is unlikely in the first place. If 
body weight falls by more than 3% during the test, this 
suggests severe dehydration. The test should be stopped, 
and plasma osmolality measured for confirmation before 
allowing access to fluids.
Normal vasopressin secretion is demonstrated by a 
urine:plasma osmolality ratio of >2:1 (or, more simply, 
a urine osmolality >600 mmol/kg), in the presence of a 
normal plasma osmolality (280–295 mmol/kg). A high 
plasma osmolality (>300 mmol/kg) with a urine osmo-
lality of <600 mmol/kg is diagnostic of DI. Intermediate 
responses are non-diagnostic and water deprivation must 
be continued or repeated, until diagnostic values are ob-
tained. Once a diagnostic response has been obtained, 
then desmopressin (2 μg i.m.) is administered, free fluids 
are allowed and urinary osmolality is measured hourly for 
2 h. In the presence of DI, full concentration of the urine 
after desmopressin indicates vasopressin deficiency rather 
than nephrogenic DI.
Patients with primary polydipsia frequently com-
mence the test with low urine and plasma osmolalities 
due to water overload, and may fail to concentrate the 
urine adequately after the standard period of water de-
privation since the plasma osmolality is frequently only 
increased into the low–normal range during this time. 
The renal response to desmopressin may also be impaired 
under these circumstances due to ‘washout’ of the renal 
concentrating gradients.
Hypertonic saline infusion
Severe DI can be diagnosed easily by a water deprivation 
test, but mild or borderline DI, and other more subtle 
defects of osmoregulation and thirst, may lead to equivo-
cal findings despite protracted water deprivation. Under 
such circumstances, a hypertonic saline infusion (5% 
NaCl infused at 0.06 mL/kg per min for 120 min) may be 
used to delineate the pathology more accurately. Plasma 
osmolality and vasopressin are measured every 30 min 
but, as vasopressin measurements are not performed in 
most laboratories, this test is often only carried out in 
specialist centres. Discussion of the interpretation of this 
test is beyond the scope of this chapter (see Chapter 4 and 
Baylis, in Further reading, below).
Summary
Outline protocol for the investigation of  
a patient with pituitary disease
The multiple tests available and the controversies regard-
ing their use and interpretation mean that the detail in 
which pituitary function is investigated remains a matter 
for clinical judgement. The authors propose the follow-
ing protocol for the initial assessment of a patient with 
suspected pituitary disease.
1.	 Measure basal pituitary function on a single 09.00 h 
sample (see Appendix 18.1, p. 371).
2.	 If plasma cortisol is <100 nmol/L, then an IST is 
contraindicated and ACTH deficiency can be as-
sumed (unless Addison disease is a possibility or the 
patient is receiving steroids).
3.	 Treat thyroid or ACTH deficiencies identified 
on basal concentrations (hypothyroidism reduces 
ACTH and GH responses to hypoglycaemia).
4.	 If plasma cortisol is >100 nmol/L then:
a.	 if cortisol is >400 nmol/L, ACTH reserve can be 
assumed to be normal unless unexplained symp-
toms suggest otherwise
b.	if cortisol is <400 nmol/L, perform a tetracosac-
tide test – a response above 600 nmol/L confirms 
a normal axis (see above)
c.	 consider IST in the presence of equivocal responses 
to tetracosactide (e.g. peak 400–600 nmol/L), es-
pecially if there are unexplained symptoms, or if 
information on GH reserve is required.
5.	 Treat any ACTH deficiency identified (with 
hydrocortisone).
6.	 Consider whether investigation for GH deficiency 
is indicated:
a.	 if ACTH, thyroid and gonadal axes and osmolal-
ities are normal, and the patient is asymptomatic 
with a normal AGHDA score, then assessment 
of GH reserve is probably of little clinical benefit 
(although it may be of research interest)
b.	in the presence of other pituitary deficiencies, se-
vere GH deficiency becomes increasingly likely 
with an increasing number of other deficiencies. 
If the AGHDA score suggests possibility of the 
clinical syndrome of adult GH deficiency, then 
perform a dynamic test of GH reserve, even if 
IGF-1 is normal
358	
Clinical biochemistry
c.	 at the initial assessment, or first assessment 
­after pituitary surgery, many centres routinely 
perform an IST to formally document ACTH 
and GH reserve (except where contraindicated), 
even in the absence of symptoms.
7.	 Perform a water deprivation test if indicated by 
symptoms or by the basal osmolalities.
A clinical approach to assessment of the 
whole ACTH–adrenal axis
Assessment of the ACTH–adrenal axis is probably the 
most common assessment of complex endocrine function 
undertaken in clinical medicine, and remains the subject 
of ongoing controversy, variation in practice, differences 
in interpretation, artefact due to drugs and, frequently, 
the use of testing in inappropriate circumstances.
Assessment of adrenal reserve is broadly undertaken to 
answer the following four clinical questions.
1.  Does this patient have undiagnosed hypo­
adrenalism? This question is frequently asked in the 
clinical context of hyponatraemia, hypotension and/or 
hypoglycaemia. A basal 09.00 h cortisol <100 nmol/L 
strongly suggests hypoadrenalism, and a value of 
>400 nmol/L makes it very unlikely (unless the patient 
is seriously unwell, in which case higher concentrations 
might normally be expected and the patient could be rela-
tively hypoadrenal with diminished adrenal reserve).
When basal cortisol is uninformative, a short tetra-
cosactide test is usually performed. A normal response 
(defined by an appropriate normal range – see above) ef-
fectively excludes adrenal deficiency. A definitely subnor-
mal response confirms hypoadrenalism (as long as it is 
certain that the patient is not receiving steroid therapy), 
but should not immediately attract a diagnosis of Addison 
disease, since the prevalence of hypopituitarism is higher 
than that of primary adrenal failure.
2.  Is the proven hypoadrenalism primary or 
­secondary? In a newly diagnosed patient with hypoadre-
nalism, the clinical picture may contribute significantly to 
this differential diagnosis. Associated features may point 
towards primary adrenal failure: typical ‘Addisonian’ 
electrolytes (hyponatraemia, hyperkalaemia and slightly 
raised urea), typical ACTH-dependent hyperpigmenta-
tion or a personal or family history of autoimmune en-
docrine disease. Conversely, if the patient has visual field 
defects, clinical signs of hypogonadism or a pituitary 
mass, then ACTH deficiency is much more likely. Many 
patients, however, do not have clear-cut clinical clues to 
the diagnosis and a biochemical diagnosis is essential be-
fore embarking on life-long treatment.
Pragmatically, assessment of basal pituitary function 
is often the simplest and quickest approach, since it will 
either give evidence of other pituitary dysfunction, or, if 
normal, suggest primary adrenal failure (or, less likely, 
isolated ACTH deficiency).
Measurement of 09.00 h basal cortisol, ACTH and re-
cumbent renin is typically slower, but diagnostic, since 
ACTH and renin are both elevated in primary adrenal 
failure.
The depot tetracosactide test has been used tradition-
ally in this context (tetracosactide depot 1 mg i.m. with 
cortisol measured at intervals over 24 h). In primary ad-
renal failure, there is an absent or flat cortisol response, 
whereas in ACTH deficiency or HPA suppression by ste-
roids, the cortisol response slowly rises to reach a near-
normal peak at 24 h.
If primary adrenal failure is confirmed, measure-
ment of adrenal antibodies may confirm autoimmune 
Addison disease, but if this is negative, alternative 
causes of adrenal destruction (tuberculosis, metas-
tases) need to be considered and excluded. If ACTH 
deficiency is present, then full assessment of pituitary 
function and pituitary magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) are indicated.
3.  Has this patient with known pituitary disease de­
veloped ACTH deficiency? This assessment has already 
been outlined above.
4.  Does this patient on pharmacological steroid 
treatment still have adrenal suppression or could they 
now stop treatment? Numerically, this is probably one 
of the most frequent situations in which adrenal function 
is tested (with testing frequently being performed in in-
appropriate circumstances or the results being incorrectly 
interpreted):
•	 there is no point in performing any test of adrenal 
function when patients are taking supraphysi-
ological doses of oral steroids (more than 5–7.5 mg 
prednisolone or 0.5 mg dexamethasone): basal 
cortisol and tetracosactide responses will always be 
suppressed
•	 high doses of inhaled, intranasal, topical or in-
jected (for musculoskeletal disorders) steroids will 
also frequently suppress cortisol responses (basal 
concentrations may be undetectable). This often 
causes difficulties in interpretation, since most syn-
thetic steroids are not measured in cortisol assays 
and it is impossible to differentiate biochemically 
between appropriate suppression and untreated 
deficiency
•	 prednisolone cross-reacts in many cortisol as-
says – so measurement of cortisol after a dose of 
prednisolone may give artefactually higher values. 
As a result of this, tests are often advised ‘under 
dexamethasone cover’. In the authors’ view, this 
is both unnecessary and unhelpful since the basal 
cortisol concentration (which gives useful infor-
mation about background spontaneous cortisol se-
cretion) will be undetectable. It is easier simply to 
omit prednisolone after 18.00 h on the day before 
testing, perform the relevant tests at 09.00 h and 
administer prednisolone when the test has been 
completed.
The authors therefore advise the following regimen 
when assessing whether or not pharmacological steroids 
can be discontinued:
•	 in a patient who is otherwise well, slowly reduce 
steroid doses to the lower end of the physiological 
replacement range indicated above before perform-
ing any hormonal tests
	
18  Hypothalamic, pituitary and adrenal disorders	
359
•	 then check the basal 08.00–09.00 h cortisol one 
morning 24 h after the last dose of steroid and be-
fore the steroid dose is taken that morning (tablets 
can be taken as usual immediately after the blood 
test). Interpretation:
•	 <100 nmol/L: the patient still has profound adre-
nal suppression – further dose reduction would be 
unwise. Steroid replacement in the lower physio­
logical range should be continued (if clinically 
well) and the test repeated in 6–12 months
•	 >400 nmol/L: the adrenal axis is probably com-
pletely normal; steroids could be stopped (or 
slowly reduced if the underlying disease process 
contraindicates complete cessation immediately); 
further tests of adrenal axis are unnecessary unless 
there are unexplained symptoms
•	 200–400 nmol/L: adrenal function is not com-
pletely suppressed (and might be normal or par-
tially suppressed); steroid doses can be slowly and 
cautiously reduced and the tests repeated
•	 100–200 nmol/L: significant adrenal suppression 
is more likely but will only remit if the steroid 
dose is reduced. Reduce steroid dose more slowly 
and cautiously; repeat 09.00 h cortisol 2–3 months 
after each dose reduction.
•	 if concentrations are >300 nmol/L, and if the pa-
tient is clinically well, then steroid replacement can 
safely be stopped completely for several weeks in or-
der to carry out a dynamic test of the adrenal using 
tetracosactide – otherwise the test may be indicated 
when on half-physiological dose as reassurance (it 
is unlikely to be normal, but profound suppression, 
for example a peak cortisol <300 nmol/L, would 
militate against further dose reduction). It may also 
be worth changing from a synthetic steroid to hy-
drocortisone, since this is shorter acting and there-
fore potentially less suppressive.
Even if the results of investigation are normal, it is im-
portant to remember that patients in whom the adrenal 
axis has been suppressed by long-term supraphysiologi-
cal steroid administration may still require replacement 
during severe intercurrent illness for at least a year after 
steroids are discontinued.
Monitoring of pituitary function  
in disease states
Reassessment after pituitary surgery
Pituitary surgery, usually by the trans-sphenoidal route, is 
the recommended therapy for many pituitary adenomas. 
Following surgery, residual pituitary function requires 
careful monitoring and reassessment.
Transient DI is very common in the immediate postop-
erative period. However, the presence of nasal packs (re-
quired by the surgery) frequently results in a dry mouth 
so that the patient may drink excessive fluid, thereby 
causing polyuria in the absence of DI. Patients cured of 
acromegaly may also show polyuria in the absence of DI 
owing to rapid resolution of soft tissue enlargement. It is 
thus essential that DI is confirmed biochemically before 
replacement therapy is commenced. Paired urine and 
plasma osmolalities should be checked daily for the first 
few postoperative days (and measured urgently if symp-
toms develop) and interpreted as outlined above. In bor-
derline cases with persisting polyuria or nocturia, a formal 
water deprivation test may be required following recovery.
Most surgeons and physicians give glucocorticoid re-
placement therapy during the immediate perioperative 
period. One week postoperatively, or earlier if considered 
clinically appropriate and the patient is well, the evening 
replacement dose should be omitted and 09.00 h plasma 
cortisol measured the following morning prior to the next 
dose. If a same-day cortisol result is available, the patient 
can remain off replacement, which should otherwise be re-
started pending the result. A 09.00 h cortisol <100 nmol/L 
indicates the need for continued, possibly life-long, replace-
ment therapy. Patients with a 09.00 h cortisol >300 nmol/L 
can be safely discharged without regular replacement ther-
apy pending further investigations, but those with cortisol 
<400 nmol/L require steroid cover for intercurrent illnesses 
until the results are known. Patients with cortisol in the 
100–300 nmol/L range usually need steroid replacement 
until definitive assessment is possible, but this must be de-
termined by individual clinical assessment. In a retrospective 
review of our own practice, in which patients were investi-
gated one week after pituitary surgery, 13% had a cortisol 
<100 nmol/L and 57% >400 nmol/L – so that only a minor-
ity of patients have equivocal responses at this stage.
Basal thyroid and gonadal function should be checked 
one week postoperatively. In view of the long plasma half-
life of T4, thyroid function should be reassessed at one 
month. At one week, a frankly low plasma testosterone 
in the male is usually diagnostic of ongoing gonadotro-
phin deficiency requiring replacement therapy. Lack of 
elevation of gonadotrophins in the postmenopausal fe-
male is also diagnostic. In both cases, borderline results 
require a repeat at one month. In the premenopausal fe-
male, early results may be misleading and it is wise to 
wait 2–3 months to assess the return of menstrual cyclic-
ity prior to commencing replacement therapy.
A tetracosactide test is invalid as a test for ACTH 
reserve until at least two weeks postoperatively: the au-
thors’ practice is to perform this test approximately one 
month postoperatively in patients with a non-diagnostic 
basal cortisol concentration. The authors only perform 
a dynamic test of GH reserve in patients with symptoms 
suggestive of GH deficiency in whom replacement is be-
ing considered, but other centres prefer an IST at this 
stage to document fully postoperative pituitary function.
Monitoring after pituitary irradiation
Pituitary irradiation may be employed in the treatment 
of pituitary tumours (although its use is declining), and 
the hypothalamus and pituitary are also within the field 
of whole brain irradiation used for other diseases. All af-
fected patients are at risk of slowly progressive hypopitu-
itarism over at least the next 20 years and require regular 
monitoring. The order of progression is typically GH 
deficiency occurring early, LH and FSH deficiency next, 
and TSH and ACTH deficiency at a later stage. The le-
sion appears to be primarily at hypothalamic level and 
PRL deficiency therefore occurs rarely, if ever.
360	
Clinical biochemistry
The development of GH deficiency in children is best 
assessed by careful monitoring of growth – and in adults, 
annual screening with the AGHDA questionnaire may be 
appropriate to identify patients in whom a dynamic test 
of GH reserve is required. For all other hormones, basal 
09.00 h pituitary function (see Appendix  18.1, p. 371) 
should be checked annually, with a subsequent tetracosac-
tide test when serum cortisol is <400 nmol/L. (A routine 
annual tetracosactide test may actually prove to be a more 
efficient use of both the patient’s and the laboratory’s time.)
Monitoring in other pituitary disease states
Not all pituitary diseases result in progressive pituitary 
failure, so the need to monitor pituitary function in such 
patients is a matter of clinical judgement.
Patients with large pituitary mass lesions, granuloma-
tous disease of the pituitary or hypothalamus, or unex-
plained acquired partial hypopituitarism certainly require 
monitoring of remaining pituitary function, which should 
be performed annually as above, at least for the first few 
years of follow-up. Conversely, patients with micropro-
lactinomas whose PRL is suppressed on therapy, or pa-
tients with clearly defined isolated pituitary deficiency 
syndromes such as Kallman syndrome, are at minimal 
risk of progressive hypopituitarism and do not require 
regular monitoring in the absence of symptoms. Isolated 
GH deficiency in childhood is sometimes followed by 
other pituitary deficiencies in adult life, but it is as yet 
unclear whether this occurs sufficiently frequently to jus-
tify regular monitoring and, conversely, some such child-
hood cases are shown to have normal GH reserve when 
retested as young adults.
OTHER DIAGNOSTIC TECHNIQUES IN  
PITUITARY DISEASE
Clinical assessment
Endocrinologists continue to rely on clinical assessment 
to determine the need for further biochemical confir-
mation of diseases of the pituitary and hypothalamus. 
Investigations for possible Cushing syndrome and ac-
romegaly are thus rarely performed unless they are sus-
pected clinically because of the relevant symptoms and 
signs. Similarly, gonadotrophin deficiency is usually sus-
pected by the development of loss of libido in both sexes, 
amenorrhoea in females and impotence and loss of sec-
ondary sexual hair in males. Diabetes insipidus results in 
thirst and polyuria, usually manifest in the earliest stages 
by nocturia (since urine is normally maximally concen-
trated overnight). Indeed, a biochemical nihilist might 
reasonably argue that there is no point in assessing these 
axes unless these clinical symptoms or signs are present.
Thyroid stimulating hormone deficiency may lead 
to typical symptoms and signs of hypothyroidism (see 
Chapter 19), although these are usually less severe than 
in primary thyroid disease. Adrenocorticotrophic hor-
mone deficiency may result in general malaise, postural 
hypotension, headaches and abdominal pains and weight 
loss (pituitary cachexia). These symptoms of deficiency 
are clearly non-specific and biochemical assessment is es-
sential to confirm or deny deficiency. Growth hormone 
deficiency in adults results in impairment of quality of 
life in some patients – the pattern of symptomatology is 
non-specific, but can be recognized clinically or through 
testing with quality of life questionnaires.
Masses enlarging within the pituitary or hypothalamus 
frequently exert pressure on the optic chiasm and thus 
cause visual field loss, typically a bitemporal hemianopia. 
Clinical assessment of visual fields by confrontation and 
by formal charting is thus an essential part of the assess-
ment of patients with pituitary disease. Large lateral ex-
tensions of pituitary tumours may more rarely result in 
cranial nerve deficits, the cavernous sinus syndrome or 
even temporal lobe epilepsy, and inferior extensions very 
rarely cause spontaneous cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhoea.
Finally, panhypopituitarism is an unusual cause of unex-
plained hyponatraemia or hypoglycaemia and should always 
be considered during the investigation of these disorders.
Pituitary imaging techniques
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scanning of the pitu-
itary, with and without gadolinium enhancement, is the 
investigation of choice and allows detailed anatomical as-
sessment. Computed tomography (CT) scanning of the 
pituitary gives less detailed information, but is used when 
MRI is contraindicated or impossible due to the presence 
of metallic implants or claustrophobia.
PITUITARY HYPERSECRETION STATES
Pituitary adenomas
Pituitary hypersecretion states are most usually associated 
with benign pituitary adenomas synthesizing and secret-
ing the relevant hormone. Tumours may be subdivided 
into microadenomas (<10 mm diameter) and macroad-
enomas (>10 mm). Pituitary tumours may be invasive but 
are only very rarely malignant. Hyperplasia of the vari-
ous cell types has also been described but, except when 
secondary to ectopic secretion of hypothalamic releasing 
hormones, is poorly defined. Non-functioning pituitary 
adenomas are more common in clinical practice.
Prolactinoma
Differential diagnosis of hyperprolactinaemia
A prolactinoma, or prolactin-secreting pituitary ade-
noma, is the commonest functioning pituitary adenoma. 
However, hyperprolactinaemia has many causes other 
than a prolactinoma (Fig. 18.5).
Any pituitary tumour or mass that is large enough to 
impede pituitary portal blood flow can result in hyper-
prolactinaemia by preventing hypothalamic dopamine 
from reaching the pituitary lactotrophs. Adenomas 
causing acromegaly also occasionally secrete PRL di-
rectly, in addition to GH. The differentiation of a pro-
lactinoma from a functionless pituitary tumour may 
therefore sometimes be difficult, although biochemical 
results give some assistance. A plasma PRL >5000 mU/L 
	
18  Hypothalamic, pituitary and adrenal disorders	
361
almost always indicates a prolactinoma, and concentra-
tions may reach several hundred thousands. Plasma PRL 
<5000 mU/L may result from a prolactinoma, a func-
tionless pituitary tumour (adenoma, cranio­pharyngioma 
etc.) or any of the other causes shown in Figure 18.5. 
It is most unlikely for a large macroprolactinoma to 
be associated with PRL concentrations in this range. 
Conversely, while a small microprolactinoma may be as-
sociated with an elevated PRL at any concentration, a 
small functionless microadenoma is unlikely to elevate 
plasma PRL into the thousands. Thus, when PRL is 
raised, but <5000 mU/L, the smaller the adenoma seen 
on CT or MRI scan, the more likely it is to be a prolac-
tinoma and vice versa.
Any drug with dopamine antagonist effects may cause 
hyperprolactinaemia; this includes almost all antiemetics 
(e.g. metoclopramide, prochlorperazine, domperidone) 
and most major tranquilizers (chlorpromazine and other 
phenothiazines, haloperidol, risperidone etc.). A care-
ful drug history is therefore essential in the assessment 
of hyperprolactinaemia. Antiemetics can often be dis-
continued but antipsychotic medication usually needs to 
be continued, although change to a newer antipsychotic 
with less effect on PRL may be possible (e.g. quetiapine, 
olanzapine and other ‘atypical antipsychotics’).
Primary hypothyroidism may be associated with hy-
perprolactinaemia in the low thousands (mU/L) (and 
with galactorrhoea and oligo- or amenorrhoea) that re-
solves with thyroid replacement therapy. Chronic kidney 
disease causes hyperprolactinaemia of a similar degree. 
Measurement of thyroid and renal function is thus essen-
tial in any patient with hyperprolactinaemia.
Mild and often intermittent hyperprolactinaemia 
(usually <1000 mU/L) is often seen in polycystic ovary 
syndrome (PCOS). In the appropriate clinical context 
(hirsutism, acne, obesity), assessment of plasma andro-
gen concentrations and sex hormone-binding globulin 
(SHBG) may therefore be indicated (see Chapter  22). 
Major ‘stress’, for example hypoglycaemia, also elevates 
plasma PRL but it is far from clear whether psychological 
stress or fear of venepuncture is able to do so.
Finally, it should be remembered that by far the com-
monest causes of a state of hyperprolactinaemia and 
amenorrhoea are pregnancy and lactation: a pregnancy 
test may be indicated.
Role of dynamic tests of PRL secretion
In order to assist the differential diagnosis of hyperpro-
lactinaemia, a number of dynamic tests of PRL secretion 
have been advocated and used, particularly in continen-
tal Europe. Such tests include the TRH test, metoclo-
pramide test and domperidone test. None of these tests 
gives clear differentiation between prolactinomas and 
other causes of hyperprolactinaemia and they have no 
role in routine biochemical assessment.
Assessment of remaining pituitary function
Few patients with small microprolactinomas have defi-
ciencies of other pituitary hormones, but, conversely, a 
functionless macroadenoma can cause severe hypopitu-
itarism associated with mild hyperprolactinaemia. Clearly 
not every patient with a high PRL requires full pituitary 
function testing. The authors’ own (arbitrary) practice is 
to perform basal anterior pituitary function tests and a 
pituitary MRI whenever the plasma PRL is consistently 
>1000 mU/L, but not otherwise unless there are relevant 
symptoms or signs.
Outline of presentation and management 
of prolactinoma
In females, hyperprolactinaemia causes oligo- or amenor-
rhoea, galactorrhoea and breast tenderness, poor libido and 
infertility. Patients may present with any combination of 
these symptoms, with or without other signs of pituitary en-
largement such as visual field defects. In males, poor libido 
and impotence are the only early symptoms and patients fre-
quently present at a later stage with visual field loss, with or 
without headaches. Development of a prolactinoma in the 
peripubertal period can also result in delayed or arrested pu-
berty in both sexes, and a serum PRL measurement is thus 
an essential part of the assessment of such patients.
The management of prolactinomas is primarily medi-
cal, using dopamine agonist therapy, which can suppress 
plasma PRL to normal and cause clinical remission of 
all symptoms. The long-acting dopamine agonist cab-
ergoline is now most commonly used – bromocriptine 
and quinagolide are alternatives. Bromocriptine may be 
preferred when pregnancy is planned, in view of its lon-
ger safety record, although there is no evidence of fetal 
harm with the newer drugs. In addition to lowering PRL 
and relieving symptoms, dopamine agonist therapy also 
causes dramatic shrinkage of macroprolactinomas in a 
majority of cases, with resolution of pressure effects such 
as visual field loss. Such tumour shrinkage is the ultimate 
non-invasive method to distinguish a prolactinoma from 
other pituitary lesions causing hyperprolactinaemia. In a 
majority of prolactinomas the hyperprolactinaemia will 
recur if dopamine agonist therapy is stopped, so that 
treatment is usually long term, although a significant mi-
nority may be able to discontinue therapy.
FIGURE 18.5  ■  Causes of hyperprolactinaemia. PCOS, polycystic 
ovary syndrome.
362	
Clinical biochemistry
Alternative therapies for a prolactinoma include trans-
sphenoidal surgery and, rarely, pituitary irradiation.
Monitoring the response to dopamine 
agonist therapy
The aim of dopamine agonist therapy is to suppress 
plasma PRL concentrations into the normal range. The 
dose of dopamine agonist is usually slowly increased 
with sequential PRL estimations until this is achieved. 
Thereafter, plasma PRL would normally be measured 
at each clinic visit, although these need only be annual 
in patients on long-term therapy. Fibrotic reactions have 
been described as rare side-effects of long-term dopamine 
agonist therapy (pulmonary, retroperitoneal and pericar-
dial); some form of monitoring is advised and the authors’ 
practice is to monitor for symptoms and measure urea 
and electrolytes, full blood count and C-reactive protein 
(CRP) (or plasma viscosity or erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate (ESR)) annually.
Macroprolactinaemia
In some patients, PRL circulates bound to immunoglobu-
lin forming an immunoreactive PRL of high molecular 
weight (macroprolactin). This is biologically inactive but 
in molar terms may considerably exceed the concentra-
tion of free PRL. Commonly used immunoassays for PRL 
cross-react with macroprolactin to a variable extent, and 
with some assays macroprolactin is a common cause of hy-
perprolactinaemia. This can usually be detected by poly-
ethylene glycol (PEG) precipitation, although gel filtration 
chromatography is more reliable. Laboratories should 
know the susceptibility of their own assay to this artefact, 
and always arrange to screen for macroprolactinaemia if 
persistent hyperprolactinaemia does not correlate with 
clinical symptoms or expected responses to treatment.
Hook effect
Extremely high PRL concentrations (say >100 000 mU/L) 
in patients with large pituitary macroprolactinomas may, 
rarely, exceed the usual linear range of the assay calibra-
tion curve when homogeneous assays are used, and give 
apparently only modest elevations not suggestive of a 
large prolactinoma. This can be detected by assays of 
doubling dilutions of serum (when measured PRL con-
centration fails to fall as expected and may begin to rise).
Acromegaly
Diagnosis of acromegaly
The diagnosis of acromegaly is usually suspected clinically 
before any biochemical tests are performed. However, 
by the time acromegaly is clinically obvious, the patient 
may have already suffered considerable morbidity from 
soft tissue changes, arthritis, hypertension, diabetes and 
consequent cardiovascular disease. Because of this, the 
aim should be to diagnose acromegaly at an early stage, 
when clinical signs are less clear cut and differentiation 
from normality can only be confirmed by biochemical 
investigations.
Basal GH and IGF-1 estimation. Random plasma 
GH measurements are never diagnostic of acromeg-
aly, since high concentrations may occur with normal 
pulses of secretion and with stress. Nevertheless, a low 
plasma GH (<0.4 μg/L), together with a normal IGF-1 
essentially excludes the diagnosis, whereas a high 
IGF-1 with consistent GH concentration makes the 
diagnosis very likely. It is therefore the authors’ prac-
tice to measure a random GH and IGF-1 concentra-
tion as a simple first test when acromegaly is suspected. 
An age-related normal range for IGF-1 must be used 
for interpretation since concentrations vary consider-
ably throughout life.
Glucose tolerance test. The 75 g glucose tolerance test 
(GTT) remains the gold standard test for the diagnosis 
of acromegaly. After glucose, plasma GH in normal in-
dividuals is suppressed to <0.4 μg/L. Patients with acro-
megaly fail to show complete suppression and may show 
a paradoxical rise of plasma GH. Failure of GH to fall to 
<0.4 μg/L is highly suggestive of acromegaly, even if sub-
stantial suppression of GH has occurred, and an elevated 
IGF-1 will normally confirm the diagnosis.
Failure of normal glucose suppression of GH may 
­occur in the absence of acromegaly in liver disease, poorly 
controlled diabetes, chronic kidney disease, malnutrition 
(including anorexia nervosa) and primary growth hormone 
insensitivity (Laron syndrome). Diabetes can be a particu-
lar diagnostic challenge, since a GTT is inappropriate in 
established disease. Insulin-like growth factor 1 concen-
trations, however, are typically normal in uncomplicated 
diabetes, and, if elevated, the authors usually recommend 
a four-point GH day curve to confirm circulating GH 
concentrations consistently above the ‘safe’ range.
Other diagnostic tests. Patients with acromegaly may 
show a paradoxical rise in plasma GH during standard 
TRH or LHRH tests. When acromegaly has been clearly 
diagnosed by other means, these tests give no additional 
clinically useful information, but they may help confirm 
mild acromegaly in patients when the results of other 
tests are equivocal.
In normal individuals, plasma GH shows a transient 
rise during a dopamine infusion (4 μg/kg per min for 3 h), 
whereas patients with acromegaly characteristically show 
a fall in plasma GH. This test can also be used to confirm 
an equivocal diagnosis but is not used routinely.
Ectopic secretion of GHRH, for example from a 
pancreatic endocrine tumour, is a rare cause of clinical 
acro­megaly. The diagnosis is not usually suspected until 
somatotroph hyperplasia is found at trans-sphenoidal sur-
gery rather than the expected adenoma. In these circum-
stances, peripheral plasma GHRH concentration (available 
only in a few specialist centres) is elevated and diagnostic.
Outline of presentation and management 
of acromegaly
Acromegaly is usually diagnosed clinically when the pa-
tient presents with an incidental illness to a doctor who 
recognizes the typical physical appearance, which is fre-
quently longstanding and only slowly progressive.
	
18  Hypothalamic, pituitary and adrenal disorders	
363
Growth hormone-secreting tumours that develop in 
childhood result in gigantism, but after puberty, fusion 
of the major epiphyses means that growth in height is no 
longer possible. Patients with acromegaly do, however, 
develop excessive growth of soft tissues and small bones 
of the skull, face, hands and feet, which results in the 
characteristic clinical features. They have large, ‘spade-
like’ hands and large, broad feet, usually with a history of 
increasing ring size and shoe size over a number of years. 
Facial appearance is characteristic with prognathism, 
prominent supraorbital ridges, large nose and tongue and 
generalized coarsening of the features. Examination of 
old photographs will frequently demonstrate that these 
changes have been progressive over 5–10 years or more. 
Headaches, often severe, and troublesome, inappropri-
ate sweating are common symptoms; other findings 
frequently include a multinodular goitre, kyphosis, hy-
pertension and diabetes mellitus, the last two presumably 
contributing to the observed increase in cardiovascular 
morbidity and mortality in this condition.
Patients with acromegaly often develop deficiencies of 
other pituitary hormones, and full investigation of pituitary 
function is mandatory once the diagnosis has been made.
Although acromegaly frequently goes undiagnosed for 
many years, treatment is almost always indicated since, 
if left untreated, the condition results in disfigurement, 
morbidity (primarily due to kyphosis and osteoarthritis) 
and mortality (primarily cardiovascular, but possibly also 
an increase in malignancies).
First-line therapy in almost all patients is trans-­
sphenoidal surgery, which is able to cure at least 75% of 
microadenomas but a much smaller proportion of large 
macroadenomas, some of which are locally invasive. A 
number of studies have shown substantial differences in 
success rates between surgeons and centres, and an ex-
perienced pituitary surgeon is essential. Unsuccessful 
pituitary surgery is traditionally followed by pituitary ir-
radiation, which steadily lowers GH secretion, but may 
require 10–20 years to normalize GH concentrations in 
patients where the initial GH is very high (over 40 μg/L). 
Medical therapy with dopamine agonists such as high-
dose cabergoline (e.g. 0.5 mg daily) is useful in a propor-
tion of patients. The potent, long-lasting somatostatin 
analogues octreotide and lanreotide are able to normalize 
GH concentrations in the majority of patients (but not 
all), albeit at the expense of monthly injections and a high 
economic cost. Both classes of drugs may allow signifi-
cant shrinkage of a somatotroph adenoma preoperatively. 
More recently, the GH antagonist pegvisomant has been 
shown to be capable of normalizing IGF-1 in almost ev-
ery patient, but treatment requires daily injections and is 
extremely expensive. The success of these drugs has led 
some authorities to recommend long-term medical ther-
apy instead of radiotherapy (or even surgery), but this is 
not currently routine practice in most centres.
Monitoring the response to therapy
There has been considerable controversy over the years 
regarding the appropriate biochemical criteria to di-
agnose remission or cure of acromegaly after therapy, 
but results of large retrospective studies and consensus 
meetings have achieved much greater uniformity. The 
current consensus criteria for disease control in acromeg-
aly define active and controlled disease. The criteria for 
active disease are a random GH >1 μg/L and nadir GH 
after OGTT ≥0.4 μg/L with an elevated IGF-1. Patients 
with active disease usually require closer monitoring to 
ensure the clinical and biochemical picture does not de-
teriorate, and would be considered for additional treat-
ment if the clinical picture were to deteriorate or the GH 
increases to >2 μg/L. The criteria for controlled disease 
are a random GH <1 μg/L or nadir GH after OGTT 
<0.4 μg/L and an age-sex normalized IGF-1 for age and 
sex. Occasionally after treatment for acromegaly there is 
a discrepancy between GH and IGF-1 concentrations, 
most commonly involving a normal GH and elevated 
IGF-1 concentration. Although the aim of management 
should be to normalize both GH and IGF-1, it is cur-
rently felt that a normal GH level concentration is prob-
ably the more important determinant of cardiovascular 
risk reduction. The current literature suggests that a GH 
<2 μg/L is probably within the safe range for cardiovascu-
lar disease, although there remains debate about whether 
adjuvant treatment is indicated for patients who have dis-
cordantly elevated IGF-1 despite acceptable growth hor-
mone concentrations.
Diagnosis and differential diagnosis 
of Cushing syndrome
Endogenous Cushing syndrome is rare, with an inci-
dence of approximately 5 per million population per year. 
However, many of the clinical features of the syndrome 
are very common (weight gain, hypertension, hirsutism, 
diabetes) so that biochemical tests are frequently re-
quested to exclude the diagnosis and are essential to con-
firm its presence. Clinical features certainly increase the 
suspicion of Cushing syndrome (easy bruising, thin skin, 
red/purple abdominal striae, proximal myopathy, specific 
distribution of fat, e.g. supraclavicular and dorsal fat pads 
in addition to central obesity). However, many patients 
with biochemically and surgically proven Cushing dis-
ease are not as grossly ‘cushingoid’ as seen in a patient 
on high-dose pharmacological steroids or as illustrated 
in older medical student textbooks; they are often over-
weight rather than obese but with a history of unexpected 
recent weight gain and change towards central distribu-
tion of fat.
Measurement of urinary free cortisol (UFC) is fre-
quently used as a first-line screening test for Cushing 
syndrome. It has the advantage of simplicity, but the dis-
advantage that the diagnosis may be missed if urine col-
lection is incomplete, and of false positive elevations of 
urinary free cortisol in obesity and stressful illness.
Many clinicians will therefore use some form of low-
dose dexamethasone suppression test as their preferred 
first-line screening test.
Low-dose 
dexamethasone 
suppression 
test. 
Dexamethasone 0.5 mg is administered 6-hourly for 
48 h commencing at 09.00 h, with plasma cortisol mea-
sured at 09.00 h at the end of the test. Normal response 
is a plasma cortisol <50 nmol/L (and undetectable in 
most normal individuals). Many regard this test as too 
364	
Clinical biochemistry
­complex – but it still potentially involves only one blood 
sample and one prescription, and patients can easily fol-
low the administration protocol as an outpatient if given 
a simple information sheet. It is sensitive and much more 
specific than the overnight test and is the authors’ pre-
ferred screening test.
Overnight 
dexamethasone 
suppression 
test. 
Dexamethasone 1 mg is administered on going to bed 
at 23.00 h and plasma cortisol is measured at 09.00 h. 
Suppression of cortisol to <50 nmol/L is unequivo-
cally normal and because it is a simple and sensitive 
investigation, it is preferred by many clinicians, al-
though it has a higher false positive rate than a formal 
48 h test.
Midnight salivary cortisol. This test is gaining in-
creasing popularity for diagnosis of Cushing syndrome, 
particularly in the USA. In normal individuals, plasma 
cortisol concentration is low at midnight, when resting 
or asleep, whereas in Cushing syndrome, the circadian 
rhythm is lost or reduced. A midnight sleeping plasma 
cortisol <100 nmol/L has traditionally been used to ex-
clude Cushing syndrome, but the practicalities of in-
patient bed and junior staff availability mean that this 
test is now rarely practical in the UK. More recent data 
suggest that an awake value >207 nmol/L may have a 
higher specificity and is easier than sampling whilst the 
patient is asleep. A saliva sample can be collected by 
the patient at home and midnight salivary cortisol has 
been shown to be a useful screening test, although the 
precise cut-off value depends upon the local reference 
range and the assay is not yet widely available in clinical 
practice.
Other tests. All tests for diagnosis and differential di-
agnosis are subject to false positive and false negative re-
sults. Where the result of first-line screening tests are in 
conflict with the clinical findings, or where doubt exists, 
then other tests are sometimes performed: repeated UFC 
measurements to establish the presence or absence of 
‘cyclical Cushing syndrome’; a formal ‘circadian rhythm’ 
assessment of plasma cortisol as an inpatient; an insulin 
stress test (IST) to demonstrate suppression of the corti-
sol response to stress, which is typically seen in Cushing 
syndrome. The desmopressin stimulation test, where pa-
tients with pituitary Cushing disease typically show a re-
sponse, and normal individuals do not, is no longer felt to 
be sufficiently useful for routine clinical practice.
At this stage, advice from a specialist tertiary centre is 
usually required. Scanning of the adrenals or pituitary 
is not advised until the diagnosis of Cushing syndrome 
is clearly established, since ‘incidentalomas’ of both the 
pituitary and adrenals are common and may lead to an in-
appropriate diagnosis.
Once Cushing syndrome has been diagnosed, mea-
surement of plasma ACTH can readily distinguish pri-
mary adrenal causes from ACTH-dependent Cushing 
syndrome. The former can be readily confirmed on CT 
or MRI scan of the adrenals, but the differential diagnosis 
of the latter remains a challenging clinical problem (see 
Fig. 18.6).
Clinical context of ACTH-dependent 
Cushing syndrome
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone-dependent Cushing syn-
drome may be due either to pituitary Cushing disease, 
usually associated with a corticotroph microadenoma, or 
to ectopic ACTH secretion (and very rarely ectopic CRH 
secretion) by a variety of tumours elsewhere.
Numerically, the commonest source of ectopic 
ACTH secretion is small cell carcinoma of the bron-
chus. In this case, the clinical presentation is usually 
rapid and is often with symptoms directly related to the 
primary tumour. Although plasma ACTH and cortisol 
concentrations can be extremely high, such patients are 
rarely clinically cushingoid but may have pigmentation 
(due to the ACTH), proximal myopathy and hypoka-
laemic alkalosis. Such patients rarely present diagnostic 
difficulties.
In contrast, other, often relatively benign neuro-
endocrine tumours, can also secrete ACTH, particu-
larly carcinoid tumours of the lungs (the commonest), 
mediastinum and elsewhere; pancreatic endocrine 
tumours; medullary thyroid carcinomas and, rarely, 
FIGURE  18.6  ■  Strategy for the differential diagnosis of ACTH-
dependent Cushing syndrome.
	
18  Hypothalamic, pituitary and adrenal disorders	
365
phaeochromocytomas. Such tumours are small, slow 
growing and clinically occult and these patients may 
present with typical Cushing syndrome indistinguish-
able from that seen in pituitary-dependent disease. 
Such cases represent 10–15% of ACTH-dependent 
Cushing syndrome in most large series. Since these 
tumours may be only a few millimetres in diameter 
and thus hard to localize clinically or by conventional 
imaging techniques, biochemical tests are of para-
mount importance in their differentiation from pitu-
itary Cushing disease.
Plasma cortisol and ACTH concentrations
In pituitary disease, plasma ACTH is often <100 ng/L, 
but higher values (up to at least 400 ng/L) are not infre-
quently seen. While, on average, plasma ACTH (usually 
>100 ng/L), and thus plasma cortisol, are higher in occult 
ectopic ACTH secretion than in pituitary disease, there 
is overlap and values usually lie within the range observed 
in Cushing disease.
Chromatography of plasma ACTH has been employed 
in the past to identify large molecular weight ACTH pre-
cursors, which are frequently secreted ectopically by tu-
mours, but also occasionally by pituitary tumours. The 
complexity of these techniques means that they are no 
longer generally available, although immunometric as-
says specific for ACTH precursors may sometimes pro-
vide equivalent information.
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test
The high-dose dexamethasone suppression test was ini-
tially described in 1960 for the differentiation of adre-
nal from pituitary causes of Cushing syndrome. While 
largely superseded in this role, it remains useful in the 
differentiation of occult ectopic ACTH secretion.
A number of dosage regimens have been described, 
but the authors prefer the original regimen, with which 
there is greatest experience. Dexamethasone is admin-
istered orally, 2 mg strictly six-hourly for 48 h, com-
mencing at 09.00 h. Plasma cortisol is measured at 
09.00 h (basal value) and after 24 h and 48 h of treat-
ment. ‘Significant suppression’ is arbitrarily defined 
as a fall in plasma cortisol to 50% or less of the basal 
value.
Using such criteria, about 80% of patients with 
Cushing disease, but only 10% of patients with occult ec-
topic ACTH secretion, show significant suppression of 
plasma cortisol. Thus differentiation is far from absolute, 
but since pituitary disease is far more common this means 
that significant suppression during the test statistically 
favours pituitary disease by approximately 70:1, whereas 
patients showing no suppression at all are equally likely to 
have a pituitary or ectopic source.
Corticotrophin releasing hormone test
Following the isolation and synthesis of the 41-amino 
acid CRH, the CRH test (see Appendix 18.1, p. 372) has 
gained an important role in the differential diagnosis of 
ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome.
Following administration of CRH (in the UK, usually 
human CRF-41, but in the USA, typically ovine CRF-
41, in both cases 100 μg i.v.), most patients with pituitary 
Cushing disease show a rise in plasma ACTH and there-
fore cortisol (defined as an increase of 25% above basal). 
In about 80% of patients with pituitary disease, the rise 
in plasma cortisol is ‘exaggerated’, that is, above the peak 
value observed in normal individuals. It is of interest and 
of practical importance that patients who fail to suppress 
with high-dose dexamethasone usually do show a cortisol 
response to CRH. In contrast, a significant cortisol re-
sponse to CRH in ectopic ACTH secretion is extremely 
rare and limited to one or two isolated case reports in the 
world literature.
Other tests
An unprovoked hypokalaemic alkalosis remains an im-
portant clue to the presence of ectopic ACTH secretion, 
since over 90% of such patients present with hypokalae-
mia, compared with only 10% of patients with pituitary 
Cushing disease.
In the context of ectopic ACTH, tumours frequently 
also secrete other peptide hormones so that one or more 
tumour markers may be positive in the blood of such 
patients. It is therefore the authors’ practice in patients 
with equivocal tests to screen plasma for tumour mark-
ers including calcitonin, human chorionic gonadotrophin 
(hCG), α-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 
and ‘gut hormones’, any of which may occasionally prove 
to be positive.
Petrosal sinus sampling for ACTH
It can be seen from the discussion above that no test 
is completely reliable in the differential diagnosis of 
ACTH-dependent Cushing syndrome. Because of this, 
techniques have been developed to ascertain directly the 
source of ACTH secretion via bilateral, simultaneous, 
inferior petrosal sinus sampling (IPSS) for ACTH after 
CRH stimulation.
Venous sampling catheters are passed from both fem-
oral veins to lie in the respective inferior petrosal sinuses, 
which drain blood from the cavernous sinus and pituitary 
gland. The patient is partially heparinized prior to the fi-
nal placement of the catheters to avoid the risk of venous 
thrombosis affecting the brain, which has been reported 
rarely. Blood for ACTH estimation is obtained simul-
taneously from both sides and from a peripheral vein, 
at timed intervals before and after an intravenous bolus 
of CRH. It is the authors’ practice to administer TRH 
(200 μg) at the same time to measure central secretion 
of TSH and PRL to confirm the equivalence of cath-
eter placement since, in the authors’ experience, unequal 
sampling is frequently seen despite good radiological 
appearances.
After a technically successful procedure, the vast ma-
jority (all in most series) of patients with pituitary Cushing 
disease show a central:peripheral gradient of ACTH con-
centration of >2:1 basally or >3:1 after CRH, which is 
diagnostic of pituitary disease. Significant lateralization 
of ACTH secretion may also be observed and may guide 
366	
Clinical biochemistry
the surgeon and improve the surgical cure rate. It is the 
authors’ practice to perform IPSS in almost every patient 
with ACTH-dependent Cushing disease without an ob-
vious ectopic tumour or pituitary macroadenoma, as part 
of the routine differential diagnostic work-up; others re-
serve the test for situations where other tests are contra-
dictory. The relative complexity of the technique means, 
however, that it should be restricted to those centres with 
experience in its use.
Venous sampling for ACTH from a wide variety of 
sites throughout the body, using a catheter in the cen-
tral veins, occasionally may also give useful information, 
especially when directed towards a suspicious lesion de-
tected on body CT, MRI or positron emission tomogra-
phy (PET) scanning.
Imaging
Although imaging plays an important role in the differ-
ential diagnosis of Cushing syndrome, it is important to 
interpret the biochemical findings as the imaging may be 
misleading. An MRI scan of the pituitary is frequently 
normal in pituitary Cushing disease, and may be ab-
normal in 10% of normal individuals (and therefore in 
ectopic ACTH patients). In some patients, where the sus-
picion of ectopic ACTH secretion is high on biochemical 
grounds, detailed CT scanning of the entire thorax and 
abdomen may be necessary. An appropriate diagnostic 
strategy is summarized in Figure 18.6.
Outline of management
The first-line treatment of Cushing disease is now selec-
tive adenomectomy at trans-sphenoidal surgery, which 
results in cure in about 75% of cases, varying from se-
ries to series and with the biochemical criteria used to 
diagnose ‘cure’ (see below). The earlier alternatives of 
bilateral adrenalectomy or pituitary irradiation are now 
usually reserved for patients who are not cured by pitu-
itary surgery.
Medical therapy is also possible for Cushing disease of 
all types, but is usually reserved for preoperative prepa-
ration or in patients where surgery has failed or is im-
possible. Commonly used drugs include metyrapone 
and ketoconazole. The aim of therapy is to maintain 
mean circulating cortisol concentrations between 150 
and 300 nmol/L, but care must be taken to ensure that 
the cortisol assay used does not cross-react with precur-
sors above the drug-induced block in cortisol synthesis 
(11-deoxycortisol in the case of metyrapone).
Reassessment after pituitary surgery
As with acromegaly, definition of ‘cure’ after trans-­
sphenoidal surgery for Cushing disease remains a con-
troversial area. Many of the larger series reporting 
success of this type of surgery have failed to define their 
criteria for ‘cure’, and some appear to be assessed only 
by clinical remission or return of UFC to within the ref-
erence range.
After 
successful 
pituitary 
surgery, 
most 
pa-
tients have adrenal insufficiency, since the normal 
hypothalamo-­pituitary axis is fully suppressed by the 
longstanding hypercortisolaemia. To be confident of 
‘cure’, a 09.00 h cortisol, off replacement therapy, at 
the early preoperative reassessment should be subnor-
mal, that is, <100 nmol/L (some authors insist on un-
detectable concentrations). Other authors suggest that 
a concentration <140 nmol/L in the context of clini-
cal improvement may suggest remission. Occasionally, 
delayed remission may occur, although a basal corti-
sol >140 nmol/L after six weeks post-pituitary surgery 
is an indication that further treatment is needed. In 
cases of doubt, a formal 48 h low-dose dexamethasone 
suppression test should be performed (0.5 mg, orally, 
strictly six-hourly for 48 h, commencing at 09.00 h); 
normal individuals suppress plasma 09.00 h cortisol to 
undetectable values (<25 nmol/L in the authors’ labo-
ratory) at the end of this test, and failure to show such 
complete suppression indicates residual disease, albeit 
mild in many cases.
Patients in remission from Cushing disease require 
glucocorticoid replacement therapy for several months 
or even years. To assess the possibility of steroid with-
drawal, a 09.00 h cortisol should be measured periodi-
cally, having omitted the early morning replacement dose 
and the evening dose the day before. When cortisol rises 
to >100 nmol/L, the replacement dose can be slowly re-
duced, with continued monitoring of cortisol concentra-
tions and a tetracosactide test or insulin stress test (IST) 
performed once replacement is completely withdrawn. 
Patients successfully withdrawn from replacement ther-
apy require periodic monitoring, with UFC and/or low-
dose dexamethasone suppression testing to detect early 
evidence of relapse.
Thyroid stimulating hormone-secreting 
adenomas
Thyroid stimulating hormone-secreting pituitary ad-
enomas (TSHomas) are rare, but occasional cases will 
be encountered in most centres. Patients typically 
present with mild clinical and biochemical thyrotoxi-
cosis with an inappropriately ‘normal’ or slightly el-
evated plasma TSH.
The differential diagnosis of a patient with a raised free 
T4 and normal or elevated plasma TSH should include 
thyroid hormone resistance (THR), and assay interfer-
ence. Although only patients with TSHomas should be 
clinically hyperthyroid, it is often difficult to distin-
guish TSHomas from THR or assay interference on 
clinical grounds alone, and other tests are often needed. 
Patients with THR typically show a rise in TSH after 
injection of TRH, whereas a flat response is usually seen 
with a TSHoma, aiding the differential diagnosis. The 
α-subunit (of TSH) can also be measured by some cen-
tres and is typically elevated with a TSHoma but not with 
THR. Analysis of the thyroid hormone receptor gene (or 
more simply measuring thyroid function in family mem-
bers) may clinch the diagnosis of THR. Measurement of 
sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG) is helpful in the 
differential diagnosis because SHBG tends to be normal 
in the thyroid hormone resistance and elevated in the 
	
18  Hypothalamic, pituitary and adrenal disorders	
367
TSHoma due to the increase in SHBG produced by the 
liver in response to thyrotoxicosis.
Treatment of TSHoma is by somatostatin analogue 
therapy and/or pituitary surgery, with or without pitu-
itary irradiation and carbimazole therapy.
Gonadotrophin-secreting adenomas
Clinically functioning gonadotrophin-secreting adeno-
mas of the pituitary are extremely rare. In the male, 
they present with elevated plasma testosterone, usually 
with enlarged testes, in the presence of ‘normal’ or el-
evated LH and FSH. In the female, the condition may 
mimic premature ovarian failure, with amenorrhoea 
and elevated gonadotrophins. Of theoretical interest, 
however, is the experimental observation that a major-
ity of so-called functionless pituitary adenomas are able 
to synthesize and secrete LH, FSH or their common 
α-subunit in vitro, the significance of which is unclear.
HYPOTHALAMIC AND PITUITARY 
­DEFICIENCY STATES
Diseases that may lead to generalized 
hypopituitarism
Non-functioning pituitary adenomas
Pituitary adenomas that do not result in the hyper­
secretion syndromes described above are described as 
non-functioning or functionless pituitary adenomas. As 
mentioned above, these can frequently be shown experi-
mentally to be capable of synthesis of LH and FSH and 
occasionally of any other pituitary hormone, in subclini-
cal amounts. Such patients usually present either with 
symptoms and signs of hypopituitarism or with other 
signs of pituitary tumour enlargement, primarily visual 
field loss. Treatment is by pituitary surgery, followed by 
irradiation where appropriate. Although such adenomas 
do not show dramatic shrinkage in size with dopamine 
agonist therapy, recent evidence suggests that these 
drugs may reduce the risk of recurrence after successful 
surgery (or during conservative observation with smaller 
tumours).
Other pituitary and parasellar tumours
Craniopharyngiomas, derived from remnants of Rathke’s 
pouch, are the only other common type of primary pi-
tuitary tumour. These usually present in childhood with 
poor growth, hypopituitarism and signs of pituitary en-
largement, but may also present for the first time in adult 
life. Malignant tumours from elsewhere in the body oc-
casionally metastasize to the pituitary; in addition to the 
usual signs of pituitary tumour, severe headache is a fre-
quent symptom.
A wide variety of other tumours may also present with 
symptoms and signs of a pituitary or hypothalamic mass 
including hypothalamic germinomas, meningiomas, op-
tic nerve and other gliomas, chordomas, hamartomas and 
pineal tumours.
Inflammatory diseases and disorders 
of unknown aetiology
Inflammatory conditions involving the hypothalamo–­
pituitary axis are rare and typically present with an un-
usual pattern of hypopituitarism in conjunction with 
diabetes insipidus. Sarcoidosis may cause granuloma-
tous masses in the pituitary and hypothalamus, with or 
without evidence of disease elsewhere; measurement of 
plasma angiotensin-converting-enzyme concentration 
may, therefore, occasionally be helpful in the diagnosis 
of unexplained pituitary masses. Other granulomatous 
diseases that may present in the same way include tuber-
culosis and histiocytosis X.
Lymphocytic hypophysitis is an inflammatory disorder 
of unknown but possibly autoimmune aetiology; it occurs 
most frequently during pregnancy or the puerperium, but 
may occur at other times and less frequently in the male. 
Granulomatous hypophysitis is probably part of the same 
spectrum of diseases. Idiopathic pituitary fibrosis is also 
rarely seen and may be associated with other midline fi-
brosis syndromes. All these conditions may present with 
hypopituitarism or with signs of a pituitary mass.
Other conditions
Sheehan syndrome is hypopituitarism due to pituitary in-
farction secondary to massive postpartum haemorrhage 
and usually presents with failure of lactation and amen-
orrhoea in the puerperium. New cases should be rare 
with modern obstetric management, but some patients 
continue to present in later life, usually with a history of 
amenorrhoea since the birth of the last child, sometimes 
30–40 years previously; diagnosis of such patients is usu-
ally precipitated by intercurrent illness.
Pituitary apoplexy is caused by pituitary haemorrhage 
or infarction, often associated with a previously undi-
agnosed pituitary adenoma. Patients may present with 
headache, visual loss, symptoms of hypopituitarism and, 
sometimes, meningism due to the presence of blood in 
the subarachnoid space; an initial working diagnosis is of-
ten meningitis or sub-arachnoid haemorrhage. Surgical 
decompression is frequently required. Head injury, espe-
cially when associated with skull fractures through the pi-
tuitary fossa, may also be associated with hypopituitarism, 
including diabetes insipidus. Congenital developmental 
disorders, such as septo-optic dysplasia, may also have 
hypopituitarism as part of a larger syndrome.
Finally, a substantial number of patients with isolated 
and generalized hypopituitarism have ‘idiopathic’ disease, 
with no lesion demonstrable on CT scanning. These pre-
sumably represent selective failure of the hypothalamic 
neurons that secrete the relevant releasing hormone. At 
least some of these cases may be autoimmune in origin, 
but more research is required to define their precise 
aetiology.
Growth hormone deficiency
Growth hormone deficiency most frequently arises in 
the context of other pituitary diseases discussed above. 
Isolated, idiopathic GH deficiency is, however, also 
368	
Clinical biochemistry
relatively common and usually presents with short stature 
and poor growth in childhood. The most important fea-
ture of the management in childhood is accurate measure-
ment of growth and growth velocity, usually followed by 
assessment of GH reserve if growth is falling away from 
the third centile on standard charts. Treatment of estab-
lished GH deficiency is with biosynthetic human GH 
(somatotrophin).
There are, however, many other causes of short stature 
in the absence of GH deficiency. These include hypothy-
roidism, chronic kidney disease, malabsorption, Crohn 
disease and other inflammatory disorders (which may be 
otherwise asymptomatic), asthma, congenital heart disease, 
Turner syndrome and other congenital disorders, and fa-
milial short stature. Laboratory investigations clearly have 
a major role in excluding a number of these possibilities.
Primary growth hormone insensitivity (Laron syndrome) 
is a rare congenital cause of severe short stature caused by 
absence or mutation of the GH receptor. Circulating GH 
concentrations are high and nonsuppressible, in the pres-
ence of low or absent circulating IGF-1 concentrations. 
Therapy with recombinant IGF-1 is possible.
Growth hormone deficiency in adults was previously 
considered to be of no significance. However, many stud-
ies have now shown that treatment of such adults with 
somatotrophin may improve quality of life, decrease 
body fat and increase bone density and muscle mass and 
strength. In the UK, the National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence (NICE) have recommended re-
placement therapy under strictly defined circumstances.
Gonadotrophin deficiency
Gonadotrophin deficiency may present at birth with an 
undervirilized male, with failure of pubertal develop-
ment or with loss of previously normal gonadal function. 
Isolated gonadotrophin deficiency may be idiopathic, 
but is sometimes familial and associated with anosmia 
(Kallman syndrome) and sometimes cleft lip or palate.
Treatment of gonadotrophin deficiency is with the rel-
evant gonadal steroids, testosterone or oestrogen, given 
by mouth, injection, implant or transdermally. If fertil-
ity is desired, complex regimens involving gonadotro-
phin therapy or pulsatile subcutaneous administration of 
GnRH are required.
Gonadotrophin deficiency is diagnosed by the combi-
nation of low plasma gonadal steroid concentrations with 
low or inappropriately ‘normal’ concentrations of LH 
and FSH. However, a large number of other conditions 
may also produce this biochemical pattern in the absence 
of organic gonadotrophin deficiency, particularly in the 
female (see Fig. 18.7).
Interpretation of borderline testosterone 
concentrations
A common clinical and biochemical dilemma is the inter-
pretation of an isolated testosterone that is near or below 
the lower end of the reference range (say 7.5–12 nmol/L), 
with normal gonadotrophins, in the presence of com-
monly occurring symptoms that might indicate hypo-
gonadism (e.g. low libido or erectile dysfunction). The 
challenge is to differentiate gonadotrophin deficiency 
from artefact or from normal outliers, the effects of age-
ing, obesity and insulin resistance, or other illness.
One of the most common reasons for this pattern is 
blood sampling in the afternoon or evening, since tes-
tosterone concentrations show a significant circadian 
rhythm. The first approach is therefore to repeat the 
sample at 09.00 h, together with measurement of PRL 
(since hyperprolactinaemia may suppress LH/FSH and 
cause this picture). If a low testosterone is confirmed, 
then it is essential to assess remaining basal pituitary func-
tion (see above); measurement of SHBG and calculation 
of bioavailable testosterone may also assist, ­although total 
testosterone seems to be an equally effective measure in all 
but borderline cases (see Morris et al. in Further reading, 
below). Magnetic resonance imaging of the pituitary is 
also usually indicated to exclude a structural lesion.
However, even after such assessments, one is fre-
quently left with a low or borderline testosterone and 
no other biochemical or radiological evidence of pi-
tuitary disease. In this situation, controversy remains: 
testosterone falls slowly with ageing and some workers 
(and many pharmaceutical companies) have advocated 
testosterone replacement for men with borderline tes-
tosterone and a wide variety of specific and non-specific 
symptoms of ill health, while others argue that this 
represents the normal pattern of ageing and does not 
require treatment. Long-term outcome studies are 
still awaited to answer this question. Low testosterone 
concentrations have also recently been described in pa-
tients with cardiac disease, with improvements in gen-
eral health and cardiac function on replacement, but 
these data remain preliminary.
Delayed puberty
Prepubertal children have low or undetectable concen-
trations of testosterone or oestradiol, with low-normal 
concentrations of gonadotrophins. In the absence of a 
demonstrable pituitary lesion or other pituitary deficien-
cies it is, therefore, impossible to differentiate biochemi-
cally isolated gonadotrophin deficiency presenting with 
failure of sexual development from constitutional delayed 
puberty, the only difference being that the former does 
not resolve with time.
Amenorrhoea
Excessive
exercise
Underweight
(socially
acceptable)
Anorexia
nervosa
Delayed
puberty
Gonadotrophin
deficiency
'Hypothalamic'
amenorrhoea
FIGURE 18.7  ■  Inter-related conditions causing amenorrhoea and 
the biochemical picture of low oestradiol without elevation of 
gonadotrophins.
	
18  Hypothalamic, pituitary and adrenal disorders	
369
Constitutional delay of growth and puberty (see also 
Chapter 21) presents a combined problem of short stat-
ure and delayed puberty mimicking combined GH and 
gonadotrophin deficiency. Such patients, usually male, 
present in their mid-teens growing poorly, with height 
below the third centile and with minimal or no signs of 
pubertal development. The aetiology is unknown, but a 
family history is common and most patients eventually 
enter a delayed puberty with a growth spurt to attain 
normal adult height. Growth hormone reserve, assessed 
by standard dynamic tests, is usually normal. Treatment, 
if any, is usually with low doses of appropriate gonadal 
steroids to slowly advance puberty and initiate a normal 
growth spurt.
Hypothalamic amenorrhoea
As illustrated in Figure 18.7, a variety of related condi-
tions in the female can lead to amenorrhoea associated 
with the typical basal biochemistry of gonadotrophin 
deficiency.
Weight-related amenorrhoea frequently occurs when 
body weight falls below the normal healthy range for 
height (BMI 18.5–25 kg/m2). Anorexia nervosa is an 
extreme example, almost always associated with amen-
orrhoea and regression of secondary sexual character-
istics, but dieting to achieve a weight which is ‘socially 
acceptably skinny’ can also induce amenorrhoea. 
Weight gain to a normal weight will usually restore 
menstruation, but chances of resumption of regular cy-
cles are <10% with a BMI <18 kg/m2 and only 50% at a 
low–normal BMI of 20 kg/m2. Low body weight is also 
an important cause of delayed puberty in both sexes.
A large proportion of international standard competi-
tive athletes develop exercise-related amenorrhoea owing 
to their intensive training regimens. Non-competitive 
athletes undertaking excessive exercise may also develop 
amenorrhoea or delayed puberty, often exacerbated by 
low body weight. The incidence of amenorrhoea is di-
rectly related to the amount of exercise taken, and if ex-
ercise is discontinued for any reason, including injury, 
menstruation usually returns.
Psychological stress is frequently quoted anecdotally 
as a cause of amenorrhoea, for example in female students 
attending university for the first time or undertaking ex-
aminations. ‘Hypothalamic amenorrhoea’ is a descriptive 
label applied to such patients and to other cases of amen-
orrhoea with low oestradiol and gonadotrophins and no 
identifiable cause, in whom organic gonadotrophin defi-
ciency is felt to be unlikely.
There is no absolute way to differentiate these causes 
of hypothalamic amenorrhoea from gonadotrophin defi-
ciency, except by their reversibility. If the disorder is mild 
(e.g. borderline underweight), then a clomifene test (see 
above) may clinch the diagnosis by inducing a rise in go-
nadotrophins and subsequent menstruation, but lack of 
response to clomifene may also occur if the disorder is 
severe.
If the cause of the amenorrhoea cannot be reversed, 
then treatment is usually with oestrogen replacement 
therapy to prevent the long-term effects of oestrogen 
deficiency.
Other isolated anterior pituitary deficiencies
Isolated ACTH deficiency occurs rarely and can only be 
diagnosed by full pituitary function testing. The adrenals 
themselves may be shown to be normal either by the find-
ing of a low plasma ACTH prior to replacement therapy 
or by a depot (long) tetracosactide test. A proportion of 
such patients show an ACTH and cortisol response to 
the CRH test, indicating that the deficit is one of hypo-
thalamic CRH secretion, but this is largely of academic 
interest.
Isolated TSH deficiency is also a rare occurrence.
Diabetes insipidus
Since vasopressin is synthesized by cell bodies within the 
hypothalamus and not controlled by the portal venous 
system, vasopressin deficiency is rarely found in primary 
pituitary disease, unless treated surgically. Diabetes insip-
idus is therefore a most unusual presenting symptom of 
a pituitary adenoma and its presence should suggest that 
the lesion is either a craniopharyngioma or other rarer 
type of tumour or inflammatory disease.
Isolated central DI may occur spontaneously. Its aetiol-
ogy is unknown; some cases may be due to hypothalamic 
autoimmunity and it may also be familial, presenting in 
early childhood and typically associated with mutations 
in the vasopressin-neurophysin-II gene. Diabetes insipi-
dus is discussed further in Chapter 4.
ADRENAL DISEASE
Clinical features of Addison disease
Addison disease implies primary adrenal failure: it is rare, 
with an incidence of 3–4/million per year and overall 
prevalence of 40–60/million. The disease involves de-
struction of the whole adrenals, today most commonly 
caused by autoimmune adrenal failure; in Addison’s time, 
tuberculosis of the adrenals was also a common cause and 
this remains an occasional cause today, as do other infil-
trations and tumours involving the adrenals.
In the absence of another acute stressful illness, the 
symptoms of Addison disease are often vague and non-
specific, including tiredness, weight loss, anorexia, de-
pression, abdominal pains, nausea and vomiting and other 
aches and pains. The rise in plasma ACTH caused by loss 
of feedback results in increasing pigmentation, classically 
in palmar creases, scars, pressure areas and buccal mu-
cosa, but which often simply appears as an increased ‘tan’ 
and is ignored. Patients who are not acutely unwell may 
often have normal biochemistry unless plasma cortisol 
concentration is measured.
During acute intercurrent illness including infection, 
trauma or surgery but especially with vomiting and diar-
rhoea or other causes of fluid loss, the undiagnosed or 
untreated patient may become very unwell. Features of 
an ‘Addisonian crisis’ include dehydration, hypotension, 
hypoglycaemia and a typical biochemical picture of hy-
ponatraemia, hyperkalaemia and slightly raised plasma 
urea and creatinine concentrations; untreated this may 
370	
Clinical biochemistry
proceed to circulatory collapse and death. Treatment is 
a medical emergency and involves intravenous steroids 
(hydrocortisone 100 mg i.v. stat, repeated six-hourly), 
0.9% saline and 5% dextrose if hypoglycaemic. Ideally, 
plasma cortisol concentration should be measured on 
the sample taken prior to steroid treatment, and this 
alone may be diagnostic if found to be low in the face of 
severe illness.
Patients commonly have a personal or family history 
of other autoimmune disease including vitiligo, primary 
hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism, premature ovarian 
failure, pernicious anaemia and occasionally inflamma-
tory bowel disease. Full blood count, calcium and thy-
roid function should therefore always be measured both 
acutely and after steroid replacement (since untreated 
hypoadrenalism is also associated with hypercalcaemia, 
elevation of TSH with low free T4, and macrocytosis, all 
of which may resolve when appropriate steroid replace-
ment is given).
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
A gene mutation resulting in deficiency of an enzyme 
involved in steroid biosynthesis (see Fig.  18.4) will 
cause inability to secrete adequate circulating cortisol, 
increased ACTH concentrations and adrenal stimula-
tion due to loss of feedback, and therefore increase in 
steroid precursors prior to the malfunctioning enzyme. 
These conditions are described as congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (since the adrenal increases in size under 
ACTH stimulation) and are summarized in Table 18.1. 
Of the subtypes, only 21-hydroxylase deficiency is at all 
common.
The diagnosis is typically made in the neonatal pe-
riod in the context of ambiguous genitalia in females, or 
evidence of acute hypoadrenalism (including a neonatal 
‘salt-losing crisis’), but is sometimes delayed and, rarely, 
occurs at or after puberty in so-called ‘late onset’ 21-hy-
droxylase deficiency. Biochemical diagnosis involves 
demonstration of elevated concentrations of steroid pre-
cursors in plasma (17α-hydroxyprogesterone in the case 
of 21-hydroxylase deficiency) or in urine by gas chro-
matography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS). In common 
forms of the condition, adrenal androgen concentra-
tions are also raised (dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate 
(DHEAS), androstenedione, testosterone), which causes 
virilization in the female, but the rarer 17α-hydroxylase 
deficiency prevents androgen as well as cortisol synthe-
sis, and causes a female phenotype in genetic males as 
well as hypertension due to increased mineralocorticoid 
production.
Treatment is by steroid replacement. A variety of 
regimens (hydrocortisone, prednisolone and dexametha-
sone) is used with no hard evidence regarding the best; 
fludrocortisone replacement is also required in salt-­
losing types. In 21-hydroxylase deficiency, treatment 
may be monitored biochemically by measurement of 
­17α-hydroxyprogesterone (a low concentration indicat-
ing overtreatment) and adrenal androgens (a high con-
centration indicating undertreatment). In childhood, 
treatment success is assessed by the close clinical moni-
toring of growth and puberty in the setting of a specialist 
paediatric endocrine service.
Assessment of adrenal incidentaloma
The increasing use of CT and MRI scanning of the ab-
domen in clinical medicine has revealed that small le-
sions consistent with adenomas in the adrenal are very 
common. Such incidentally discovered lesions are often 
described as ‘adrenal incidentalomas’ and require ap-
propriate investigation to exclude malignancy and ex-
cess hormone secretion. The risk of malignancy can be 
­assessed on radiological grounds: evidence of invasion 
of surrounding tissues, calcification and heterogeneity, 
and the lipid content of the lesion, which, if high, increases 
the likelihood of the adenoma being benign. However, 
the risk of malignancy can also be assessed simply on the 
basis of size, with most authorities advising removal of 
lesions >4 cm in diameter. In the absence of obvious clin-
ical features of Cushing syndrome, however, the exclu-
sion of a functioning lesion is primarily biochemical and 
includes exclusion of phaeochromocytoma (by measure-
ment of urine catecholamines) and Conn syndrome (see 
p. 760), and usually exclusion of subclinical excess corti-
sol secretion by a formal 48 h low-dose dexamethasone 
suppression test. Most clinicians would advise excision 
of a functioning lesion, whereas non-functioning lesions 
<4 cm in diameter are typically managed conservatively. 
There is current controversy regarding the significance 
of ‘subclinical Cushing syndrome’, which describes in-
complete dexamethasone suppression in the absence of 
frank cushingoid symptoms. Some groups believe that 
this confers increased cardiovascular risk, while others 
believe it is a statistical ‘fall out’ of normal individuals.
MONITORING PITUITARY AND ADRENAL  
REPLACEMENT THERAPY
The clinical biochemist is often called upon to moni-
tor the adequacy of hormone replacement therapy in 
pituitary disease. Clinical assessment of adequacy of 
replacement is imprecise and may, for example, lead to 
over-replacement with adrenal or thyroid hormones in 
response to unrelated, vague malaise.
There is no general agreement regarding the most 
appropriate way to monitor glucocorticoid replacement 
and it is difficult to validate whatever approach is taken. 
The authors’ practice for a patient taking hydrocorti-
sone (which is cortisol) is to measure plasma cortisol at 
09.00 h (having taken the morning dose on rising), at 
12.30 h (just before any lunchtime dose) and at 17.30 h 
(before the evening dose) and to perform a 24 h UFC 
measurement beginning and ending with the morning 
replacement dose. The aim of therapy is then to achieve 
a 24 h UFC within the normal range and 09.00 h cor-
tisol within the 09.00 h normal range (to avoid over-
replacement), with neither 12.30 h or 17.30 h cortisol 
<50 nmol/L (and ideally not <100 nmol/L to avoid 
­under-replacement). Using these criteria, most patients 
require thrice-daily hydrocorti­sone dosage, typically 
10 mg on rising, 5–10 mg at lunchtime and 5 mg in the 
early evening, which is consistent with current estimates 
of normal cortisol secretion rates. Random measure-
ments of plasma cortisol on replacement therapy are of 
little or no value.
	
18  Hypothalamic, pituitary and adrenal disorders	
371
In primary adrenal failure, mineralocorticoid replace-
ment is also required, and adequacy of replacement can 
be assessed biochemically by measuring lying plasma 
renin (which is markedly elevated in untreated patients 
and ideally should be normal on fludrocortisone replace-
ment). Since the renin–angiotensin system is intact in pa-
tients with pituitary disease, fludrocortisone replacement, 
with monitoring of plasma renin, is not necessary.
The aim of levothyroxine replacement in hypopituita-
rism should be to achieve a plasma free T4 in the middle- 
or upper-third of the normal range. Measurements of TSH 
are clearly unhelpful in this context, and a common mistake 
is to reduce the dose of thyroxine because of the incorrect 
conclusion that a low TSH indicates over-replacement.
Biochemical assessment of gonadal steroid replace-
ment presents greater difficulty. In a male on testoster-
one ester depot preparations, plasma testosterone may 
reasonably be measured a few days after an injection 
and just prior to the next dose to ensure that adequate 
concentrations are being achieved. Plasma testosterone 
measurement is also useful in patients on transdermal or 
mucoadhesive testosterone preparations. In patients on 
oral testosterone undecanoate therapy, however, there 
is preferential conversion of testosterone to dihydrotes-
tosterone, and plasma total testosterone concentrations 
are frequently below normal despite adequate replace-
ment therapy. In the female, the best approach to therapy 
is probably to use the endometrium as a natural in vivo 
bioassay for oestrogen and aim simply to achieve regular 
withdrawal bleeds. It is possible to measure plasma oes-
tradiol in patients receiving oral or transdermal oestra-
diol replacement, but other oral preparations of modified 
synthetic or equine oestrogens cannot logically be moni-
tored biochemically.
Desmopressin replacement therapy can be monitored 
by measurement of plasma osmolality, aiming to maintain 
a normal osmolality and avoid dehydration or fluid over-
load. Patients should be instructed to allow the diuresis to 
resume prior to each treatment dose.
Patients with hypopituitarism and with primary adre-
nal failure require appropriate information and education 
about the nature of their replacement therapy and, in 
particular, the need to increase steroid hormone replace-
ment in the face of intercurrent illness. They should be 
advised to carry a ‘Steroid card’ or alert bracelet and en-
sure that all doctors and dentists who carry out treatment 
are aware of their condition and the need for increased 
treatment during stress.
CONCLUSION
In the last decades of the 20th century, clinical neuro-
endocrinology was revolutionized by the introduction 
of reliable assays for the relevant pituitary and adrenal 
hormones. The relationship between endocrinologist 
and clinical biochemist must remain a close one, since 
the biochemical investigations to be performed depend 
closely on the clinical assessment of the patient, while the 
treatment which the patient will receive is equally depen-
dent on the biochemical results obtained. In this chapter, 
it is hoped that a logical framework for such a harmoni-
ous relationship has been laid down.
Further reading
Arnaldi G, Angeli A, Atkinson AB et al. Diagnosis and complications of 
Cushing’s syndrome: a consensus statement. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2003;88:5593–602.
Baylis PH. Diabetes insipidus. J R Coll Physicians Lond 1998;32:108–11.
Biller BM, Grossman AB, Stewart PM et  al. Treatment of 
adrenocorticotropin-dependent Cushing’s syndrome: a consensus 
statement. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;93:2454–62.
Clark PM, Neylon I, Raggatt PR et  al. Defining the normal 
cortisol response to the short Synacthen test: implications for the 
investigation of hypothalamic-pituitary disorders. Clin Endocrinol 
(Oxf) 1998;49:287–92.
Dickstein G. Hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal axis testing: nothing is 
sacred and caution in interpretation is needed. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 
2001;54:15–6.
Giustina A, Chanson P, Bronstein MD et al. A consensus on criteria for 
cure of acromegaly. Acromegaly Consensus Group. J Clin Endocrinol 
Metab 2010;95:3141–8.
Lindholm J. The insulin hypoglycaemia test for the assessment of the 
hypothalamic–pituitary–adrenal function. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 
2001;54:282–6.
Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Reed Larsen P et al. editors. Williams’ textbook 
of endocrinology. 12th ed Philadephia: Elsevier Saunders; 2011.
Morris PD, Malkin CJ, Channer KS et al. A mathematical comparison 
of techniques to predict biologically available testosterone in a cohort 
of 1072 men. Eur J Endocrinol 2004;151:241–9.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Growth hormone 
deficiency (adults) – human growth hormone (Technology Appraisal 
No. 64): http://www.nice.org.uk/page.aspx?o=83406; [Accessed 
October 2013].
Nieman LK, Biller BM, Findling JW. The diagnosis of Cushing’s 
syndrome: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2008;93:1526–40.
Pekic S, Popovic V. Diagnosis of growth hormone deficiency in adults. 
In: Ho K, editor. Growth hormone related diseases and therapy. 
A molecular and physiological perspective for the clinician. New York: 
Humana Press; 2011.
APPENDIX 18.1 TEST PROTOCOLS
Assessment of basal pituitary function
A basal 09.00 h blood sample for measurement of:
•	 cortisol
•	 free T4
•	 TSH
•	 testosterone (male) or oestradiol (female)
•	 LH, FSH
•	 prolactin
•	 IGF-1 in the context of proven pituitary disease (but 
not simply as a screening test)
•	 osmolalitya.
aSimultaneous random urine for osmolality.
(aAssessment of posterior pituitary function is only re-
quired if indicated by the clinical context.)
Insulin stress test
Indications: assessment of ACTH/cortisol and GH re-
serve. Contraindications: ischaemic heart disease, epi-
lepsy or unexplained blackouts, severe longstanding 
hypoadrenalism.
Precautions: electrocardiograph must be normal, basal 
09.00 h cortisol must be >100 nmol/L. Free T4 must be 
normal.
Procedure: fasting from midnight, i.v. cannula, soluble 
insulin, 0.15 U/kg i.v. at 09.00 h. Observe and record 
signs of hypoglycaemia. Hypoglycaemia only needs to be 
372	
Clinical biochemistry
reversed with i.v. dextrose if severe and prolonged or with 
impending or actual loss of consciousness or fits.
Sampling: blood for glucose, cortisol, GH at 0, 30, 45, 
60, 90 and 120 min.
Interpretation: 
blood 
glucose 
must 
fall 
below 
2.2 mmol/L to achieve an adequate hypoglycaemic stress. 
If adequate hypoglycaemia is not achieved then cortisol 
or GH deficiency cannot be diagnosed. Untreated hypo-
thyroidism can also give subnormal results.
A normal response is traditionally defined as a rise in 
plasma cortisol to a peak of ≥550 nmol/L (but see com-
ments in text (p. 355) on normal ranges) and a rise in 
plasma GH to ≥7 μg/L (most normal individuals actually 
rise to a peak >15 μg/L). ‘Severe GH deficiency’ is arbi-
trarily defined as a GH peak <3 μg/L.
Patients who show such a normal cortisol response 
can withstand major surgery without corticosteroid re-
placement. Patients with responses in the range 400–
550 nmol/L may not require regular replacement therapy, 
but do require cover for major illnesses and surgery. All 
other patients with subnormal responses require hydro-
cortisone replacement.
Children with bone age <12  years and GH peak 
<6.7 μg/L generally benefit from GH therapy.
Short tetracosactide (synacthen) test
Indication: screening test for adrenocortical insufficiency, 
including ACTH deficiency.
Procedure: synacthen (tetracosactide) 250 μg i.v or i.m. 
Plasma cortisol before and after 30 min.
Interpretation: plasma cortisol of ≥600 nmol/L at 30 min 
is highly correlated with a normal ACTH response to hy-
poglycaemia and a normal pituitary-adrenal axis. However, 
normal responses vary with gender and between commonly 
used cortisol assays – an appropriate normal range for the 
assay methodology must, therefore, be used (see p. 355).
Responses >600 nmol/L can be considered normal 
for almost all assays and circumstances. Peak cortisol re-
sponses between 400 and 600 nmol/L may be regarded 
as equivocal – they require appropriate patient educa-
tion and may need confirmation by a formal IST (if not 
contraindicated).
Water deprivation test
Indications: diagnosis of vasopressin deficiency.
Procedure: if mild DI is suspected, the patient should 
have no fluids from midnight the night before (dry foods 
allowed). If severe DI is likely, free fluids and a light 
breakfast should be allowed prior to the test.
Commence test at 09.00 h or earlier if practicable. 
Measure plasma and urine osmolality basally, then hourly 
until the end of the test (after 8 h or when diagnostic os-
molalities achieved). Record all urine volumes passed.
Osmolalities should be measured prospectively as the 
test proceeds. If this is not possible, weigh the patient ev-
ery 2 h and arrange for urgent plasma osmolality if body 
weight falls by more than 3%.
When osmolalities diagnostic of DI have been 
achieved, give desmopressin 2 μg i.m., allow free fluids 
and measure urine osmolality hourly for 2 h.
Interpretation: diabetes insipidus is diagnosed by a rise 
in plasma osmolality above 300 mmol/kg, without appro-
priate concentration of urine osmolality (to >600 mmol/
kg). Adequate concentration of the urine after desmo-
pressin indicates central, cranial DI and lack of concen-
tration indicates nephrogenic DI.
Normal vasopressin secretion is shown by concentra-
tion of the urine to >600 mmol/kg, in the presence of a 
normal plasma osmolality (280–295 mmol/kg).
Normal concentration of the urine at the expense 
of elevation of plasma osmolality (>295 mmol/kg) is 
not a strictly normal response and may indicate mild 
DI or other subtle defects of thirst, osmoregulation or 
vasopressin secretion. Further investigations may be 
indicated.
Failure to concentrate either plasma or urine osmo-
lality by the end of the test is non-diagnostic, but usu-
ally represents primary polydipsia. Such patients typically 
start the test with very dilute urine and often dilute 
plasma as a result of fluid overload. If clinically indicated, 
more prolonged water deprivation is required to make 
the diagnosis.
Glucose tolerance test for the diagnosis 
of acromegaly
Procedure: fasting from midnight, i.v. cannula, 75 g glu-
cose at time 0.
Sampling: blood glucose and plasma GH at 0, 30, 60, 
90, 120 and 150 min.
Normal response: growth hormone suppresses to 
<1 μg/L after glucose in normal subjects.
Interpretation: failure of growth hormone to suppress 
completely after glucose is highly suggestive of acromeg-
aly, even if a substantial fall has occurred.
CRH test
Indications: differential diagnosis of Cushing syndrome.
Differential diagnosis of isolated ACTH deficiency.
Procedure: i.v. cannula, human CRF-41, 100 μg i.v. at 
09.00 h.
Notes: in North America it is usual to administer CRH 
in the evening rather than early morning. Ovine CRF-41 
was originally used but is not readily available in the UK. 
Most patients notice facial flushing after CRH, but there 
are no other side-effects.
Sampling: plasma cortisol and ACTH at −15, 0, 15, 
30, 45, 60, 90 and 120 min.
Normal response: plasma cortisol rises by 25% or 
more above the basal concentration. The peak response 
to hCRF-41 in normal individuals is <600 nmol/L 
(<800 nmol/L with ovine CRF-41).
Interpretation: patients with Cushing disease show a 
normal or exaggerated response to CRH. Patients with 
ectopic ACTH-secreting tumours and adrenal tumours 
show no response (see text).
Responses in ACTH deficiency remain to be defined 
but a response of plasma ACTH would imply hypotha-
lamic CRH deficiency. Patients with depression show a 
normal cortisol but reduced ACTH response. Patients 
with massive obesity show a blunted cortisol response.
373
C H A P T E R  1 9
INTRODUCTION
Thyroid hormones are essential for normal growth, 
­development and metabolism, and their production is 
tightly regulated through the hypothalamic–pituitary–
thyroid axis. Thyroid disease is common, particularly in 
women, with a prevalence in the community of 3–5%. 
With the exception of iodine deficiency, which affects 
millions of people worldwide, diseases that directly 
affect the thyroid gland are the most common causes 
of thyroid dysfunction. Pituitary disease and the use of 
­certain drugs that alter thyroid hormone synthesis or me-
tabolism can also give rise to thyroid dysfunction. Any 
severe illness can produce abnormalities in the ­results of 
thyroid function tests that resolve as the patient’s ­illness 
improves. Once diagnosed, thyroid disease is usually eas-
ily treated, with an excellent long-term outcome for most 
patients. This chapter outlines thyroid physiology and the 
Thyroid dysfunction
Colin M. Dayan  •  Onyebuchi E. Okosieme  •  Peter Taylor
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  373
NORMAL THYROID PHYSIOLOGY  374
The thyroid gland  374
Biological actions of thyroid hormones  374
Synthesis, storage and release of thyroid 
hormones  375
Iodine and thyroid hormone synthesis  376
Transport of thyroid hormones  
in blood  376
Free hormone hypothesis  376
Entry of thyroid hormone into tissues  377
Thyroid hormone deiodination and regulation 
of extrathyroidal T3 production  377
Catabolism of thyroid hormones  377
Nuclear action of thyroid hormones  377
Control of thyroid hormone synthesis and 
secretion  378
Extrathyroidal factors that may affect thyroid 
function  379
THE EVALUATION OF THYROID 
FUNCTION  382
Clinical evaluation of thyroid status  382
In vitro tests of thyroid activity and  
pituitary–thyroid status  383
Measurement of thyroid stimulating 
hormone  383
Free T4 and free T3 measurements  383
Methods for measuring free thyroid 
hormones  383
Validity of commercial methods for free  
hormone analysis  383
Nomenclature of free thyroid hormone 
assays  384
Total T4 and total T3  384
Selective use of thyroid function tests  384
Interpreting results of thyroid function tests  385
Common situations in which TSH results may 
be misleading  385
Reference ranges and significant 
changes  385
Miscellaneous tests  386
Autoantibodies to thyroidal antigens  386
Imaging the thyroid  387
HYPERTHYROIDISM 388
Clinical features  388
Causes of hyperthyroidism  389
Hyperthyroidism or non-thyroidal  
illness?  394
HYPOTHYROIDISM  394
Clinical features  394
Causes of hypothyroidism  396
Treatment of hypothyroidism  397
THYROIDITIS  398
Thyroiditis producing 
hyperthyroidism  398
Hypothyroidism resulting from Hashimoto 
thyroiditis  399
Other forms of thyroiditis  399
Hypothyroidism and the postpartum  
period  399
NEOPLASIA  399
Diagnosis  399
Treatment  400
Tumour markers  400
SYNDROMES OF RESISTANCE TO THYROID 
HORMONES  400
SCREENING  401
374	
Clinical biochemistry
­pathways of thyroid hormone synthesis and ­metabolism. 
The investigations used in diagnosis and management of 
thyroid disorders are ­described, ­together with guidance 
on their interpretation. The various ­thyroid disorders are 
described together with current views on their treatment.
NORMAL THYROID PHYSIOLOGY
The thyroid gland
The thyroid gland is brownish-red in colour and consists 
of left and right lobes connected by a midline isthmus, 
typically forming an ‘H’ or ‘U’. It is located anteriorly 
in the neck deep to the platysma, sternothyroid and 
­sternohyoid muscles. The isthmus lies just below the 
cricoid cartilage and the lobes extend upward over the 
lower half of the thyroid cartilage. The pretracheal fascia 
encloses the thyroid gland and attaches it to the trachea 
and larynx. This explains why the thyroid gland is seen to 
move upwards with swallowing.
The thyroid is a highly vascular organ with blood flow 
~5 mL/min/g of tissue (nearly twice that of the kidneys). It 
consists of thousands of follicles, each a spheroidal sac of 
epithelial cells (thyrocytes) surrounding a lumen contain-
ing colloid, mainly comprising ­thyroglobulin (Fig. 19.1). 
It also contains parafollicular C cells, which secrete calci-
tonin; calcitonin is discussed in Chapter 6.
Embryologically, the thyroid is derived from the floor 
of the pharyngeal cavity and migrates from the base of 
the tongue to its final position in the neck along the 
thyroglossal duct. Abnormalities of this migration give 
rise to ectopic glands that may not function normally. 
Occasionally, the gland is completely absent.
The primary function of the thyroid is to synthesize 
and secrete thyroid hormones (Fig. 19.2). Under normal 
circumstances the gland synthesizes approximately 80 μg 
(110 nmol) of thyroxine (T4) per day and 6 μg (10 nmol) 
of 3,5,3′-tri-iodothyronine (T3).
Biological actions of thyroid hormones
Thyroid hormones produce enhancement of many in-
tracellular events and promote differentiation and 
growth; they are essential for normal fetal and neonatal 
development.
Thyroid hormones increase mitochondrial oxidative 
phosphorylation and maintain amino acid and electro-
lyte transport into cells. They increase calorigenesis and 
oxygen consumption in most tissues, though not in brain. 
Thyroid hormones stimulate the synthesis of proteins, 
including structural proteins and enzymes. They regu-
late all aspects of carbohydrate metabolism, including 
increasing gluconeogenesis and accelerating insulin deg-
radation. Thyrotoxicosis can, therefore, lead to a deterio-
ration of glycaemic control in diabetes mellitus.
Stimulation of lipid metabolism leads to a fall in plasma 
cholesterol concentration, as degradation is increased to 
a greater extent than synthesis. Bone turnover is stimu-
lated, resorption more so than mineralization, raising 
plasma calcium concentration in some patients. In gen-
eral, the effect of thyroid hormones on the turnover of 
any substance will depend on the relative effects on syn-
thesis and degradation. The actions of thyroid hormones 
increase demand for coenzymes and vitamins.
Complex interactions occur with the sympathetic 
nervous system and many of the signs and symptoms 
of hyperthyroidism, including palpitations, tremor and 
Interfollicular
stroma
Parafollicular
(C) cells
Follicular cell
(thyrocyte)
Basement membrane
Follicle
Lumen containing
colloid
FIGURE 19.1  ■  Structure of the thyroid follicle.
HO
O
I
I
CH2
CH
NH2
COOH
Thyroxine (T4)
(prohormone)
I
I
I
HO
O
I
CH2
CH
NH2
COOH
Tri-iodothyronine (T3)
(active)
I
I
HO
O
I
CH2
CH
NH2
COOH
Reverse
tri-iodothyronine (rT3)
(inactive)
I
FIGURE 19.2  ■  Structures of the iodothyronines.
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
375
Apical
membrane
Plasma
membrane
Thyroglobulin
TPO
H2O2
T3 T4 DIT MIT
Thyroglobulin
Reabsorption
Pendrin,
Apical iodide transporter
Proteolysis
Deiodinase
D1 and D2
T3 T4
T3
T3
T4
T3
Hormone
secretion
TSH
TSH
receptor
2Na+
2Na+
I–
I–
Na/I–
symporter
I–
Ca++/PI
cAMP
FIGURE 19.3  ■  Sites of biochemical processes within the follicular cell (thyrocyte).
sweating may be attributed to these. For example, thyroid 
hormones amplify the adrenergic system through the α1 
and β3 adrenergic receptors and are also the main deter-
minant of basal metabolic rate (BMR). The increase in 
metabolic rate involves inhibition of AMP-activated pro-
tein kinase (AMPK) in the hypothalamus. However, the 
mechanisms responsible for many interactions between 
thyroid hormone and the sympathetic nervous system 
have not been identified.
Most changes in biochemical parameters produced by 
changes in thyroid status are not sufficiently specific or of 
such magnitude to be useful as tests of thyroid function, 
though the association may be sufficiently close that the 
finding of an abnormality should provoke a request for 
testing for previously unsuspected thyroid disease. For ex-
ample, hypothyroidism is a relatively common and ­easily 
treatable cause of raised plasma cholesterol; ­however, the 
effect on lipids in subclinical hypothyroidism is modest. 
Equally, it may be helpful (and avoid ­unnecessary inves-
tigations) to anticipate these changes in cases of known 
thyroid dysfunction and to expect their normalization 
after treatment of the thyroid disorder. Some examples 
are listed in Box 19.1.
Synthesis, storage and release of thyroid 
hormones
Synthesis of T4 and T3 occurs on thyroglobulin (Tg), 
a glycoprotein of molecular weight 660 000 Da that con-
tains many tyrosyl residues. Thyroglobulin is synthesized 
by the thyrocytes and exported to be stored within the col-
loid of the follicular lumen. Incorporation of iodide into 
Tg requires hydrogen peroxide and thyroid peroxidase 
(TPO), an enzyme that is synthesized within the follicu-
lar cell and transported to the apical membrane. Thyroid 
hormones are synthesized at the interface between the 
apical membrane of the thyrocyte and the colloid of the 
follicular lumen.
The process of thyroid hormone synthesis, storage 
and secretion requires a series of highly regulated steps 
(Fig. 19.3).
•	 Trapping of iodide. Iodide from plasma is actively 
transported by a sodium-iodine symporter situated 
in the basal membrane of the thyrocyte. This pro-
cess allows iodide to be actively taken up against a 
steep concentration gradient. At the apical mem-
brane of the cell, pendrin, a relatively non-­specific 
anion transporter, mediates iodide efflux. The 
BOX 19.1	
Effects of thyroid hormones on 
metabolic indices
Parameters increased by hyperthyroidism
•	 Basal metabolic rate
•	 Plasma
•	 Calcium
•	 Sex hormone-binding globulin
•	 Angiotensin-converting-enzyme
•	 Liver enzymes (alkaline phosphatase, aminotrans-
ferases, γ-glutamyl transferase)
•	 Glucose tolerance tests may show a degree of glucose 
intolerance
Parameters increased by hypothyroidism
•	 Plasma
•	 Cholesterol
•	 Creatine kinase (CK-MM isoenzyme)
•	 Creatinine
•	 Thyroxine binding globulin
•	 Prolactin
Parameters decreased by hypothyroidism
•	 Plasma sodium
376	
Clinical biochemistry
­sodium-iodide symporter is competitively inhibited 
by anions of similar size to iodide. Pertechnetate 
is also transportable and thus is used for radioac-
tive imaging of the gland. Perchlorate is used to 
block the uptake of iodide, for example after acci-
dental exposure to radioactive iodide. Thiocyanates 
(found in certain foods, e.g. cassava) competitively 
inhibit the iodide pump but are not taken up into 
the gland.
•	 Oxidation of iodide to iodine by thyroid peroxidase. This 
occurs on the luminal side of the apical membrane 
and requires TPO and hydrogen peroxide, which is 
generated by a calcium-dependent flavoprotein en-
zyme system situated at the apical membrane.
Recently, the dual oxidase molecules DUOX1 
and DUOX2, which contain peroxidase-like and 
NADPH oxidase-like domains have been identi-
fied as essential for H2O2 production. They require 
maturation or activation factors (DUOXA1 or 2) 
for translocation of DUOX from the endoplasmic 
reticulum to the apical plasma membrane where 
H2O2 production occurs. Mutations in DUOX2 
and DUOXA2 have both recently been identified 
as causes of hypothyroidism, resulting from dimin-
ished H2O2 production.
Halogenases collect the iodide removed from 
thyroglobulin as it is broken down in the cell.
Antithyroid drugs such as propylthiouracil and 
mercaptoimidazoles (methimazole and carbima-
zole) exert their action through inhibiting the ac-
tion of TPO.
•	 Incorporation of iodine into tyrosyl residues on thyroglob-
ulin. Mono-iodotyrosine and di-iodotyrosine (MIT 
and DIT) are formed through the actions of TPO 
(organification).
•	 Coupling of two iodotyrosyl residues in the thyroglobulin 
molecule. This is also catalysed by TPO and produces 
T3 and T4 that remain linked to Tg. When iodine 
supply is limited, the proportion of T3 produced on 
Tg increases. Iodinated Tg is stored in the follicular 
lumen.
•	 Internalization of Tg and release of T4 and T3. When 
there is a demand for thyroid hormone, this is sig-
nalled by an increase in plasma thyroid stimulat-
ing hormone (thyrotrophin; TSH) concentration. 
Thyroglobulin is then internalized by pinocytosis 
and appears as colloid droplets that fuse with lyso-
somes and undergo proteolytic degradation to re-
lease T3 and T4. Any MIT and DIT is deiodinated 
and the iodine conserved.
•	 Delivery of T4 and T3 into the circulation. This is 
probably achieved by thyroid hormone transport-
ers. The large stores of T4 and T3 incorporated 
into thyroglobulin allow secretion of T4 and T3 
more quickly when required than if it had it had to 
be synthesized.
Thyroid stimulating hormone appears to stimulate 
each of the above processes. It also stimulates the ex-
pression of many genes in thyroid tissue including 
thyroglobulin, sodium iodide symporter (NIS) and 
interleukin-8. It also causes thyroid hyperplasia and 
hypertrophy.
Iodine and thyroid hormone synthesis
Iodine deficiency represents a major public health is-
sue for over two billion people who live in areas of 
iodine deficiency and especially for the 43 million in 
whom the deficiency is severe enough to cause learn-
ing difficulties. The recommended intake of iodine is 
150 μg/day for adults but this may rise to 250 μg during 
pregnancy and lactation. Iodine is obtained from the 
ingestion of foods such as seafood, seaweed, kelp, dairy 
products, some vegetables (e.g. soybeans and potatoes) 
and iodized salt.
High iodine intakes can induce hypothyroidism, goitre 
and sometimes hyperthyroidism (see later). A large excess 
of iodide, when given acutely, results in acute inhibition 
of thyroid hormone release. It also inhibits the adenylate 
cyclase response to TSH (see below) and iodination of 
thyroglobulin; this is termed the Wolff–Chaikoff effect. 
After a few days of exposure to high iodide concentrations, 
thyroidal iodide uptake is very low, the intrathyroidal io-
dide concentration falls and the synthesis of iodinated 
thyroglobulin recommences. This effect can be used to 
prepare a thyrotoxic patient for thyroidectomy. However, 
if high iodine intake persists for more than ten days, then 
thyrotoxicosis can occur in individuals with a pre-existing 
multinodular goitre or those from iodine deficient areas; 
this is termed the Jod–Basedow effect.
Transport of thyroid hormones in blood
When T4 and T3 are secreted into the bloodstream, 
they become bound to plasma carrier proteins. Three 
proteins share this function: in order of decreasing affin-
ity for iodothyronines they are thyroxine binding globu-
lin (TBG); thyroxine binding prealbumin (TBPA, also 
known as transthyretin), and albumin. These binding 
proteins bind approximately 70% (TBG), 20% (TBPA) 
and 10% (albumin) of the circulating thyroid hormones. 
T4 is more tightly bound than T3 to each of these pro-
teins. Approximately 0.02% of T4 and 0.2% of T3 are in 
the unbound or ‘free’ form in plasma in normal subjects, 
so that, although the total molar concentration of T4 is 
some 50 times that of T3, the concentration of free T4 is 
only about three times that of free T3. The half-life of T4 
is 5–7 days; that of T3 is 1–2 days.
Free hormone hypothesis
For most of their actions, thyroid hormones need to en-
ter the cell and bind to nuclear receptors. The free hor-
mone hypothesis suggests that only the unbound (free) 
fraction of thyroid hormone is able to cross the plasma 
membrane and enter the nucleus. This hypothesis is 
supported by the observation that, in clinical practice, 
thyroid status correlates better with the concentration 
of the free hormone fraction than with the protein-
bound fraction. The precise function of TBG and TBPA 
is unclear, but a number of roles have been suggested 
including acting as a reserve or buffer to prevent rapid 
changes in free hormone concentration in blood and 
also to prevent loss of thyroid hormones through filtra-
tion and excretion at the kidney. One further hypothesis 
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
377
is that TBG may be involved in targeting the delivery 
of thyroid hormone in a differential manner to differ-
ent organs or facilitating the efflux of thyroid hormones 
from some tissues. Whatever their function, the absence 
or overexpression of the transport proteins is not asso-
ciated with any obvious detrimental effects. There are 
difficulties in measuring the concentrations of free hor-
mones and this is discussed later in this chapter.
Entry of thyroid hormone into tissues
Specific transporters appear to be required to facili-
tate the entry of the free thyroid hormones into cells. 
A number of important thyroid hormone transporters 
have been characterized. The organic anion transport-
ing polypeptides (OATPs) are one group of important 
transporters. OATP1C1 appears to be specific for T4 
and reverse tri-iodothyronine (3,3′5′-tri-iodothyronine: 
rT3); it is expressed exclusively in the capillaries of the 
brain and may be important for T4 transport across the 
blood–brain barrier. Two l-type amino acid transport-
ers (LAT1 and LAT2) have been identified among the 
members of the heterodimeric amino acid transporter 
family, that transport thyroid hormone in many tis-
sues. Human monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8) 
is another active thyroid hormone transporter. It has a 
preference for T3 and is expressed in a variety of tissues 
including the brain, where it appears to be involved in 
the uptake of T3 by neurons, the primary target for thy-
roid hormones during brain development. The MCT8 
gene is located on the X chromosome and mutations 
in the gene have been identified in a small number of 
boys with severe psychomotor retardation and elevated 
plasma T3 concentration (Allan–Herndon–Dudley syn-
drome). These mutations result in an inhibition of T3 
supply to neurons leading to a defect in brain develop-
ment. The characteristic pattern of thyroid function 
tests remains unexplained.
Entry of thyroid hormone into liver cells appears to 
be ATP-dependent. In rat hepatocytes, it is inhibited by a 
range of compounds that accumulate in plasma during ill-
ness. These compounds include free fatty acids, bilirubin 
and indoxyl sulphate. The uptake of thyroid hormones by 
the pituitary appears to occur through a different mecha-
nism from that occurring in the liver. For example, unlike 
in the liver, the pituitary thyroid hormone transporters 
are not energy dependent; they can maintain or increase 
the uptake of T4 and T3 in low energy states and are not 
inhibited by bilirubin.
Thyroid hormone deiodination and regulation 
of extrathyroidal T3 production
Thyroxine is produced entirely by the thyroid gland, ap-
proximately 80 μg being produced each day. However, 
only 20% of T3 is produced directly from the thyroid 
gland; 80% is produced by the extrathyroidal deio-
dination of T4. Approximately 6 μg of the T3 in blood 
originates from thyroidal synthesis; 25 μg is formed by 
5-deiodination of T4 in extrathyroidal tissues, a reaction 
catalysed by the D1 and D2 isoenzymes of iodothyronine 
deiodinase. T4 is considered to be a prohormone, T3 be-
ing responsible for the biological actions of thyroid hor-
mones. Most tissues express one or more of a family of 
three iodothyronine deiodinases (D1, D2 and D3) that 
are responsible for providing a local source of T3 from 
T4 or for providing a source of T3 in plasma. In humans, 
it has proved difficult to determine which deiodinase and 
which tissues are responsible for providing most of the 
circulating T3. Classically it has been thought that D1 in 
liver and kidney provided most circulating T3, but some 
studies have suggested that, in humans, D2 may also pro-
vide an important source. Genetic association studies 
may provide more conclusive evidence. To date common 
genetic variants (single nucleotide polymorphisms) in 
DIO1 have been robustly associated with variation in the 
T3/T4 ratio in serum at genome wide levels of signifi-
cance ( p = < 1 × 10
−8), but as yet no associations have been 
observed with single nucleotide polymorphisms in DIO2.
Figure 19.4 summarizes the characteristics of the three 
deiodinases. All are selenoenzymes requiring adequate 
intake of dietary selenium for their expression. D1 carries 
out either 5′-deiodination, giving T3, or 5-deiodination, 
giving the inactive compound rT3. D2 appears to pro-
vide a very important local source of T3 in some tissues, 
including the brain, pituitary and brown adipose tissue. 
D3 catalyses the conversion of T4 to rT3 and is thought 
to be an important extrathyroidal control mechanism to 
regulate delivery of T3 to its receptors, particularly in the 
developing fetus.
Catabolism of thyroid hormones
Sulphation, glucuronidation, deamination, oxidative decar-
boxylation, ether cleavage and deiodination form the main 
routes for the inactivation and degradation of thyroid hor-
mone. These metabolites are excreted via bile or in urine.
Nuclear action of thyroid hormones
Tri-iodothyronine exerts its effects through interaction 
with nuclear thyroid hormone receptors (TR) that have 
a high affinity and high specificity for T3. Nuclear thy-
roid hormone receptors are a family of ligand-regulated 
transcription factors that are associated with chromatin. 
Several α and β isoforms of TR are produced and these 
usually dimerize with the retinoid X receptors (RXRs). 
TRα1 is widely expressed with particularly high expres-
sion in cardiac and skeletal muscles, whereas TRβ1 is pre-
dominantly expressed in the brain, liver and kidney and 
TRβ2 is primarily limited to the hypothalamus and the 
pituitary.
The TR/RXR complex binds to target response el-
ements located in the promoter region of the target 
genes. The formation of the T3-TR/DNA complex and 
subsequent recruitment of a variety of transcriptional 
coactivators leads to activation of the target genes, giv-
ing increased mRNA and protein production. In some 
circumstances, gene expression may be switched off. 
Mutations in the TRβ gene lead to a decreased affinity 
of the receptor for T3, leading to the autosomal domi-
nant clinical syndrome of ‘thyroid hormone resistance’ 
(­discussed later in this chapter).
378	
Clinical biochemistry
Control of thyroid hormone synthesis  
and secretion
Classic feedback regulation
The most important regulator of thyroid homoeosta-
sis is TSH. This dimeric peptide hormone comprises 
a β-subunit, required for binding to the TSH recep-
tor, and an α-subunit. The α-subunit is the same as that 
of luteinizing hormone, follicle stimulating hormone 
and human chorionic gonadotrophin. The β-subunit is 
specific for TSH: both subunits are required for bio-
activity. The subunits contain carbohydrate chains that 
are essential for the biological activity of the molecule. 
Modifications to these carbohydrate residues occur in 
different thyroid states, which alter both the bioactivity 
of the molecule and its plasma half-life. For example, in 
primary hypothyroidism, TSH has increased bioactivity 
and an increased plasma retention time, while in sec-
ondary hypothyroidism the bioactivity of the molecule 
is diminished. Most immunoassays are unable to recog-
nize modifications to the carbohydrate chains. There is 
a circadian rhythm of TSH secretion, plasma concentra-
tions being highest between midnight and 04.00 h and 
lowest at about midday. Thyroid stimulating hormone 
release also occurs in a pulsatile fashion. These changes 
in TSH are not reflected in the serum thyroid hormone 
concentrations.
The production of TSH is controlled by a stimula-
tory effect of the hypothalamic tripeptide, thyrotrophin 
releasing hormone (TRH, thyroliberin), mediated by a 
negative feedback from circulating free T3 and free T4 
(Fig. 19.5). Free T3 and free T4 inhibit TSH synthesis 
and release directly, by inhibiting transcription of the 
TSH subunit genes and indirectly by inhibiting TRH 
release. Free T3 and free T4 also decrease TSH glyco-
sylation and therefore its biological activity. It is thought 
that the hypothalamus, via TRH, sets the level of thyroid 
hormone production required physiologically, and that 
the pituitary acts as a ‘thyroid-stat’ to maintain the level 
of thyroid hormone production that has been determined 
by the hypothalamus. Twin studies have shown that in in-
dividuals without thyroid disease, TSH and thyroid hor-
mone concentrations are largely genetically determined. 
The setpoint in an individual is relatively narrow with 
intraindividual variation being less than half the interin-
dividual variation.
D1
D2
D3
T4
T2
rT3
rT3
T3
rT3
T3
T2
T2
T3
T4
T4
(5)
(5')
(5')
(5)
(5')
(5')
(5)
(5)
(Inactive)
(Active)
Tissue location
Liver
Kidney
Thyroid
Pituitary
CNS (R)
Cellular location
Plasma membrane
Tissue location
Thyroid (H)
BAT
Heart (H)
Placenta
Brain (H)
Pituitary
Spinal cord (H)
Skeletal muscle (H)
Cellular location
Endoplasmic reticulum
Tissue location
CNS
Skin
Placenta
Fetal liver (H)
Cellular location
Plasma membrane
FIGURE 19.4  ■  Characteristics of the iodothyronine deiodinases. In non-thyroidal illness, 5′-mono-deiodination is impaired leading to 
a decreased production of T3 and impaired breakdown of rT3. BAT, brown adipose tissue; CNS, central nervous system; (H), human 
not rat; (R), rat not human; T2, 3,3′-di-iodothyronine. (From Beckett G J, Arthur J R. Journal of Endocrinology 2005; 184:455–465. © Society 
for Endocrinology, with permission.)
Bound T4, T3
Free T4, T3
FIGURE  19.5  ■ The ‘classic’ hypothalamo–pituitary–thyroid axis. 
The production of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) is con-
trolled by a stimulatory effect of the hypothalamic tripeptide, 
thyrotrophin releasing hormone (TRH, thyroliberin), mediated 
by a negative feedback from circulating free T3 and free T4. 
Thyroid stimulating hormone may also exert autoregulatory 
fine control on its own production. Dopamine, somatostatin, 
glucocorticoids, leptin and catecholamines all may have an in-
fluence on the axis.
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
379
Other mechanisms
The classic feedback regulation of TSH release described 
above is an oversimplification. Dopamine, somatostatin 
and glucocorticoids inhibit TSH release, and these agents, 
together with cytokines, may be important modifiers of 
plasma TSH, particularly in patients with non-thyroidal 
illness (NTI) (Fig. 19.6). Leptin and catecholamines reg-
ulate TSH indirectly by stimulating TRH production. 
There is accumulating evidence that TSH can provide au-
toregulation via a direct action of TSH on the hypothala-
mus and at the pituitary. In the pituitary, folliculo-stellate 
cells have been identified that express TSH receptors: in-
teraction of TSH with these cells may produce fine control 
on TSH release through the release of cytokines, which in 
turn inhibit TSH release from thyrotrophs. It has been ar-
gued that interaction of TSH receptor antibodies with the 
folliculo-stellate cells explains why patients with Graves 
disease may continue to have suppressed TSH weeks or 
months after normal thyroid hormone concentrations 
have been achieved through carbimazole therapy.
Thyroid stimulating hormone modifies thyroid hor-
mone synthesis by binding to a specific receptor on the 
surface of the thyrocyte. The TSH receptor is a single 
protein with a large extracellular amino-terminal domain 
involved in the binding of TSH, seven transmembrane 
domains and a short intracellular carboxy-terminal do-
main involved in the activation of G-protein modulators 
of the adenylate cyclase-protein kinase-A system. These 
characteristics are shared with receptors for gonadotro-
phins: their extracellular domains show some 40% ho-
mology, the remainder being more highly conserved. 
This may explain the weak thyroid-stimulating activity 
of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG). Binding of 
TSH results in activation of adenylate cyclase and accu-
mulation of cyclic AMP. The calcium and phosphoino-
sitol signalling pathways may also be activated by TSH. 
After about an hour, an increase in release of thyroid 
hormones is seen. In the longer term, TSH increases 
the synthesis of iodinated thyroglobulin and also causes 
a general increase in the metabolism, size and activity of 
the follicular cells.
Extrathyroidal factors that may affect 
thyroid function
Age
Fetus. Thyroxine and TSH are detectable in fetal 
plasma at 10–12 weeks of gestation. Plasma concentra-
tions of total and free T4, total and free T3 and TBG 
increase during gestation, total and free T4 reaching 
adult concentrations at about 36  weeks, but total and 
free T3 reaching only the lower limit of the adult range 
at this time. The concentration of TSH also increases 
with gestational age but is within or above the adult 
­reference range throughout gestation. Marked time- 
and organ-specific changes occur throughout gestation 
in the expression of the deiodinases, which are thought 
to coordinate the orderly maturation of enzyme systems 
responsible for development of the brain and the other 
organ systems in the fetus.
Neonate. During the first 24 h after birth, there is a rapid, 
transient increase in the release of TSH, T3 and T4 that 
is considered to be an adaptive response to birth. Thyroid 
stimulating hormone peaks during the first 30 min, which 
then stimulates T3 and T4 production during the first 
24–36 h of postnatal life. This effect may be attenuated 
in infants delivered prematurely. Screening for congenital 
hypothyroidism should be carried out after at least three 
days to avoid spurious results.
Infancy and childhood. Plasma concentrations of TSH 
are within the adult range but free T3 is higher than in 
adults. Free T4 concentrations tend to be at the lower 
end of the adult range. This hormone pattern suggests it 
may arise as a result of increased D1 activity in children. 
After puberty, no major changes in thyroid function oc-
cur, except in the pregnant woman.
Elderly. In old age, there is little change in thyroid func-
tion tests and age-related reference ranges are not re-
quired. There is a modest decrease in T4 secretion but 
without an accompanying change in circulating T4. 
A slight fall in T3 may occur in those over 80 years of age. 
In patients on T4 replacement, the dose of T4 may have 
to be decreased with age. There is also increasing evi-
dence that the normal TSH distribution curves appear to 
be shifted towards higher value ranges in individuals aged 
over 80. Age-specific analysis of TSH concentrations and 
anti-thyroid antibody titres measured in the National 
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) 
demonstrated that 12% of subjects aged 80 and older 
without any evidence of underlying autoimmune thy-
roiditis had TSH concentrations >4.5 mU/L. What is 
currently unclear is whether higher TSH concentrations 
confer a survival advantage or simply represent a degree 
of non-autoimmune age-related thyroid failure.
Pregnancy
In normal pregnancy there is a large increase in plasma 
TBG concentration that arises from both an oestrogen 
stimulated increase in synthesis and diminished clearance 
Stress
Illness
Malnutrition
CRF
Cytokines
IL-1
TNF
Somatostatin
ACTH
Low
TSH
Cortisol
FIGURE  19.6  ■ The hypothalamo–pituitary–thyroid axis in non-
thyroidal illness. Dopamine, somatostatin, and glucocorticoids 
inhibit TSH release, and these agents together with cytokines 
may be important modifiers of serum TSH, in particular in pa-
tients with non-thyroidal illness. ACTH, adrenocorticotrophic 
hormone; CRF, corticotrophin releasing factor; IL-1, interleukin-1; 
TNF, tumour necrosis factor.
380	
Clinical biochemistry
of the protein. There is also an increase in the pool size 
of extrathyroidal T4 distribution and an increase in the 
deiodination of thyroid hormones in the developing pla-
centa. The result of these changes is that, during preg-
nancy, there is a marked increase in the requirement for 
iodine and an approximately 50% increase in T4 produc-
tion occurs if the supply of iodine is adequate.
In order to maintain homoeostasis, an increase in to-
tal T4 and total T3 concentrations occurs, which reach 
a new steady state around mid-gestation. This require-
ment for increased thyroid hormone production requires 
an ideal iodine supply during pregnancy of approximately 
250 μg/day. Similarly, women with hypothyroidism tak-
ing T4 replacement will need an increase in the dose 
of T4 of approximately 25–50 μg/day during pregnancy 
within the first six weeks of gestation, aiming for a TSH 
no higher than 2.5 mU/L. Some centres recommend that 
women double their pre-pregnancy levothyroxine dose 
on two days a week as soon as pregnancy is confirmed to 
reduce the risk of maternal hypothyroidism. Thyroxine 
replacement should be monitored carefully using both 
TSH and free T4, since even modest degrees of hypothy-
roxinaemia in early pregnancy have been associated with 
an impaired IQ in the infant.
In pregnancy, free T4 and free T3 concentrations may 
initially show a slight rise, thought to be due to the weak 
thyroid stimulating action of hCG, present in very high 
concentration in early pregnancy. This increase in free 
hormones can lead to suppression of TSH, such that low 
or sometimes undetectable concentrations may be found 
in up to 20% of patients during the first trimester. It is 
important that these changes in early pregnancy are not 
construed as suggesting that the patient has thyrotoxico-
sis. As pregnancy progresses, the concentrations of free 
thyroid hormones fall and TSH begins to rise, although 
rarely increasing above the reference range seen in non-
pregnant subjects. Free thyroid hormone concentration 
may be lower than those found in non-pregnant women. 
It is important that trimester-related reference ranges are 
used for both TSH and free thyroid hormones. Patients 
can usually return to their pre-pregnancy levothyroxine 
replacement regimen immediately post-delivery; how-
ever, they should be monitored to ensure that this is still 
the optimal dose.
Hyperemesis gravidarum (severe vomiting in the first 
trimester of pregnancy) is associated with high plasma 
total and free thyroid hormone and low TSH concen-
trations, making it difficult to distinguish this condition 
from severe true thyrotoxicosis (thyroid crisis). It is be-
lieved that hCG is responsible for the thyroid stimulation; 
the condition usually resolves by the second trimester. 
Thyroid stimulating hormone receptor antibodies are 
negative in patients with hyperemesis but positive if the 
patient has Graves disease.
Thyrotrophin releasing hormone can cross the pla-
centa from mother to fetus, but TSH does not. Thyroid 
hormones cross the placenta, but this transplacental flux 
is regulated in part by changes in expression of placental 
deiodinase as pregnancy progresses. A maternal supply of 
thyroid hormones (particularly T4) to the fetus is par-
ticularly import in the first trimester until a functional 
fetal thyroid has developed. However, since a fetus with 
congenital thyroid deficiency develops relatively normally 
in utero, this suggests that some maternal-fetal trans-
fer of thyroid hormone must be maintained throughout 
pregnancy. Iodide and antithyroid drugs also pass to the 
fetus. Indeed, antithyroid drugs are transferred more 
readily than thyroid hormone, and for this reason treat-
ment of thyrotoxicosis in pregnancy with a ‘block and 
replace’ regimen (high dose antithyroid drugs ‘rescued’ 
by simultaneous thyroid hormone replacement) is con-
traindicated in pregnancy as it would result in a relatively 
hypothyroid fetus. The treatment of hyperthyroidism in 
pregnancy requires careful consideration. Radioactive io-
dine is contraindicated and the choice of antithyroid drug 
is currently the subject of debate. Propylthiouracil has 
been traditionally preferred to carbimazole/methimazole 
owing to fears of scalp and gastro-oesphageal defects in 
fetuses exposed to carbimazole/methimazole in the first 
trimester. However, recent concerns have arisen owing 
to the occurrence of propylthiouracil induced hepatitis, 
which has occasionally required liver transplantation and 
rarely has resulted in maternal death. Autoantibodies 
may cause additional problems in managing patients with 
hyperthyroidism in pregnancy. In patients with Graves 
disease, the transplacental passage of thyroid stimulating 
immunoglobulins may cause transient neonatal thyrotox-
icosis, while the presence of anti-TPO antibodies is asso-
ciated with an increased risk of maternal hypothyroidism 
and miscarriage.
Non-thyroidal illness
Patients attending or admitted to hospital suffering from 
any of a wide range of chronic or acute non-thyroidal 
­illnesses (NTI), often have abnormalities in thyroid func-
tion tests. A low T3 may often be found even though the 
patients are clinically euthyroid; this has been termed the 
sick euthyroid syndrome.
Several mechanisms are involved, including:
•	 alterations in the hypothalamic–pituitary–thyroid 
axis leading to decreased hypothalamic stores of 
TRH and suppression of TSH release due to in-
creased concentrations of dopamine, cytokines, 
cortisol and somatostatin (see Fig. 19.6). While the 
degree of TSH suppression in NTI is often not as 
great as that found in hyperthyroidism, there is con-
siderable overlap in TSH concentrations found in 
the two conditions
•	 changes in the affinity characteristics and in the 
plasma concentrations of the thyroid hormone-
binding proteins. These changes give rise to 
­alterations in the plasma concentrations of both the 
free and total thyroid hormones
•	 impaired uptake of thyroid hormones by the tissues
•	 decreased production of T3 in the peripheral 
tissues
•	 changes in the T3 occupancy and function of the T3 
receptors.
The contribution of each of the above mechanisms 
may vary with the severity and stage of the illness, and 
thus the pattern of thyroid function tests may be ex-
tremely variable and may mimic the profile seen in either 
primary or secondary thyroid disease. Interpretation of 
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
381
thyroid function tests is complicated further by the ef-
fects of drugs and methodological problems associated 
with free hormone measurements.
Thyroid hormone metabolism is markedly affected by 
fasting and illness, with the magnitude of these changes 
tending to be proportional to the severity of the illness 
(Fig.  19.7). Extrathyroidal conversion of T4–T3 is re-
duced, leading to a marked decline in plasma total and 
free T3, which may fall to undetectable concentrations. 
Reverse T3 concentration increases, primarily owing to 
impaired catabolism rather than increased synthesis. These 
changes are often considered to be an adaptive response 
for energy conservation, as rT3 is not metabolically active. 
Concentrations of free fatty acids and other substances that 
can compete with thyroid hormones for binding to plasma 
proteins may rise. This can produce a transient increase in 
free T4. Drugs that compete for T4 binding sites will have 
a similar effect. Uptake of thyroid hormone into cells may 
be impaired, either directly by endogenous inhibitors or 
indirectly as a result of impairment of the active transport 
systems of the cells. Finally, administration of corticoste-
roids or dopamine may suppress TSH release.
Methodological 
shortcomings 
render 
the 
re-
sults of free hormone analysis liable to serious error. 
Equilibrium dialysis methods usually show a normal or 
slightly raised free T4 in patients with illness of mild 
to moderate severity, but most commercial assays tend 
to show normal or low free T4 results in sick patients. 
Normalization or transient rebound changes of thyroid 
parameters may be seen during recovery from NTI or 
refeeding after starvation. In particular, TSH may rise 
transiently into the hypothyroid range. It should be 
noted that, although TSH is in general the most reliable 
test of thyroid function, in hospitalized patients a TSH 
of <0.1 mU/L is twice as likely to be due to NTI as to 
hyperthyroidism, and an increased TSH is as likely to 
be due to recovery from illness as to hypothyroidism. 
Because of the poor predictive value of thyroid function 
tests in hospitalized patients, these tests should only be 
requested if the reason for hospital admission is con-
sidered, on clinical grounds, to be related to a thyroid 
problem. Also, abnormal thyroid function tests during 
illness may need to be rechecked after the acute illness 
has resolved.
While the changes in thyroid hormone metabolism 
associated with illness might theoretically lead to tissue 
hypothyroidism, most trials of T4 and T3 administration 
in severe non-thyroidal illness have not shown improved 
outcome.
Drugs
Drugs may interfere with TSH secretion or the pro-
duction, secretion, transport and metabolism of thyroid 
hormones (Table 19.1). Some drugs modify thyroid sta-
tus while others produce abnormal thyroid function test 
results in clinically euthyroid subjects. Certain agents (in 
particular iron preparations) impair the absorption of T4 
from the gut, and patients on thyroxine therapy should be 
advised to take their T4 at least 4 h apart from these med-
ications. Patients should also be advised to avoid caffeine 
within 45 min of taking levothyroxine as caffeine can also 
impair absorption. Patients taking levothyroxine are likely 
to require an increase in replacement dose if drugs such 
as phenytoin or carbamazepine are also prescribed as they 
increase hepatic metabolism of T4. Phenytoin, carbam-
azepine, furosemide and salicylate compete with thyroid 
hormone binding to plasma binding proteins and may in-
crease plasma free T4 concentrations. The influence of 
rT3
FT4–ED
TT4 or FT4
TT3 or FT3
TSH
Mild
Moderate
Severe
Reference
range
Severity of disease
FIGURE 19.7  ■ The effects of illness on the concentration of thy-
roid hormones and thyrotrophin. The profile for free T4 obtained 
using equilibrium dialysis is shown (FT4-ED). The concentration 
of free T4 found using routine assays is method dependent, with 
some assays showing the profile of FT4-ED, while others follow 
the profile of total T4 (TT4). Free T3 (FT3) shows a similar profile 
to total T3 (TT3).
TABLE 19.1  Drugs affecting thyroid function
Mechanism
Example of drug
Decrease in TSH 
secretion
Dopamine, glucocorticoids, 
octreotide, cytokines
Decrease in thyroid 
hormone secretion
Lithium, amiodarone, iodide
Increase in thyroid 
hormone secretion
Lithium, amiodarone (rare), 
iodide
Decrease in thyroidal 
synthesis
a
Carbimazole, propylthiouracil, 
lithium
Increase in TBG
Oestrogens, tamoxifen, heroin, 
methadone, clofibrate, 
raloxifene
Decrease in TBG
Androgens, glucocorticoids, 
anabolic steroids
Displacement of 
thyroid hormones 
from plasma 
proteins
Furosemide, fenclofenac, 
salicylates, mefenamic acid, 
carbamazepine
Increased hepatic 
metabolism
Phenytoin, carbamazepine, 
rifampicin, barbiturates
Impaired T4 and T3 
conversion
β-antagonists, amiodarone
a, 
radiocontrast dyes, e.g. 
iopanoic acid
Impaired absorption 
of thyroxine
b
Cholestyramine, aluminium 
hydroxide, ferrous sulphate, 
calcium salts, sucralfate, soya 
protein
Altered immunity
c
Interleukin-1, interferons, tumour 
necrosis factor-α, interleukin-2
aCause decrease in thyroid hormone synthesis or secretion and 
alter thyroid status.
bInterfere with absorption from GI tract. Patients on T4 therapy 
should be advised to take their T4 at least 4 h apart from these 
medications.
cThese cytokines can cause transient hypothyroidism or  
thyrotoxicosis, the mechanism of which is unclear.
Other drugs listed produce abnormal thyroid function tests but 
patients remain euthyroid. Amiodarone is the exception (see text).
382	
Clinical biochemistry
drugs on modifying free thyroid hormone concentrations 
may be method specific. For example, depending on the 
method, free T4 may be measured as being normal, high 
or low in patients given heparin or taking phenytoin or 
carbamazepine. Amiodarone, lithium and interferon can 
induce thyroid dysfunction and are covered in detail later 
in this chapter.
THE EVALUATION OF THYROID FUNCTION
This section describes the methods that have been devel-
oped in order to assess the functional state of the thyroid 
gland. In most cases, the presenting clinical features will 
lead to thyroid function tests being performed for confir-
mation of the provisional diagnosis.
Clinical evaluation of thyroid status
Disordered thyroid function may be detected clinically 
by demonstrating both changes in the thyroid gland itself 
and the systemic effects of under- or overproduction of 
thyroid hormones. In some instances, the clinical presen-
tation may be virtually diagnostic of a specific condition 
and investigations are required only for confirmation. In 
others, the clinical features may be less specific and more 
thorough investigation is required. The signs and symp-
toms of thyroid dysfunction are listed in Tables 19.3 and 
19.6. The normal thyroid can often be palpated and may 
also be apparent on inspection of the neck, particularly 
in young, thin women. Abnormal thyroid enlargements 
may be diffuse or asymmetrical. As a result of connec-
tive tissue attachments to the trachea, thyroid swellings 
move upwards on swallowing and a similar phenomenon 
is found with tongue protrusion in the case of thyro-
glossal cysts. The normal gland has a ‘rubbery’ feel; in 
Graves disease and diffuse colloid goitre, the consistency 
is softer. By contrast, the thyroid in Hashimoto disease is 
often rather firm, often with a palpable pyramidal lobe. 
Thyroid carcinoma (anaplastic) and Riedel thyroiditis 
result in a rock-hard gland that may, in the case of car-
cinoma, be irregular in outline. Increased blood flow 
through a hyperactive gland is often associated with a 
bruit. This may be maximal over the superior thyroidal 
TABLE 19.2  Interpretation of thyroid function tests
 
TSH low
TSH normal
TSH high
Free T4 low
Severe non-thyroidal illness: repeat test 
when non-thyroidal illness resolved
Non-thyroidal illness or drugs: repeat 
tests when non-thyroidal illness 
resolved
Hypothyroidism: no 
confirmation needed 
but look for cause-
autoimmune, drugs, 
congenital etc.
Recent treatment for hyperthyroidism
Hypopituitarism: other tests of pituitary 
function abnormal
Recent treatment for hyperthyroidism 
Hypopituitarism: other tests of 
pituitary function abnormal
Inadequate T4 
replacement
Free T4 normal
Subclinical hyperthyroidism: free 
T3 normal; check autoantibodies 
(antiperoxidase)
Euthyroid: no confirmation needed. 
Also applies to adequate T4 
replacement
Subclinical 
hypothyroidism: check 
autoantibodies
Over-replacement with T4
Non-thyroidal illness, drugs: free  
T3 normal or low; only common in 
hospitalized patients
T3-hyperthyroidism: free T3 high; check 
autoantibodies
Treated thyrotoxicosis: free T3 normal 
or high
 
Inadequate T4 therapy
Recovery from non-
thyroidal illness; 
repeat tests after 
illness fully resolved
Free T4 high
Hyperthyroidism: free T3 usually high; 
check autoantibodies
T4 replacement: either erratic 
compliance with T4 replacement 
therapy or consistent with adequate 
replacement in some patients
Erratic compliance with 
T4 therapy
Over-replacement with T4
Non-thyroidal illness, drugs
 
Hyperthyroidism with coexistent non-
thyroidal illness: total T4 raised, free T3 
may be normal; check autoantibodies
Autoantibodies to T4 (and T3): free T3 
may be high; test for autoantibodies 
to thyroid hormones; try a different 
method for free T4
Resistance to thyroid 
hormones: free T3 high; 
normal or exaggerated 
response of TSH to 
TRH; family studies
Hyperemesis gravidarum or very early 
pregnancy: free T3 normal, sometimes 
raised; check TSH receptor antibodies 
to exclude Graves disease
Genetic albumin variants: try a 
different method for free T4.
Resistance to thyroid hormones: free 
T3 high; SHBG normal; normal or 
exaggerated response of TSH to 
TRH; family studies
TSH-secreting tumour: 
free T3 high; no 
response of TSH to 
TRH or T3
Non-thyroidal illness: total T4 usually 
normal; free T3 usually normal or low
TSH-secreting tumour: free T3 high; 
SHBG high; no TSH response to 
TRH or T3; other tests of pituitary 
function abnormal; α-subunit 
increased
 
Bold type shows most common diagnoses in each category.
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
383
artery rather than the gland itself and, in some cases, may 
also produce a palpable thrill.
In vitro tests of thyroid activity and  
pituitary–thyroid status
The tests used to investigate thyroid dysfunction can be 
grouped into:
•	 tests that establish whether there is thyroid 
­dysfunction, e.g. serum TSH and thyroid hormone 
(T4 and T3) measurements
•	 tests to elucidate the cause of thyroid dysfunction, 
e.g. thyroid autoantibody and serum thyroglobulin 
measurements, thyroid enzyme activities, biopsy of 
the thyroid, ultrasound and isotopic thyroid scanning
•	 thyroglobulin measurements, which are used to 
monitor treatment and detect recurrence in patients 
with follicular or papillary carcinoma.
Measurement of TSH and thyroid hormones should 
be performed to determine the patient’s thyroid status 
before requesting the additional tests that seek to deter-
mine the cause of any thyroid dysfunction.
Measurement of thyroid stimulating hormone
The measurement of TSH in a basal serum sample by 
a sensitive immunometric assay provides the single most 
sensitive, specific and reliable test of thyroid status in 
both overt and subclinical primary thyroid disorders. 
In primary hypothyroidism, TSH is increased, while in 
primary hyperthyroidism TSH is usually <0.02 mU/L. 
However, TSH alone is not a reliable test for detecting 
thyroid dysfunction arising from hypothalamic–pituitary 
dysfunction and in other specific instances as outlined 
below.
Thyroid stimulating hormone is now measured 
by ­immunometric assays (IMAs) that utilize non-­
competitive labelled antibody methods with non-­isotopic 
labels. These IMAs use highly specific monoclonal anti­
bodies raised to epitopes on α- and β-subunits of the 
TSH molecule. The IMA technique uses a sandwich- 
assay configuration using two antibodies. The ‘functional 
sensitivity’ of a TSH assay defines the minimum con-
centration of TSH that can be quantified in routine use. 
To obtain the functional sensitivity of a routine assay, a 
precision profile is constructed using data obtained over 
many assay runs with multiple batches of reagent and 
different operators. The concentration of TSH that has 
a coefficient of variation of 20% taken from the preci-
sion profile defines ‘functional sensitivity’. It is essen-
tial that TSH assays are sufficiently sensitive for clinical 
­diagnostic purposes and they must have a functional 
sensitivity of <0.02 mU/L.
Free T4 and free T3 measurements
Theoretical considerations
The plasma concentrations of free thyroid hormones 
are extremely low and their quantification in the pres-
ence of large concentrations of bound hormones has 
proved challenging. Poor assay design of many free 
hormone methods has produced a mass of conflicting 
literature regarding the typical ranges of free thyroid 
hormone concentrations in patients with NTI and tak-
ing a variety of drugs.
The free hormone concentration results from the 
equilibrium between the bound (BP) and free hormone.
The proportion of T4 that binds to the binding pro-
tein is dictated through the law of mass action by the 
affinity of the binding protein (Keq) multiplied by its 
concentration. This is known as the ‘relative binding 
capacity’. Thus, if the affinity or concentration of the 
binding protein decreases, the proportion of T4 bound 
will also diminish and the free hormone concentration 
will increase. In humans, the free T4 fraction is mostly 
affected by changes in the affinity and concentration of 
TBG; changes in the affinity and concentration of albu-
min or transthyretin have little effect on free T4.
Free hormone measurements involve sampling the 
free hormone fraction. This can be done using physi-
cal separation of the free from bound hormone using 
a semipermeable membrane (equilibrium dialysis or 
­ultrafiltration) or, alternatively, by adding an antibody 
that ‘captures’ a proportion of the free hormone pool. 
The removal of free hormone from the original equilib-
rium will result in further hormone dissociating from the 
binding protein to create a new equilibrium. A crucial 
requirement of any valid method for free hormone mea-
surement is that during the assay process there should 
be minimal disruption of the original equilibrium, and 
this can be achieved by minimizing the dilution of the 
specimen and sampling only a small proportion of the 
hormone pool. The pH and the ionic composition of any 
buffer also need to be controlled. The inadequacies of 
many commercial assays have led to the suggestion that 
the term free hormone estimate is used for all free hormone 
assays used in clinical practice.
Methods for measuring free  
thyroid hormones
Equilibrium dialysis and ultrafiltration methods
These are widely regarded as reference methods, although 
neither is completely satisfactory. The long dialysis period 
(~12–18 h) used for equilibrium dialysis can, in certain sam-
ples (e.g. patients given heparin), lead to the production of 
non-esterified fatty acids (NEFAs) from triglyceride, which 
may displace thyroxine from its binding proteins and thus 
increase the free T4 concentration. A similar increase in free 
T4 will occur if such patient samples are stored unfrozen 
prior to analysis.
Validity of commercial methods for  
free hormone analysis
Routine assays are given a variety of names depend-
ing on the methodology used, but all usually involve: 
(1) adding an antibody to diluted serum to ‘capture’ a 
proportion of the free T4 pool and (2) estimating the 
BP
T
BP
T
−
+
4
4
⇋
384	
Clinical biochemistry
unoccupied T4 binding sites on the antibody by adding 
labelled T4. These commercial assays have additional 
problems over those of equilibrium dialysis. First, the 
antibody used will tend to disrupt the original equilib-
rium, an effect that is dependent on the overall thyroxine 
binding capacity of the sample and the affinity and con-
centration of the antibody. Second, the binding capacity 
of the patient sample may be quite different to that used 
in the assay calibrators. The overall effect of this is that 
samples with low binding capacity (NTI, low TBG etc.) 
tend to have a negative bias introduced, while samples 
with high binding capacity (high TBG, e.g. pregnancy) 
may have a positive bias introduced. Many commercial 
assays include albumin, added in an attempt to reduce 
non-specific binding and nullify the effects of NEFA on 
free T4 concentrations. Unfortunately, albumin binds 
T4 and, if present in sufficient concentrations, will 
cause significant disruption of the equilibrium. Again, 
samples with low serum binding capacity will be more 
prone to this effect than samples with normal or high 
binding capacities. These various effects explain why 
free T4 assays may appear to produce low, normal or 
raised free T4 concentrations in the same sample taken 
from patients with NTI.
In a true free hormone assay the calculated and mea-
sured free hormone concentrations in a set of serially 
diluted serum samples should be closely approximate. 
Assays that show a significant reduction in free T4 at 
these dilutions are likely to produce heavily negatively 
biased results in patients with low serum binding capac-
ity. Many current commercial assays for free T4 fail these 
validation tests. The development of free T3 assays has 
been even more problematic than for free T4.
Nomenclature of free thyroid  
hormone assays
The names given to free hormone assays include one-step 
analogue, two-step back-titration and labelled antibody 
assays. The principles for each of these assays are widely 
reviewed in the literature but the name given to an assay 
does not guarantee its validity or performance.
The free T4 and free T3 index methods, that esti-
mate the free hormone concentration in the presence of 
protein-bound hormone, have now largely been replaced 
by the direct measurement of free T4 and free T3.
Total T4 and total T3
Plasma concentrations of total T4 and total T3 are mea-
sured by immunoassay using diluents that incorporate a 
chemical agent that releases the thyroid hormones from 
their binding proteins. In clinical practice, most problems 
associated with total hormone measurements arise in pa-
tients with modified hormone binding capacities that, in 
turn, may increase or decrease the total hormone concen-
tration. Pregnancy and oestrogen medication give rise to 
increased concentrations of TBG and thus increases in 
total T3 and total T4. Some causes of abnormal TBG 
concentration (and thus, abnormal total thyroid hor-
mones) are given in Box 19.2. Genetic variants of TBG, 
transthyretin and albumin have been described that have 
altered hormone-binding characteristics, which in turn 
modify the total concentration of thyroid hormones in 
the circulation. Non-thyroidal illness results in the pro-
duction of modified TBG with diminished affinity for 
thyroid hormone. Many drugs may also lower the hor-
mone binding capacity of plasma. Some patients produce 
autoantibodies to the thyroid hormones that increase the 
hormone binding capacity of plasma and, in addition, 
produce marked assay interference.
The use of total hormone measurements is now less 
popular following the introduction of more reliable 
methods for free hormone measurements. However, to-
tal hormones are still considered to have a role in clarify-
ing thyroid status in some patients with NTI where the 
results of free thyroid hormone and TSH measurements 
do not concur.
Selective use of thyroid function tests
Many laboratories measure random TSH as the initial 
test of thyroid function. This approach is not infallible, 
but is least likely to produce an abnormal result in NTI 
and in patients on various forms of drug treatment. It 
can detect both overt and subclinical disease. A normal 
TSH concentration effectively excludes primary thyroid 
dysfunction. If an abnormal result is obtained, thyroid 
hormone measurements are then made to confirm that 
thyroid dysfunction is present, and to determine the 
­severity of the disease.
Initial measurement of both TSH and free T4 to-
gether can provide a more satisfactory method of assess-
ing thyroid status, since in some situations a single TSH 
result may be misleading. If this strategy is followed, a 
significant number of cases will arise in which one test 
is abnormal while the complementary test is normal. It 
is thus essential to understand and appreciate the factors 
that can affect the results of thyroid function tests.
BOX 19.2	
Causes of abnormal plasma  
thyroid binding globulin  
(TBG) concentrations
High TBG
•	 Genetic (hereditary TBG excess X-linked dominant)
•	 Physiological (pregnancy, neonatal period)
•	 Hydatidiform mole
•	 Oestrogens, including oestrogen-containing oral 
­contraceptives, tamoxifen,
•	 Other drugs, e.g. phenothiazines, opiates, clofibrate
•	 Hepatitis
•	 Acute intermittent porphyria
Low TBG
•	 Genetic
•	 Androgens
•	 Protein-losing states, e.g. nephrotic syndrome
•	 Malnutrition
•	 Malabsorption
•	 Severe illness
•	 Acromegaly
•	 Cushing disease
•	 Corticosteroid therapy (high dose)
•	 Liver disease (chronic)
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
385
Interpreting results of thyroid function tests
Table 19.2 provides a guide to the interpretation of thyroid 
function tests.
Situations in which TSH usually provides the  
correct estimate of thyroid status
Overt primary hyperthyroidism. Thyroid stimulat-
ing hormone is nearly always <0.1 mU/L and often 
<0.02 mU/L, owing to feedback inhibition on the pituitary. 
Free and total T4 and T3 concentrations are nearly always 
increased, but in a very small percentage of hyperthyroid 
patients, total T4 and free T4 are both normal, whereas 
both total T3 and free T3 are increased: this condition is 
known as T3 hyperthyroidism or T3 thyrotoxicosis.
Overt primary hypothyroidism. Thyroid stimulating 
hormone is invariably increased, often to >20 mU/L, as 
feedback inhibition of the pituitary is diminished, and 
free T4 and total T4 are low. Free T3 and total T3 mea-
surements are of no value here, since normal concentra-
tions are often observed because of increased peripheral 
deiodination of T4–T3.
Subclinical thyroid disease. Thyroid disease presents as 
a spectrum of clinical and biochemical features of varying 
severity. The clinical diagnosis of mild thyroid disorders 
is often difficult, and the only biochemical abnormality 
may be an abnormal serum TSH concentration. For ex-
ample, many clinically euthyroid patients with multinodu-
lar goitre or with exophthalmic Graves disease have a TSH 
<0.1 mU/L, but normal free and total thyroid hormone 
concentrations. The combination of a low TSH together 
with normal thyroid hormone concentrations in a patient 
is known as ‘subclinical hyperthyroidism’, but this descrip-
tion is unsatisfactory, since it rests solely on the results of 
chemical investigations. Similarly, a diagnosis of ‘subclini-
cal hypothyroidism’ is given to those patients with an in-
creased TSH but normal thyroid hormone concentrations.
Before the diagnosis of subclinical thyroid disease can 
be made, causes of an abnormal plasma TSH other than 
thyroid disease must be excluded. These include preg-
nancy, NTI, drug treatment and assay interference.
Common situations in which TSH results  
may be misleading
Assay interference from endogenous  
heterophilic antibodies
Some individuals have antibodies in their plasma that re-
act with a range of animal immunoglobulins (heterophilic 
antibodies). These antibodies interfere with a wide range 
of immunoassays. For example, a normal or even elevated 
TSH result may be found in some thyrotoxic patients 
­owing to this type of assay interference.
Pregnancy
Thyroid stimulating hormone is a reliable indicator 
of thyroid status in the second and third trimester of 
pregnancy, but in the first trimester, a low TSH may be 
found in up to 20% of women. Thyroid function testing 
in pregnancy is covered earlier in this chapter.
Secondary thyroid disorders
Thyroid stimulating hormone concentration is normal 
in about half of patients with central (pituitary) hypo-
thyroidism, and in a few, TSH may be slightly elevated. 
Circulating TSH has been shown to have reduced bio-
activity in central hypothyroidism and thus free T4 and 
total T4 concentrations are usually low. When pituitary 
disease is known to be present, TSH concentrations 
should not be used to assess the thyroid status.
Very rarely, hyperthyroidism is due to a TSH-secreting 
tumour. Persistent hyperthyroid symptoms associated 
with elevated free T4 and free T3 but raised or normal 
TSH are consistent with this diagnosis, once the com-
mon problems of assay interference or NTI have been 
eliminated. Serum α-subunit concentrations are often in-
creased in these patients.
Abnormal pituitary T3 receptor function, due gen-
erally to mutations in the thyroid hormone β receptor, 
can result in disordered thyroid function not reflected by 
changes in TSH. In this disorder, the thyrotroph is resis-
tant to the normal negative feedback regulation, so that 
plasma thyroid hormone concentrations are raised in the 
presence of a normal or raised TSH. Depending on the 
balance of effects between receptor function in the pitu-
itary and the rest of the body, the patient may be clinically 
euthyroid, hyperthyroid or even mildly hypothyroid. 
This condition is termed ‘thyroid hormone resistance’.
Reference ranges and significant changes
By convention, a reference range usually only comprises 
95% of values from a reference population; therefore 
2.5% of the population will have values above the ref-
erence range and 2.5% below. Thyroid hormone con-
centrations show a normal distribution in reference 
populations. For TSH, the reference population shows 
a log normal distribution even when subjects who are 
thyroid peroxidase (TPO) antibody positive are excluded. 
Thyroid stimulating hormone reference ranges should 
be established using specimens collected between 08.00 h 
and 18.00 h and using 95% confidence limits from log 
transformed data. The reference population should have 
no personal or family history of thyroid dysfunction, be 
on no medication known to alter TSH secretion and 
have no thyroid antibodies detectable by a sensitive as-
say. Method-related reference ranges need to be used for 
all thyroid function tests. Typical adult reference ranges 
are: TSH 0.3–4.0 mU/L, total T4 60–160 nmol/L, total 
T3 1.2–2.6 nmol/L, free T4 9–25 pmol/L and free T3 
3–8 pmol/L.
In neonates, infants and children, age-related refer-
ence ranges are recommended. Trimester-related refer-
ence ranges should be available for use in pregnancy.
Knowledge of the analytical variability and estimates 
of the intraindividual and interindividual variability 
­allows a calculation of differences in the results of thy-
roid tests that can be considered as clinically significant 
386	
Clinical biochemistry
when monitoring serially a patient’s response to therapy. 
These changes may be method dependent but are in the 
order of:
TSH	
0.8 mU/L
Total T4	
15 nmol/L
Free T4	
6 pmol/L
Total T3	
0.6 nmol/L
Free T3	
1.5 pmol/L.
Miscellaneous tests
Thyrotrophin releasing hormone test
In this dynamic test of pituitary-thyroid function, the 
TSH response to an intravenous dose of thyrotrophin 
releasing hormone (TRH) is measured. Formerly, it was 
used as a test of hypothyroidism when TSH estimates 
were insensitive (exaggerated TSH response) and as a 
test of pituitary function. Nowadays it is only occasion-
ally used in the diagnosis of thyroid hormone resistance 
or TSH-secreting adenoma.
Thyroglobulin
Thyroglobulin (Tg) is normally present in the circula-
tion in very small amounts and, although concentrations 
may be raised in many thyroid disorders, its measurement 
(by immunoassay) is essentially reserved for follow-up of 
patients with thyroid cancer (post total thyroidectomy 
and radioiodine ablation), in whom elevation of previ-
ously suppressed concentrations may indicate tumour 
recurrence. The measurement of Tg is challenging, as 
up to 30% of patients with thyroid cancer have antithy-
roglobulin antibodies in their serum that may interfere 
with the assay. Rarely, demonstration of suppressed Tg 
concentration in the presence of raised T4 and T3 is used 
to diagnose factitious hyperthyroidism due to illicit abuse 
of thyroid hormone.
The measurement of serum thyroglobulin is also use-
ful in identifying the cause of congenital hypothyroidism 
as all patients with organification disorders, and those 
with severe thyroid-stimulating hormone receptor de-
fects, will have raised concentrations when their circulat-
ing TSH is increased, except for those with thyroglobulin 
synthesis defects where the thyroglobulin concentra-
tion usually remains low. Thyroglobulin measurements 
can also provide useful information about the presence 
of thyroid tissue, for example, if serum thyroglobulin is 
measurable where there is apparent athyreosis on imag-
ing, this implies that radiologically undetectable hypo-
plastic thyroid tissue is present.
α-Subunit
The pituitary glycoprotein hormones TSH, follicle 
stimulating hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone 
(LH) are composed of two subunits, the α-subunit be-
ing common to all three hormones and the β-subunit 
specific to each hormone. The plasma concentration of 
the α-subunit can be measured by immunoassay, without 
cross-reaction from complete hormone molecules, and it 
may be raised in patients with pituitary tumours. Raised 
concentrations are also found in some postmenopausal 
women.
Autoantibodies to thyroidal antigens
Antibodies to thyroid peroxidase (TPOAb)
Originally known as thyroid microsomal antibodies, these 
antibodies are found in almost all (95%) patients with au-
toimmune hypothyroidism secondary to Hashimoto thy-
roiditis early in the course of the disease, and in some 
patients with other autoimmune thyroid diseases. The an-
tibodies are polyclonal and their target antigen has been 
identified as the thyroid peroxidase enzyme, which plays 
critical roles in thyroid hormone synthesis. These anti-
bodies are frequently present in individuals with subclini-
cal hypothyroidism as well as in 2–5% of biochemically 
euthyroid women (rising to over 10% over the age of 70). 
The prevalence of these antibodies is lower in men, but 
also increases with age, being present in 2.5% of the male 
population aged over 75. They may play a pathogenetic 
role in some patients with destructive autoimmune thy-
roid disease, as they have been shown both directly to fix 
complement on the thyrocyte and to direct cell-mediated 
cytotoxic reactions against thyrocytes, but in the majority 
of cases the damage to the thyroid is believed to be T cell 
rather than antibody mediated.
Knowledge of the presence of this group of antibodies 
can be of value in several circumstances. The presence 
of a high titre of TPOAb in the presence of goitrous hy-
pothyroidism is characteristic of Hashimoto disease; they 
may also be seen in association with the early, transient 
hyperthyroidism sometimes associated with this condi-
tion. In pregnancy, the presence of antithyroid peroxi-
dase antibodies is a significant risk factor for miscarriage, 
maternal hypothyroidism and the future development 
of postpartum thyroiditis with disturbed thyroid func-
tion. In more general terms, the finding of TPOAb in 
high titre is indicative of thyroid autoimmunity and may 
hence be associated with present or future occurrence of 
other organ-specific autoimmune disease. Patients with 
ophthalmic Graves disease (eye signs typical of Graves 
ophthalmopathy but without a present or past history of 
hyperthyroidism) are often found to have these antibod-
ies, confirming the association with autoimmune thyroid 
disease despite normal thyroid function. In patients with 
subclinical hypothyroidism, the presence of TPOAb is an 
indicator to consider commencing T4 replacement, as 
such patients are at significant risk of developing overt 
hypothyroidism in the future (50% will progress to bio-
chemical hypothyroidism over the next 20 years).
Antibodies to thyroglobulin (TgAb)
Antibodies to thyroglobulin are also found in patients 
with thyroid autoimmunity, but at lower frequency than 
the TPOAb. These antibodies do not fix complement 
and are not known to play a direct pathogenetic role in 
the aetiology of autoimmune thyroid disease in man. The 
only reason to measure these antibodies is in patients 
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
387
being treated for follicular or papillary cancer, to indi-
cate possible assay interference in Tg assays. Antibodies 
to thyroglobulin can interfere with assays for Tg, giving 
falsely elevated Tg concentrations in radioimmunoassays 
and falsely decreased concentrations in IMAs. In patients 
being monitored for differentiated thyroid cancer, a ris-
ing titre of TgAb is associated with a poor prognosis.
Antibodies to the thyroid stimulating hormone 
receptor
The hyperthyroidism of Graves disease is mediated via 
the effect of IgG class autoantibodies that bind to the 
TSH receptor and produce an increase in intracellular 
cyclic AMP concentration. Serum concentrations of such 
antibodies can be correlated with thyroid gland hyper-
function. Two types of assay system are in use: the first 
measures the capacity of the autoantibody to inhibit the 
binding of labelled TSH to its receptor on human thy-
roid membrane preparations (TSH-binding inhibiting 
immunoglobulin or TBII), and the second measures the 
increase in cyclic AMP concentrations in thyroid prepara-
tions following stimulation by the patient’s IgG (thyroid 
stimulating antibody or TsAb). During periods of thyroid 
overactivity, these assays will be positive in 90–95% of 
patients.
Knowledge of TSH receptor antibody status in pa-
tients with Graves disease during pregnancy is of prog-
nostic value: the infants of patients with a high antibody 
titre during the third trimester have an increased risk of 
neonatal hyperthyroidism secondary to transplacental 
passage of maternal autoantibody. Such neonatal hyper-
thyroidism is transient, settling as maternal antibody dis-
appears from the child’s circulation.
Other TSH receptor antibodies (‘blocking’ antibody), 
although infrequently demonstrated, can inhibit gland 
function and lead to hypothyroidism; the predominant 
effect (stimulation vs blocking) may vary in a single pa-
tient with time. However, stimulation is far more com-
monly found.
Antibodies and ophthalmopathy of Graves disease
The aetiology of the ophthalmopathy of Graves ­disease, 
which is present in about a third of patients, is still poorly 
understood, but current evidence suggests an autoim-
mune pathogenesis and an association with smoking. 
Orbital muscle, connective tissue and adipose tissue be-
come infiltrated with lymphocytes and macrophages. The 
extracellular compartment of the extraocular muscles and 
orbital fibro-adipose tissue becomes oedematous ­owing 
to water deposition caused by production of glycos-
aminoglycans by orbital fibroblasts and pre-adipocytes. 
Evidence of autoimmune responses to thyroid antigens 
is often present in patients with Graves ophthalmopathy. 
The most promising candidate autoantigen is the TSH 
receptor that is expressed in orbital connective tissue and 
in particular orbital fat (pre-adipocytes). It seems most 
likely that TSH receptor binding antibodies ­activate 
­orbital fat cells by signaling through this receptor in a 
way that is subtly different from activation of thyroid 
cells, explaining why Graves ophthalmopathy is often, 
but not always, associated with stimulation of the thyroid 
gland. A role for activation of the insulin-like growth fac-
tor (IGF-1) receptor in orbital fat has also been proposed.
Imaging the thyroid
Standard radiography gives only limited information in 
the case of thyroid enlargement and is not used routinely. 
X-ray of the chest may show a superior mediastinal mass 
in patients who have retrosternal extension of a goitre, 
and the presence of tracheal deviation with or without 
narrowing of the lumen may also be noted.
Thyroid ultrasound can demonstrate the type of thy-
roid enlargement (diffuse or localized) and nature (solid 
or cystic, single or multiple) of thyroid nodules. It is, 
however, not possible definitively to exclude malignancy 
using ultrasound alone and biopsy of the nodule may be 
required. There is increasing use of ultrasonography to 
improve the quality of the content of fine needle aspira-
tions of thyroid nodules. Colour-flow Doppler sonogra-
phy is also increasingly being used to distinguish between 
type 1 amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis (increased 
uptake) and type 2 amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis 
(decreased/absent uptake); these conditions are covered 
later in this chapter.
The ability of the thyroid to concentrate radioisotopes 
of iodine and other substances has been utilized for many 
years to identify areas within the gland that are or are not 
functionally active. These imaging systems are of particu-
lar value in the evaluation of thyroid nodules, where the 
presence of nonfunctioning solid tissue is associated with 
a much higher risk of malignancy. Although subject to 
important limitations, the level of overall gland activity 
can also be assessed.
Thyroid scintiscanning
Using intravenous administration of radioisotopes and 
a scintillation camera, qualitative images of functioning 
thyroid tissue can be obtained and the proportion of the total 
dose taken up by the gland can be quantified. Of the avail-
able isotopes, 
99mTc, given intravenously as pertechnetate, 
is concentrated within the gland but not organified into 
thyroid hormones and therefore diffuses out of the gland 
with time. This fact, together with its short half-life, 
means that large doses can be administered without de-
livering a high radiation dose to the thyroid. The gland is 
imaged 20 min after injection.
Disadvantages of use of this isotope are that it cannot 
reliably be used to identify retrosternal glands (as confu-
sion may arise with intravascular radioactivity) and the 
lack of information regarding iodine organification. The 
use of radioisotopes of iodine circumvents this latter prob-
lem, 
123I perhaps being the best isotope to use when imag-
ing thyroid tissue in its normal site as, by comparison with 
other isotopes of iodine, it delivers a much lower total ra-
diation dose to the gland. Iodine-131, with higher energy 
and a longer half-life, is useful where deep thyroid tissue is 
sought or where there is a need to detect, and treat by irra-
diation, functionally active metastatic thyroid carcinoma.
388	
Clinical biochemistry
By quantifying the proportion of the total adminis-
tered dose of isotope concentrated within the thyroid 
gland during a given time period, it is possible to estimate 
the activity of the gland, uptake increasing with increased 
gland activity and vice versa. However, gland uptake of 
isotopes of iodine may be critically influenced by many 
factors other than gland activity (such as dietary iodine 
content, coincidental administration of iodine-containing 
drugs such as amiodarone and previous administration of 
iodine-containing contrast media for radiological inves-
tigations) and the results of such uptake studies should 
be interpreted with caution. Biochemical tests of thyroid 
function have therefore superseded uptake studies in the 
measurement of gland activity. However, uptake studies 
are useful in identifying those patients with hyperthy-
roidism and a negligible uptake (painless thyroiditis, pre-
vious treatment with amiodarone) for whom 
131I therapy 
would be inappropriate.
Perchlorate discharge test
Rarely, hypothyroidism and/or goitre result from de-
fects in enzymes responsible for the organification of 
iodine into thyroid hormone. In such cases, iodine will 
be trapped within the thyrocyte but is not organified. 
Perchlorate, given orally as potassium perchlorate, will 
cause inhibition of the active transport of iodine across 
the thyrocyte membrane and hence lead to a loss of non-
organified iodine from the gland.
HYPERTHYROIDISM
Clinical features
The clinical symptoms and signs which may result from 
the hyperthyroid state are summarized in Table  19.3. 
The clinical picture may be modified by the presence of 
coexisting systemic diseases and may depend on the age 
of the patient. Some of the thyroid diseases themselves 
also produce characteristic physical signs, for example 
the orbital and cutaneous manifestations of Graves 
­disease. The changes seen in the major organ systems 
are described below.
Cardiovascular system
Many of the manifestations of hyperthyroidism relate to 
the increased demands placed upon the cardiovascular 
system. High circulating concentrations of thyroid hor-
mones have a direct stimulatory effect on cardiac muscle. 
Heart rate and stroke volume are both increased at rest 
(including during sleep) and peripheral vascular resistance 
is reduced, leading to a marked rise in cardiac output in 
patients who have no pre-existing cardiac disease. Overt 
cardiac failure may result from this high output state but 
can also be triggered by the occurrence of arrhythmias. 
Atrial flutter/fibrillation is seen in over 10% of patients 
with hyperthyroidism and may be the presenting feature 
in some cases. Patients who suffer from ischaemic chest 
pain typically find that angina worsens as a result of the 
increased metabolic demands placed on the myocardium.
Thyroid crisis
Florid hyperthyroidism may result in a life-threatening 
illness (thyroid ‘crisis’ or ‘storm’). In these – fortunately 
uncommon – cases, cardiovascular symptoms and signs 
predominate. Circulatory collapse is characteristic and 
results from arrhythmia and high output cardiac failure. 
High output cardiac failure usually occurs in younger in-
dividuals with longstanding thyrotoxicosis; despite dou-
bling of the cardiac output, the increase in preload and 
blood volume in thyrotoxicosis causes a rise in ventricu-
lar filling pressure leading to pulmonary and peripheral 
congestion. Pharmacological attempts to correct abnor-
mal cardiac rhythms are usually unsuccessful in the face 
of continuing hyperthyroidism. Management aims to 
control the hyperthyroidism rapidly (using large doses 
of antithyroid drugs, including iodine) while treating the 
patient symptomatically. β-Blocking drugs such as pro-
pranolol are used, and measures to cool the patient are 
often needed. Use of steroids under these circumstances 
may be of additional value.
Gastrointestinal system
Weight loss is a classic feature of hyperthyroidism, often 
occurring despite an increased appetite. Increases in gas-
trointestinal motility lead to increased frequency of bowel 
movement, though true diarrhoea does not usually result. 
Nausea and vomiting are also uncommon, but may pre-
cede the onset of a thyrotoxic crisis. In severe hyperthy-
roid states, liver function can be markedly deranged, with 
hypoalbuminaemia and elevation of plasma aminotrans-
ferase and alkaline phosphatase activities. Paradoxically, 
alkaline phosphatase concentrations (of mixed bone and 
liver origin) can rise further initially after treatment for 
thyrotoxicosis, settling after 2–3 months.
TABLE 19.3  The symptoms and signs of 
hyperthyroidism
 
Common
Uncommon
Symptoms
Increased irritability
Increase in appetite
Increased sweating
Leg swelling
Heat intolerance
Menstrual 
irregularity
Palpitation
True diarrhoea
Lethargy
Loss of appetite
Loss of weight
Weight gain
Breathlessness
 
Increased bowel 
movement
 
Signs
Tachycardia
Palmar erythema
Goitre
Finger clubbing
Warm, moist 
peripheries
Splenomegaly
Tremor
Pretibial 
myxoedema
Arrhythmias
Gynaecomastia
Eye signs
 
Proximal myopathy
 
Thyroid bruit
 
Cardiac failure
 
Onycholysis
 
Muscular weakness
 
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
389
Central and peripheral nervous system
Generalized hyperkinesia is very often seen in hyperthy-
roid individuals, frequently being accompanied by emo-
tional lability. A fine tremor of the outstretched fingers is 
also characteristic. Patients complain of inability to sleep, 
despite often profound feelings of tiredness.
Locomotor system
Muscular weakness particularly affects proximal muscles. 
The aetiology of the weakness may be related to im-
paired phosphorylation of creatine. Muscle biopsy shows 
loss of type IIb muscle fibres, with replacement by fat 
and occasional lymphocytic infiltration. These changes 
reverse when euthyroidism is restored, but muscle power 
can take several weeks or months to return fully to nor-
mal. Periodic paralysis, associated with hypokalaemia 
­during attacks of weakness, is also seen in association 
with ­hyperthyroidism, particularly in people of oriental 
descent. Myasthenia gravis is found in approximately 1% 
of patients with Graves disease and, similarly, myasthenia 
sufferers have an increased incidence of Graves disease.
Respiratory system
As part of the generalized myopathy, respiratory muscle 
function may be impaired and pulmonary compliance 
may also be reduced. Dyspnoea may result from these 
changes and breathlessness secondary to cardiac dysfunc-
tion may also be exacerbated. All these changes are re-
versible with appropriate antithyroid therapy.
Skin and hair
With prolonged elevation of thyroid hormone concen-
trations, diffuse hair loss is common; the nails are brittle 
and may become elevated from the nail bed (onycholy-
sis). Palmar erythema may be found; the skin itself feels 
warm and moist due to increased cutaneous blood flow 
and sweating.
The skeleton
Prolonged hyperthyroidism may result in significant loss 
of mineral from the skeleton, which results from increased 
bone turnover, with resorption of bone exceeding accre-
tion. Hypercalciuria and hyperphosphaturia are also found 
and urinary hydroxyproline excretion is increased, reflect-
ing the increase in collagen turnover. Although hypercal-
caemia is commonly found in hyperthyroid individuals, it is 
usually mild and resolves with effective antithyroid therapy.
The kidneys: mineral and water balance
Hyperthyroid individuals often complain of increased 
thirst and mild polyuria, even in the absence of hyper-
calcaemia or hyperglycaemia, and osmoregulation may 
be disturbed while biochemical hyperthyroidism persists, 
though this is rarely clinically significant. Plasma sodium 
and potassium concentrations do not usually alter, but 
urinary magnesium excretion increases and plasma mag-
nesium concentrations may be low.
Other endocrine systems
In the female hyperthyroid patient, menstrual irregulari-
ties occur sometimes, with scanty menstrual loss and/or 
irregular cycle length. Although cycles usually remain 
ovulatory, fertility is significantly reduced. In general, 
plasma concentrations of free sex steroids are reduced as 
a consequence of increases in binding proteins, but total 
sex steroid concentrations may be high. Preferential me-
tabolism of androgens to oestrogens may be responsible 
for the gynaecomastia seen in a small proportion of hy-
perthyroid males. Hypothalamo–pituitary responsiveness 
to exogenous gonadotrophins and basal concentrations of 
LH and FSH are usually normal.
The turnover of cortisol is increased in hyperthyroid-
ism, but basal concentrations remain normal and the re-
sponse to physiological stress is preserved in the absence 
of coincidental adrenal or pituitary disease.
Hyperthyroidism in the elderly
Although weight loss is variable, there may be anorexia 
leading to a clinical suspicion of malignancy. Patients are 
often tired and withdrawn with reduced mobility due to 
proximal myopathy, and the term ‘apathetic thyrotoxicosis’ 
has been used to describe this presentation. Atrial fibril-
lation, which may be associated with cardiac failure, is a 
common presentation in patients over 70 years, especially 
in those with multinodular goitre, in whom mild hyper-
thyroidism may have been present for some years. Any co-
existing osteoporosis will be accelerated. Elderly patients 
often present with a single feature of hyperthyroidism (e.g. 
weight loss, atrial fibrillation) without the other systemic 
features more commonly seen in younger patients.
Causes of hyperthyroidism
Table  19.4 lists the causes of hyperthyroidism and 
­summarizes their pathogenesis.
Thyroid stimulating hormone measurement demon-
strates suppression of TSH concentrations in all cases of 
hyperthyroidism (except those due to inappropriate pi-
tuitary secretion of TSH, as described later). Free T4 is 
usually elevated in association with raised free T3 con-
centrations, though true T3 toxicosis (elevation of T3 
alone) may be present. Specific diagnostic biochemical 
and immunological tests are outlined below.
When following the response of hyperthyroidism to 
treatment, TSH concentrations should be measured, but 
as it is clear that TSH suppression may persist for a vari-
able period of time after restoration of normal free T4 
and T3 concentrations, the measurement of TSH should 
not be used unsupported to follow response to therapy. 
The authors recommend that, ideally, concentrations of 
free T4 and T3 be measured with TSH until TSH secre-
tion returns to normal.
Graves disease
Graves disease, an autoimmune condition of unknown 
aetiology, is characterized by the presence of diffuse thy-
roid enlargement, orbital tissue involvement (Graves 
390	
Clinical biochemistry
ophthalmopathy) and, less commonly, skin involvement 
(pretibial myxoedema and thyroid acropachy) in addition 
to thyroid dysfunction. The disease predominantly affects 
females, with a female:male ratio of approximately 6:1, 
and peak incidence in the fourth and fifth decades. As with 
other autoimmune diseases, there is clearly an inherited 
predisposition to develop the disease, although other fam-
ily members may have hypo- rather than hyperthyroidism. 
Excess iodine may induce hyperthyroidism in susceptible 
individuals, and observational studies indicate a relation-
ship between major stress, such as loss of a close relative, 
and the onset of hyperthyroidism some months later. It is 
now well established that stress may modify the immune 
response.
Graves disease is also seen as the immune system re-
covers after a period of immunosuppression. This occurs 
in around 3% of patients with HIV disease after ini-
tiation of retroviral therapy and up to 15% of patients 
with multiple sclerosis 9–12 months after treatment with 
Campath
® monoclonal antibody therapy as the T cell 
compartment repopulates.
Thyroid involvement. In Graves disease, thyroid en-
largement (goitre) is typically moderate and diffuse, and 
the gland has a soft consistency. Because of increased 
blood flow through the hyperactive gland, a vascular 
bruit may be heard over the thyroid.
Eyes. Hyperthyroidism produces a characteristic staring 
expression, with the sclera being seen above and below 
the iris (lid retraction) and a tendency for the lid move-
ment to lag behind that of the globe as patients look 
downward from a position of maximum upward gaze (lid 
lag). These signs may be present in any patient with hy-
perthyroidism. Additional and specific orbital signs and 
symptoms may be found in patients with Graves disease 
(Fig. 19.8). Similar changes may rarely occur with other 
autoimmune thyroid diseases such as Hashimoto thyroid-
itis and are listed in Table 19.5. Patients with Graves oph-
thalmopathy should be managed in a multidisciplinary 
eye clinic with the joint input of ophthalmologists and 
endocrinologists.
Skin. Patients with Graves disease may sometimes de-
velop indurated purple skin lesions, classically over the 
anterior tibia. These areas (pretibial myxoedema) contain 
large amounts of glycosaminoglycans and tend to be seen 
in patients with high concentrations of thyroid stimulat-
ing antibody and ophthalmopathy. Acropachy (similar 
to clubbing) is a recognized but rare feature of Graves 
disease.
Diagnosis. The diagnosis of Graves disease is not diffi-
cult when the typical triad of hyperthyroidism, goitre and 
extrathyroidal involvement is present. The diagnosis may 
be made in other circumstances by demonstrating the 
presence of thyroid stimulating antibody and is supported 
by the finding of diffuse, increased uptake of radioisotope 
on thyroid scintiscanning (see Figure 19.9A).
TABLE 19.4  The major causes of 
hyperthyroidism
Cause
Pathogenesis
Graves disease
Hyperthyroidism due to TSH 
receptor stimulating antibody
Toxic multinodular 
goitre
Autonomous function in areas of a 
nodular gland
Toxic nodule
Autonomously functioning nodule
Chronic iodine 
excess
High thyroidal iodine ± areas of 
autonomously functioning gland 
or thyroid stimulating antibody
Thyroiditis
Transient phenomenon resulting 
from release of stored thyroid 
hormone from damaged gland
Pituitary tumour 
secreting TSH
Inappropriate release of TSH 
stimulating the thyroid
Amiodarone
High iodine content; alteration of 
thyroid hormone metabolism
Thyrotoxicosis 
factitia
Exogenous administration of 
thyroid hormone
Ectopic thyroid  
tissue
Functionally active and autonomous 
thyroid tissue present in 
extrathyroidal tumours
Trophoblastic 
tumours
Secretion of thyroid stimulator
FIGURE 19.8  ■ The appearance of a patient with severe Graves 
ophthalmopathy. Significant proptosis, periorbital swelling, che-
mosis and conjunctival infection are all present. The dilated left 
pupil is a consequence of the use of mydriatic eyedrops and not 
the disease process. (© University Hospital of Wales, Heath Park, 
Cardiff Medical Illustration Dept).
TABLE 19.5  The eye signs found in 
thyrotoxicosis
Sign
Examination finding
Proptosis
a
Forward protrusion of the globe
Lid retraction
Sclera visible above/below iris
Lid lag
Lid movement lags behind that 
of globe
Ophthalmoplegia
a
Failure of full ocular movement 
often producing diplopia
Chemosis
a
Oedema of conjunctival sac
Periorbital oedema
a
Oedema and prolapsed orbital 
fat present around eye
Conjunctival infection
a
Inflammatory response
Visible ocular muscle
a
Enlarged extraocular muscle 
visible anteriorly
Loss of vision
a
Compressive optic neuropathy 
or corneal exposure with 
scarring
Ptosis (rarely)
Drooping of upper eyelid
aEye signs specific to Graves disease rather than thyrotoxicosis.
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
391
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 19.9  ■  Isotope scans of patients with various thyroid disorders. The figure shows 
99mTc scan images of (A) Graves disease 
showing characteristic diffuse uptake of isotope; (B) multinodular goitre with patchy uptake of isotope and inadequate activity in rela-
tion to the autonomously functioning nodules; (C) toxic adenoma causing ‘T3 thyrotoxicosis’. The suppressed TSH secretion leads to 
atrophy of the normal thyroid tissue, which recovers following removal of the adenoma by surgery or 
131I ablation; (D) a ‘cold nodule’ 
with reduced uptake in relation to the rest of the gland. Fine needle aspiration revealed papillary carcinoma confirmed histologically 
following thyroidectomy.
Natural history. The natural history of the hyperthy-
roidism of Graves disease is that of successive relapse and 
remission over many years in the majority of patients. In 
about 30% there is a single episode of hyperthyroidism, 
lasting several months, followed by prolonged remission 
and even the eventual development of hypothyroidism 
10–20 years later. Unfortunately, it is not possible at first 
presentation to identify which patients are destined to 
have a single episode. The antithyroid drugs, which do 
not influence the natural history of Graves disease, are 
given for an empirical period of 9–18 months, thereby 
identifying the ‘single episode’ patient and avoiding the 
use of destructive therapy.
Treatment. There are three forms of treatment of the 
hyperthyroidism of Graves disease: antithyroid drugs, 
surgery and 
131I. Each is effective but none is perfect. 
Medical therapy with antithyroid drugs offers the only 
chance of lasting remission without resulting in perma-
nent hypothyroidism. However, medical treatment is 
required for at least 9–18 months in most instances and 
overall success rates are <50%. Surgery or radioactive io-
dine therapy provide rapid control of hyperthyroidism, 
but incur the need for lifelong thyroid hormone replace-
ment. Radioiodine treatment with 
131I may be associated 
with a rise in thyroid stimulating antibody concentrations 
and a worsening of ophthalmopathy and is absolutely 
contraindicated in pregnancy or the puerperium. Surgery 
is generally safe and effective, but carries the risks asso-
ciated with anaesthesia and can be complicated by vocal 
cord damage or transient or permanent hypoparathyroid-
ism. These complications are, however, minimized in the 
hands of an experienced surgeon.
The antithyroid drugs carbimazole (and its active form 
methimazole) and propylthiouracil exert their action prin-
cipally by inhibiting the action of thyroid peroxidase and, 
therefore, thyroid hormone synthesis. Treatment is given 
for 9–18 months. Shorter treatment periods are associated 
with higher relapse rates, but treatment periods extending 
beyond 18 months carry no advantage. The antithyroid 
drugs can be given either in titrated doses or as part of a 
‘block and replace’ regimen using both carbimazole and 
thyroxine. Both approaches are equally effective but the 
block and replace regimen, although generally resulting 
in more stable thyroid function and a reduced frequency 
of follow-up visits for dose titration, may be associated 
with slightly more side-effects than the titration. Lasting 
remission is only achieved in 30–40% of cases: adverse 
prognostic indicators include younger age, male gender, 
high pretreatment concentrations of T3, the presence of 
a large goitre and persistence of TSH receptor antibody 
at the end of the planned treatment period. As the drugs 
do not affect release of thyroid hormone from the gland, 
there is typically a delay of 4–8 weeks before euthyroid-
ism is restored. Although persistently raised TSH recep-
tor antibody concentrations at the end of therapy are 
associated with an increased risk of relapse, they are not 
sufficiently predictive to be of value in guiding clinical 
decision-making and testing is currently recommended 
only for diagnostic and not for prognostic purposes.
Symptomatic relief can be obtained in nearly all pa-
tients by also using β-blocking drugs for these first few 
weeks of therapy in order to reduce their tremor and 
tachycardia. In pregnant thyrotoxic patients, careful 
monitoring is required in order to keep the dose of an-
tithyroid drugs to a minimum, especially during the last 
trimester, as these compounds cross the placenta and may 
render the fetus hypothyroid. ‘Block and replace’ treat-
ment should not be used as T4 crosses the placenta only 
poorly. It is generally recommended to maintain free T4 
and free T3 concentrations in the high–normal range to 
ensure sufficient transfer of thyroid hormones to the fe-
tus to counter the effects of transplacental passage of the 
antithyroid drugs.
Iodine-131 can be used therapeutically to treat hyper-
thyroidism due to Graves and other thyroid disorders. 
Radioiodine works initially by interfering with organi-
fication of iodine, but later predominantly inhibits rep-
lication of thyrocytes, by inducing radiation damage in 
the gland and hence controlling thyroid overactivity, af-
ter a delay of weeks or months. The major side-effect of 
this form of therapy is long-term hypothyroidism, with 
up to 80% of patients becoming hypothyroid within 
the first year, if a standard dose of 400  MBq is used. 
In some individuals, there is a transient rise in thyroid 
hormone concentrations in the first few weeks after ra-
dioiodine before they begin to fall. In patients with 
Graves disease, the appearance or worsening of thyroid 
392	
Clinical biochemistry
eye disease may occur, and in patients with active eye 
disease it is recommended that radioiodine is avoided 
and/or steroid prophylaxis for 6–8 weeks is given (e.g. 
prednisolone 20 mg reducing by 5 mg every two weeks). 
Graves ophthalmopathy is associated with smoking and 
cessation should be advised, particularly prior to radio-
iodine treatment. There is no evidence of an increase 
in the risk of malignancy following therapeutic doses of 
radioiodine. The dose should be repeated if hyperthy-
roidism persists after six months. Note that transient 
hypothyroidism at three months is occasionally seen 
with return of thyrotoxicosis by six months following 
radioiodine requiring repeat therapy.
Thyroidectomy is a highly effective treatment for 
Graves disease. Patients should be rendered euthyroid 
prior to operation using antithyroid drugs. In some cen-
tres, the drug is stopped for two weeks prior to surgery 
and potassium iodide substituted; this reduces the size 
and vascularity of the gland and makes surgery technically 
easier. To avoid the risk of relapse and the requirement 
for repeat surgery, near-total thyroidectomy (rather than 
subtotal thyroidectomy) is now routinely performed for 
thyrotoxicosis, rendering all patients ­hypothyroid post-
operatively, and treatment with thyroid hormone is rou-
tinely administered immediately post surgery.
Treatment of Graves ophthalmopathy. A third of pa-
tients with Graves disease have thyroid eye involvement; 
sight loss is rare but may occur if untreated in 3–5% of 
patients. In addition, most patients have impaired qual-
ity of life and suffer significant psychological distress due 
to the disfiguring appearance of the eyes. In its classic 
form thyroid eye disease is easily recognizable. However, 
some patients suffer with eye disease for months to years 
before a diagnosis, which may be missed in patients with-
out eye symptoms, patients with unilateral eye disease 
or patients who are euthyroid at presentation since or-
bitopathy may precede or post-date the development of 
hyperthyroidism. General management measures include 
smoking cessation and maintenance of normal thyroid 
status. Radioiodine therapy is best avoided in patients 
with moderate to severe eye disease (see above) but may 
be administered with glucocorticoid cover in mild cases. 
Local measures, e.g. lubricants, ointments and corrective 
prisms, will be adequate for mild disease. Glucocorticoids 
are first-line therapy in active moderate to severe 
­disease. Other treatments that have been tried include 
­ciclosporin, methotrexate, intravenous immunoglobu-
lins, orbital radiotherapy, and the B cell depleting agent, 
rituximab. Selenium is an antioxidant with a non-specific 
­anti-inflammatory effect that has been shown to reduce 
symptoms in mild Graves ophthalmopathy.
Toxic multinodular goitre
Hyperthyroidism arising in a previously multinodular 
goitre occurs in an older population than that affected by 
Graves disease; patients are typically over the age of 50, 
with females being affected more than males.
Clinical features. The cardiovascular features of hyper-
thyroidism tend to be prominent in this, often elderly, 
group of patients, though all the features of hyperthy-
roidism mentioned earlier may occur. The goitre itself 
is classically nodular and may be large, often having 
been present for many years prior to the onset of thyroid 
dysfunction.
Diagnosis. The biochemical diagnosis of hyperthyroid-
ism in this situation is fairly straightforward, with suppres-
sion of TSH, though thyroid hormone concentrations 
may not be grossly elevated, in some cases lying at the 
upper limit of normal. Thyroid autoantibodies are not 
usually present. Thyroid scintiscanning shows a patchy 
uptake of isotope, with multiple hot and cold areas being 
seen throughout the gland (Fig. 19.9B). Radioiodine up-
take values may lie at or above the upper limit of normal, 
but are not usually grossly elevated, and thyroid ultra-
sound can be used to confirm the multinodular nature of 
the gland.
Treatment. In general, radioiodine is the treatment of 
choice for the patient with toxic multinodular goitre as 
relapse invariably occurs after withdrawal of antithyroid 
drug therapy. Antithyroid drugs can be used until radio-
iodine becomes effective. Where compressive symptoms 
result from gland enlargement, surgery should be used in 
place of radioiodine.
Toxic adenoma
Isolated, autonomously functioning adenomas within the 
thyroid account for 5% of cases of hyperthyroidism. Half 
of these patients have ‘T3-thyrotoxicosis’ and the result-
ing clinical hyperthyroidism is usually mild.
Diagnosis. Scintiscans of the gland in cases of toxic ad-
enoma show an area of high uptake in the region of the 
nodule, with suppression of uptake in the remaining, nor-
mally responsive, areas of the gland (Fig. 19.9C).
Treatment. Patients with proven toxic adenoma may 
be treated successfully either with radioiodine, which is 
concentrated by the hyper-functioning adenoma, or by 
surgery. Radioiodine is usually the treatment of choice 
and post 
131I hypothyroidism is less common than with 
Graves disease.
Thyroid stimulating hormone-secreting  
pituitary tumour
Very rarely, adenomas of the pituitary gland secreting 
TSH (TSHomas) may produce hyperthyroidism.
Diagnosis. The biochemical key to making this diagnosis 
is the persistence of TSH secretion despite definite over-
production of thyroid hormones. The differential diag-
noses are thyroid hormone resistance (see p. 400), drugs 
(amiodarone/amfetamine), and acute psychotic illness. 
Interference with one or other of the thyroid function as-
says should always be excluded, for example by repeating 
the tests on another assay platform. In TSHomas, high 
circulating concentrations of the α-subunit of TSH may 
be found in the serum, TSH secretion is not increased by 
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
393
the administration of TRH and a goitre is present in the 
absence of immunological evidence of thyroid autoimmu-
nity. Pituitary MRI or CT imaging should be performed, 
but not before the biochemical diagnosis is established, as 
the lesion may be too small to visualize and because in-
cidental non-functioning microadenomas of the pituitary 
are common. If large, the pituitary lesion may produce 
local damage, with reduction or loss of secretion of other 
anterior pituitary hormone and impairment of the visual 
fields. TSH secreting pituitary adenomas may co-secrete 
other anterior pituitary products such as prolactin and 
growth hormone.
Treatment. Treatment consists of surgical removal of the 
tumour or, alternatively, pharmacological reduction of 
TSH secretion. The long-acting somatostatin analogue 
octreotide has been reported to reduce TSH secretion 
and tumour size in individual cases and dopaminergic ag-
onists such as bromocriptine and cabergoline may also be 
effective. Ablative antithyroid therapy will lead to control 
of hyperthyroidism, but will not deal with the primary 
problem and is, therefore, not generally indicated.
Other causes of hyperthyroidism
In some of the areas discussed below, the term ‘hyper-
thyroidism’ is strictly not applicable, as the elevation of 
thyroid hormones derives from extrathyroidal sources. 
However, for continuity, this term will be used to repre-
sent states of clinical and biochemical thyroid hormone 
excess.
Iodine. In individuals with goitre due to previous iodine 
deficiency, chronic administration of excess iodine in the 
diet can induce a hyperthyroid state. This phenomenon 
(sometimes called the Jod–Basedow phenomenon) is par-
ticularly likely to occur in patients who already have a 
degree of pre-existing thyroid autonomy, expression of 
which may have been masked by the lack of iodine. In 
iodine-replete areas, a similar phenomenon may be seen, 
especially in individuals with a multinodular goitre and 
in some cases the hyperthyroidism reverses completely 
when the source of additional iodine is withdrawn from 
the diet. The precise relationship between iodine dose and 
thyroid response is clearly complex, since it is dependent 
not only on the individual’s prior exposure to iodine and 
the degree of gland autonomy, but also on the time course 
of iodine administration; use of large doses of iodine as 
a therapeutic means of rapidly treating hyperthyroidism 
has quite the opposite of the effect seen with chronic ad-
ministration of more moderate doses. In iodine-induced 
hyperthyroidism, radioiodine uptake is characteristically 
reduced and urinary iodine excretion increased, with co-
incident TSH suppression and evidence of elevated T4 
and elevated or high normal T3 concentrations.
Amiodarone. This anti-arrhythmic drug contains iodine 
and, at therapeutic dosage, generates 6–12 mg of free io-
dine per day compared with the recommended iodine in-
take of 0.2 mg/day. The drug can produce abnormalities 
in thyroid function tests in up to 50% of patients, but may 
also induce true thyroid dysfunction. Amiodarone has a 
structure similar to that of thyroid hormones and inhibits 
the peripheral conversion of T4 to T3 catalysed by iodo-
thyronine deiodinase D1. Resulting concentrations of T4 
may, therefore, be high and T3 low, with an increase in 
rT3. Thyroid stimulating hormone may rise transiently 
during the first few weeks of treatment, but by four 
months, most patients who are euthyroid will have normal 
or sometimes suppressed concentrations of TSH. The 
drug inhibits both iodine uptake by the thyroid and entry 
of T4 into cells and can also cause both iodine-induced 
hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism. The frequency of 
these two conditions depends on the ambient iodine in-
take. In areas of high iodine intake (e.g. Worcester, USA), 
amiodarone produces hypothyroidism in up to 20% of 
patients receiving the drug, while hyperthyroidism only 
occurs in about 2% of patients. Conversely, in areas of 
Italy, where iodine intake is low, hypothyroidism occurs 
in 5% of patients and hyperthyroidism in 10%. In ­patients 
with an underlying thyroid abnormality (e.g. multinodu-
lar goitre or subclinical Graves disease), the high iodine 
content can induce thyrotoxicosis (amiodarone-induced 
thyrotoxicosis type I) that is treatable with antithyroid 
drugs), but the drug may also induce a destructive thy-
roiditis (amiodarone-induced thyrotoxicosis type II) that 
is not readily responsive to antithyroid drugs, but is of-
ten responsive to steroids. A mixed picture is also seen, 
and occasionally urgent thyroidectomy is required for 
thyrotoxicosis refractory to both forms of therapy. It is 
therefore important to evaluate patients before they com-
mence therapy with amiodarone. This should include 
clinical examination and a basal measurement of TSH, free 
T4, free T3 and TPOAb. After starting treatment, thyroid 
function tests should be repeated at six months and there-
after every six months, including the year after the drug is 
stopped. The long half-life of the drug means that changes 
in thyroid test results may persist for some time after ceasing 
therapy.
Thyrotoxicosis factitia. Cases of hyperthyroidism oc-
cur due to self-administration of thyroid hormone, taken 
either as T3 or T4. Radioiodine uptake is low, goitre is 
absent and thyroglobulin concentrations are low. Unless 
there is a prior history of thyroid autoimmunity, thyroid-
directed antibodies will be absent. Thyroid stimulating 
hormone will be undetectable; total and free T4 con-
centrations will be high if the patient is taking T4 and 
suppressed if the patient is taking T3, and total and free 
T3 concentrations will be high in both cases. Careful su-
pervision of patients with serial measurement of thyroid 
function in hospital may be necessary, and specific psy-
chological assessment and counselling may be required 
after the diagnosis has been made.
Ectopic thyroid tissue. Metastatic thyroid follicular car-
cinoma may rarely produce sufficient thyroid hormone 
to result in hyperthyroidism. Other tumours, such as 
ovarian teratomata, may contain functional thyroid tissue 
in sufficient quantity to produce symptoms and signs of 
thyrotoxicosis (struma ovarii): endogenous thyroid radio-
isotope uptake will be suppressed and functioning tissue 
demonstrable in the tumour under these most uncom-
mon circumstances.
394	
Clinical biochemistry
Other thyroid stimulators. Trophoblastic tumours 
such as choriocarcinoma, hydatidiform mole and meta-
static embryonal testicular carcinoma may secrete hu-
man chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) and produce 
hyperthyroidism.
Subclinical hyperthyroidism. This term is used to 
describe patients with the biochemical picture of sup-
pressed serum TSH but normal concentrations of T3 
and T4. Subclinical hyperthyroidism is present in about 
0.5–3.0% of the population and rises in prevalence with 
age. Most patients are asymptomatic and revert to nor-
mal thyroid status over time. However, a small propor-
tion of patients (1–5% per annum) will progress to overt 
hyperthyroidism (suppressed TSH and elevated T3 and 
T4). Patients with a fully suppressed TSH concentration 
(<0.01 mU/L) are more likely to progress to overt hy-
perthyroidism than those with partial TSH suppression 
(TSH 0.1–0.4 mU/L). Patients with subclinical hyperthy-
roidism are at increased risk of atrial fibrillation and os-
teoporosis and, once persistent abnormal thyroid function 
over a period of six months is confirmed, treatment may 
be indicated to prevent these complications. Other indi-
cations for treatment are listed in Box 19.3. Radioiodine 
is generally used as the underlying aetiology is almost al-
ways nodular thyroid disease, although this form of treat-
ment is contraindicated in pregnancy.
Hyperthyroidism or non-thyroidal illness?
It may be difficult to determine whether the finding of 
suppressed serum TSH and raised free T4 are due to non-
thyroidal illness (NTI) or hyperthyroidism, especially if 
the serum T3 concentration is in the upper part of its 
reference range. A raised total T4 is uncommon in NTI. 
Furthermore, features such as ophthalmopathy, goitre or 
unexplained atrial fibrillation will favour hyperthyroid-
ism. In the absence of these clinical signs, measurement 
of the TSH receptor antibody and isotope imaging may 
be helpful in detecting Graves disease and nodular goitre. 
If there still remains doubt, repeat thyroid function test-
ing after 3–6 months is indicated.
HYPOTHYROIDISM
Clinical features
The clinical features seen as a consequence of low cir-
culating concentrations of thyroid hormone are summa-
rized in Table 19.6.
Cardiovascular system
A reduction in resting cardiac output occurs. Cool pe-
ripheries are characteristic, owing to a reduction in cuta-
neous blood flow, which contributes to the intolerance to 
cold that is so often present. In the thorax, cardiac dilata-
tion may be seen on chest X-ray and occurs in associa-
tion with pericardial effusion, which occasionally leads to 
compromised myocardial function. Ischaemic chest pain 
is uncommon, more frequently being seen in hypothy-
roid patients with coincidental ischaemic heart disease 
when they first receive thyroid hormone replacement 
therapy. The cardiac changes reverse with appropriate 
thyroid replacement therapy.
Gastrointestinal system
Most individuals show a moderate weight gain despite re-
duced appetite, due primarily to fluid retention. Intestinal 
absorption of nutrients may be affected both by reduced 
absorption rates and increased intestinal transit time, but 
net absorption may actually be reduced, normal or even 
increased. Results of biochemical liver function tests are 
usually normal.
Central and peripheral nervous system
Deficiency of thyroid hormones in fetal or early neonatal 
life, if not promptly treated, results in irreversible dam-
age to the CNS, with structural abnormalities evident on 
histological examination. The classic picture of congeni-
tal hypothyroidism is fortunately only rarely seen now, 
TABLE 19.6  The symptoms and signs of 
hypothyroidism
 
Common
Uncommon
Symptoms
Lethargy
Anorexia
 
Skin dry and coarse
Irritability
 
 
 
 
Slow speech and 
mentation
Facial puffiness 
(oedema)
Cold intolerance
Pallor
Menorrhagia
Angina
Deafness
Poor coordination
 
Hoarse voice
 
 
Constipation
 
 
Weight gain
 
 
Hair dry and falling 
out
 
 
Weakness/stiffness
 
 
Breathlessness
 
Signs
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Periorbital/facial 
oedema
Pale, dry skin
Goitre
Obtunded mental state
Cool peripheries
Diffuse alopecia
Bradycardia
Median nerve 
compression
Delayed relaxation 
phase of reflexes
Psychosis
Pleural/
pericardial 
effusions
Ascites
Cerebellar ataxia
Galactorrhoea
Hydrocoele 
(males)
 
 
 
BOX 19.3	
Indications for treatment in patients 
with subclinical hyperthyroidism
•	 Cardiac arrhythmias
•	 Congestive cardiac failure
•	 Osteoporosis
•	 Presence of hyperthyroid symptoms
•	 Goitre
•	 Pregnancy
•	 Infertility
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
395
due largely to the introduction of neonatal screening for 
hypothyroidism and the efficacy of therapy, if introduced 
sufficiently early in life.
In adult life, neurological defects resulting from 
hypothyroidism are usually reversible. The character-
istic features are of generalized slowing in intellectual 
function, with inanition, slow mentation, somnolence, 
and occasionally, a frankly psychotic state. Speech be-
comes slow and the voice coarse and gruff in nature, 
the latter in part due to oedema within the vocal ap-
paratus. Cerebellar ataxia may be seen with prolonged 
hypothyroidism and may become irreversible with delay 
in treatment. Seizures may also occur in severe cases. 
Peripheral nervous system manifestations are also com-
mon, with compression of the median nerve at the wrist 
being perhaps the best known (carpal tunnel syndrome). 
Relaxation of the tendon jerks is characteristically 
delayed.
Locomotor system
Muscular stiffness is a particularly common complaint in 
hypothyroidism and relates to reduced relaxation rate. 
The muscles show abnormal structure on microscopy, 
with loss of striations, oedema, swelling of fibres and 
relative deficiency of type II fibres. Muscular weakness 
is often evident clinically and plasma activities of muscle 
enzymes such as creatine kinase may be raised.
Respiratory system
Similar changes to those described above may occur in 
the respiratory muscles, with abnormal muscle function 
leading, in patients with pre-existing lung disease, to 
exacerbation of any carbon dioxide retention and sleep 
apnoea. Chest X-ray may show pleural effusions, though 
these are seldom large.
Skin and hair
Increased water binding occurs as a result of deposition 
of mucopolysaccharides in the skin, in common with the 
other tissues. The indurated oedema that results gives 
rise to the ‘myxoedematous’ appearance of the typical 
hypothyroid patient. Associated anaemia and hyperca-
rotenaemia through impaired conversion of β-carotene 
into retinol may render the skin pale or yellow, respec-
tively. Body hair tends to be easily lost, though the classic 
description of loss of the outer-third of the eyebrows is 
rarely seen today.
The skeleton
Thyroid hormone deficiency in early life leads to ab-
normalities of the epiphyses with marked reduction in 
linear growth and stunted final height. Short stature 
may be an apparently isolated presentation of hypothy-
roidism in childhood. In common with all systemic ill-
nesses, prolonged hypothyroidism in childhood leads 
to retardation of bone age compared with chronologi-
cal age. Rates of bone turnover are reduced, leading to 
a reduction in the pool of exchangeable calcium. Plasma 
concentrations of calcium and phosphate remain normal. 
Alkaline phosphatase activity tends to be low in children 
with hypothyroidism.
The kidneys: mineral and water balance
Renal blood flow and glomerular filtration are both de-
creased, but total body water has been shown to increase 
with hypothyroidism, owing to impaired renal excretion 
of water that itself results from a reduction in delivery to 
the distal tubule and abnormal osmoregulatory function 
in the hypothalamus and posterior pituitary. Although ex-
changeable body sodium is increased, the dilutional effect 
typically leads to a mild hyponatraemia. Plasma creati-
nine and urea concentrations remain normal.
Reproductive system
In adults of both sexes, hypothyroidism leads to a reduc-
tion in libido and subfertility. Menorrhagia due to failed 
progesterone secretion with anovulatory cycles is com-
mon in the female, as is oligospermia in the male. These 
changes may be related to impaired luteinizing hormone 
secretion, particularly in longstanding cases. Basal gonad-
otrophin concentrations are, however, typically within 
the normal range, unless pituitary disease is responsible 
for the hypothyroid state. A reduction in sex hormone 
binding globulin concentration leads to an elevation in 
free sex hormone concentrations, with a reduction in 
total concentrations of both oestrogen and testosterone 
following from both this and alterations in sex steroid 
synthesis.
Other systems
Cortisol turnover is often reduced and, in some patients, 
the cortisol response to hypoglycaemia is blunted, although 
response to exogenously administered ACTH is normal. 
Hyperprolactinaemia is a common finding, resulting from 
increased TRH release. The hyperprolactinaemia corre-
lates with the degree of elevation of TSH, although frank 
galactorrhoea is only relatively infrequently found.
A normochromic anaemia, which may be either 
normo- or macrocytic in nature, is often seen and is likely 
to reflect diminished production of erythropoietin, with 
low red cell mass. Macrocytosis is frequently ascribed to 
coincidental occurrence of vitamin B12 deficiency due to 
autoimmune pernicious anaemia, but a deficiency in the 
response to available B12 and concurrent malabsorption 
of folate from the gut may contribute. If menorrhagia 
has been prolonged or severe, microcytosis, rather than 
macrocytosis, may be present as part of an iron deficiency 
state. Plasma concentrations of clotting factors VIII and 
IX may be reduced in hypothyroidism and platelet adhe-
siveness reduced, causing a mild bleeding tendency that 
may exacerbate the existing risk of anaemia. The effects 
of thyroid hormones on lipids have been outlined ear-
lier in this chapter. Glucose absorption from the gut and 
uptake by the tissues from plasma are both delayed, but 
in patients with established diabetes, a characteristic in-
crease in sensitivity to exogenous insulin is seen, probably 
due to decreased clearance of insulin.
396	
Clinical biochemistry
Causes of hypothyroidism
Causes of hypothyroidism are listed in Table 19.7.
Measurement of plasma TSH concentrations pro-
vides the cornerstone of the biochemical evaluation of 
hypothyroidism. As circulating concentrations of thyroid 
hormone fall, TSH secretion increases and is used to 
monitor thyroid status. Secretion of T3 is preferentially 
maintained in the presence of the high TSH concentra-
tions that accompany declining thyroid function. T3/
T4 ratios, therefore, rise and plasma T4 concentrations 
correlate better with thyroid activity than do plasma T3 
concentrations. Replacement therapy for primary hypo-
thyroidism can be monitored using plasma TSH concen-
trations. The particular problems resulting from pituitary 
failure are described below. Hashimoto disease and other 
forms of thyroiditis are described in the following sec-
tion on thyroiditis. It should be noted that not all raised 
concentrations of TSH equate to hypothyroidism: of 
possible sources of error clinically, the most important 
is hypoadrenalism, which results in a mild to moderately 
raised TSH (with completely normal free T4) but treat-
ment with thyroxine (rather than steroids) will increase 
metabolism of any remaining cortisol and precipitate a 
potentially fatal hypoadrenal crisis.
Primary myxoedema
In a large proportion of patients with primary hypothy-
roidism, no goitre, or history of goitre, will be present. 
These individuals will have high plasma TSH concentra-
tions with low total and free T4 concentrations, and the 
majority will have anti-peroxidase and/or anti-thyroglobulin 
antibodies. Thyroid growth blocking antibodies have also 
been described in these patients. While the majority of 
patients may represent end-stage Hashimoto thyroiditis 
with lack of clinical recognition of the early phases of the 
disease, clearly other immunological processes may be re-
sponsible for some of them.
Post-surgery or post-radioiodine
Although the hypothyroidism developing after surgery or 
131iodine therapy for Graves disease is usually permanent, 
it may be temporary, especially in the first 3–4 months. 
If symptomatic at this early stage, patients should be 
treated with a relatively small dose of thyroxine (50–75 μg 
daily) and the need for continued treatment assessed at 
six months. If serum TSH remains elevated, thyroxine 
therapy will be required lifelong and the dose needs to 
be increased. If at that stage serum TSH is normal or un-
detectable, stopping the thyroxine for four weeks and re-
testing thyroid function would be the appropriate action.
Congenital hypothyroidism
Causes of congenital hypothyroidism are listed in 
Box  19.4. Clinical detection of hypothyroidism in the 
neonate may be difficult. In many developed countries, 
screening programmes measuring TSH or T4 on dried 
bloodspots from heel-prick blood samples (taken at six 
days when phenylketonuria screening is performed) have 
been operating for some years with considerable success. 
Abnormal thyroid development is responsible for most 
congenital hypothyroidism. Scintiscanning may be used 
in order to help to clarify the diagnosis.
Inability to organify trapped thyroidal iodide can be 
recognized by an abnormal perchlorate discharge test and 
is usually associated with goitre. Patients with mild forms 
of this type of defect may also have deafness (Pendred 
syndrome), but are in this case not often hypothyroid. 
Ineffective transport of iodide into the thyroid gland 
can produce both goitre and hypothyroidism and will be 
found in individuals with abnormally low radioiodine up-
take. The block to transport can, in some cases, be over-
come by treating patients with high doses of oral iodide, 
reducing goitre and restoring normal thyroid function.
Deficiency of iodotyrosine dehalogenase produces 
impaired deiodination of iodotyrosine, such that large 
TABLE 19.7  Causes of hypothyroidism
 
Disease
Pathogenesis
Primary (due to disease of 
the thyroid gland)
Thyroiditis:
Hashimoto; postpartum; de Quervain 
(rarely); Riedel (rarely)
Autoimmune destruction of the gland
Prolonged inflammatory damage
Gland becomes fibrosed
 
Primary myxoedema
Gland atrophy; post-autoimmune in many cases
 
Ablative
Post-radioiodine or surgery; gland bulk reduced
 
Athyreosis
Abnormal or absent thyroid tissue
 
Dyshormonogenesis
Abnormal synthesis of thyroid hormones
 
Drugs
Inhibition of thyroid hormone synthesis or 
induction of thyroid autoimmunity
 
Iodine deficiency
Lowered gland iodine; impaired hormone 
synthesis
 
Acute iodine excess
Transient inhibition of hormone synthesis 
may become permanent in the presence of 
coexisting thyroid destructive autoimmune 
activity
Secondary (due to 
extrathyroidal disease)
Anterior pituitary failure:
tumours; granulomatous deposits; 
Sheehan syndrome; post pituitary 
destructive therapy; developmental 
abnormalities; post-head injury
Loss of TSH stimulation of thyroid
 
Hypothalamic dysfunction
Loss of TRH stimulation of anterior pituitary
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
397
amounts of mono-and di-iodotyrosines appear in the 
blood, and iodine deficiency can result from the uri-
nary loss of large quantities of deaminated metabolites 
of these molecules. Again, large doses of iodine may re-
duce the severity of the hypothyroidism and the accom-
panying goitre. Biochemically, parenteral administration 
of mono- and di-iodotyrosines will be followed by their 
rapid urinary excretion and this can be used as a diagnos-
tic test for the condition.
Diversion of thyroidal iodine into metabolically inac-
tive or less active iodoproteins, rather than thyroid hor-
mones, can lead to hypothyroidism. Radioactive iodine 
uptake will be high, due to high TSH drive to synthetic 
activity within the gland, and the abnormal quantities of 
iodinated products of the gland can be measured in se-
rum. Thyroid hormone replacement therapy is required.
Maternal TSH receptor-blocking antibodies can cross 
the placenta to produce transient hypothyroidism in the 
fetus, which resolves within a few weeks after birth. In 
these patients, bloodspot TSH values are usually only 
modestly raised. Testing for TSH receptor antibodies 
would distinguish these infants from those requiring T4 
replacement therapy.
Lithium treatment
Lithium therapy may lead to reduced thyroid hormone syn-
thesis in a similar manner to the acute effects of iodine, but 
more commonly aggravates any underlying autoimmune 
disease. Female patients are more often affected and thyroid 
autoantibodies are often present. Lithium can, therefore, 
cause hypothyroidism (in approximately 14% of women 
and 5% of men taking lithium) but also, less commonly, 
induces hyperthyroidism. Patients taking lithium should 
have their thyroid function tests measured every six months. 
Patients on lithium who have positive TPO antibodies are 
at increased risk of developing thyroid dysfunction. Lithium 
itself has been used as a treatment for hyperthyroidism and 
as an adjunct to radioiodine treatment (as it enhances radio-
iodine uptake) but because of the potential for toxicity, this 
approach has not entered routine practice.
Cytokine therapy
Treatment with a variety of cytokines (see Table 19.1) 
can result in hypothyroidism that is more common in pa-
tients with underlying autoimmune thyroid disease. This 
is most commonly observed in patients being treated 
with interferon therapy for viral hepatitis. It is usually 
self-limiting once cytokine therapy ceases, but may need 
temporary treatment with thyroxine.
Iodine
Both excess and deficiency of dietary iodine may result in 
hypothyroidism.
Although oral use of large doses of iodine would nor-
mally lead to transient suppression of thyroid hormone 
synthesis, iodine can rarely produce more lasting hypothy-
roidism, particularly in individuals with Hashimoto disease.
Environmental iodine deficiency remains a major 
cause, worldwide, of goitre and hypothyroidism. Clinical 
euthyroidism is often maintained by preferential pro-
duction of T3 and compensatory thyroid hyperfunction, 
leading to large goitre formation.
Secondary hypothyroidism
Loss of TSH drive to thyroid function may result from any 
of the causes of pituitary gland hypofunction. Recognition 
of the aetiology of this type of hypothyroidism is critical 
and is usually made by observing a low T4 accompanied 
by an inappropriately ‘normal’ TSH concentration. In 
some cases of secondary hypothyroidism, TSH may be 
slightly increased. Increased T3:T4 ratios are not seen in 
this type of hypothyroidism as TSH drive is absent.
Treatment of hypothyroidism
Myxoedema coma
Profound hypothyroidism may produce the state known 
as myxoedema coma. This is a relatively uncommon en-
docrine emergency that may be triggered by factors such 
as infection, cold exposure, the use of sedative medica-
tions or non-compliance with treatment. The classic 
presentation is that of decompensated hypothyroidism 
with altered sensorium, marked bradycardia, hypother-
mia and circulatory collapse. Patients should be admitted 
to an intensive care unit where possible. Therapy is sup-
portive with thyroid hormone replacement using naso-
gastric T4 or parenteral T3 therapy. Replacement doses 
of glucocorticoids should be given until coincidental ad-
renal insufficiency has been excluded, infections should 
be treated aggressively and further heat loss prevented to 
allow progressive rewarming to occur. Despite appropriate 
therapy, the mortality from this condition remains high, 
often with arrhythmias in the first 24 h after commencing 
therapy, and early recognition and careful management 
in a critical care setting offers the best chance of recovery.
Thyroid hormone replacement therapy
Treatment of primary or secondary hypothyroidism is with 
oral synthetic levothyroxine. The usual replacement dose 
is 1.6 μg/kg per day, which equates to about 100–125 μg 
daily. Patients are customarily advised to take levothyrox-
ine 30–60 min before breakfast since food and caffeine 
interfere with its absorption. Bed time administration is 
BOX 19.4	
Causes of congenital 
hypothyroidism
•	 Structural abnormalities
•	 Absent gland
•	 Ectopic site
•	 Enzyme defects (dyshormonogenesis)
•	 Iodide transport
•	 Iodide organification
•	 Iodotyrosine dehalogenase
•	 Defective iodoprotein secretion
•	 Mutation in MCT8 gene (T3 transporter)
•	 Maternal antibodies (transient)
398	
Clinical biochemistry
equally effective and may be suited to patients who take 
a number of other medications. Treatment can usually be 
initiated at full replacement doses except in elderly indi-
viduals and patients with cardiac disease who will require 
more cautious starting doses. Serum T4 and TSH should 
be checked 6–8 weeks after initiation, making any minor 
adjustment to the dose necessary to restore TSH to nor-
mal. In the elderly and in patients with established isch-
aemic heart disease, levothyroxine replacement should 
begin with 25 μg daily, increasing by 25 μg increments 
every 4–6 weeks. In patients with hypopituitarism, with 
both secondary adrenal and thyroid failure, it is impor-
tant that levothyroxine is not started before hydrocorti-
sone replacement, as this might precipitate adrenal crisis 
by increasing the metabolic rate in a patient unable to 
secrete cortisol.
The objective of treatment is to achieve clinical well-
being and restore biochemical euthyroidism, i.e. a serum 
TSH within the laboratory reference range. Patients 
who remain symptomatic despite full replacement doses 
may benefit from additional dose increases to keep TSH 
concentration in the lower half of the reference range. 
Lowering TSH to below the reference range is not ad-
visable as there is evidence that such individuals with ex-
ogenous hyperthyroidism have an increased risk of atrial 
fibrillation and osteoporosis. The response to treatment in 
patients with secondary hypothyroidism should be based 
on FT4 measurements since TSH secretion is deficient in 
pituitary disease. The therapeutic goal in such cases would 
be a FT4 in the upper-third of the reference range.
Although thyroid hormone replacement with synthetic 
levothyroxine is effective in most cases, a significant pro-
portion of patients report that they remain symptomatic. 
The management of such patients can be challenging and 
factors that may predispose to inadequate thyroid hormone 
replacement include poor patient compliance, inadequate 
dosage and administration, concurrent use of medica-
tions which interfere with levothyroxine availability and 
the presence of comorbidities which impair levothyroxine 
absorption. The combination of a raised serum T4 and 
TSH is suggestive of poor compliance, the patient having 
been over zealous in the few days prior to thyroid function 
testing in an attempt to compensate for missing doses ear-
lier. Some individuals may remain symptomatic even after 
normalization of thyroid function. Although some of such 
patients may benefit from further dose titrations to attain 
a low normal TSH, it is important to consider alternative 
causes of persistent symptoms such as diabetes mellitus, 
obesity, Addison disease, anaemia, depression, coeliac dis-
ease, obstructive sleep apnoea and post-viral syndromes. 
In practice, such investigations are frequently negative 
and whether some individuals with persistent symptoms 
will benefit from combined treatment with T4 and T3 re-
mains contentious. The use of T3 in replacement is much 
harder to titrate and monitor, is not recommended by pro-
fessional bodies and should not be conducted away from 
specialist centres with programmes of long-term follow-
up for these individuals. Recent delineations of common 
genetic variations in the deiodinase and thyroid hormone 
transport proteins suggest that such polymorphisms may 
account for some of the variability in the response to thy-
roid hormone treatment.
Subclinical hypothyroidism
This is the term used to describe patients who are clinically 
euthyroid with normal serum T4 concentration but raised 
TSH, usually <10 mU/L. There may be mild non-specific 
symptoms, such as tiredness, weight gain and depression. 
Now viewed as the mildest form of thyroid failure, it is 
common practice to treat with thyroxine if antibodies are 
positive and/or serum TSH is >10 mU/L in order to ‘nip 
things in the bud’ before the progression to overt thyroid 
failure (5% per year), and the possibility of loss to follow-up 
and later presentation with severe hypothyroidism. Other 
potential indications for treatment in patients with subclini-
cal hypothyroidism are shown in Box 19.5. Recovery from 
non-thyroidal illness should be excluded before a diagnosis 
of subclinical hypothyroidism is made, emphasizing that in 
all cases thyroid function tests should be repeated and con-
firmed as remaining abnormal before initiating therapy.
THYROIDITIS
Inflammation of the thyroid gland (thyroiditis) can result 
in both overactivity and underactivity of the gland.
Thyroiditis producing hyperthyroidism
Autoimmune thyroiditis (typified by Hashimoto disease) 
is a common cause of hypothyroidism and, as such, will 
be reviewed in detail below. However, in the early phase 
of autoimmune damage to the gland, release of stored 
thyroid hormone may lead to transient hyperthyroidism 
in some patients. This usually lasts about 6–8 weeks, fol-
lowed by mild and equally transient hypothyroidism and 
then recovery, although, in the long term, permanent hy-
pothyroidism is common. Known as silent thyroiditis, the 
biochemical pattern is similar to that observed in postpar-
tum thyroiditis and in de Quervain thyroiditis.
Diagnosis and treatment
Depending on the phase of the illness, thyroid function 
may show hyperthyroidism, euthyroidism or hypothy-
roidism. Radioactive iodine scans in the hyperthyroid 
phase of the illness will typically show reduced isotope 
BOX 19.5	
Indications for treatment in patients 
with subclinical hypothyroidism
•	 Increased TPO antibody concentration
•	 TSH >10.0 mU/L
•	 Goitre
•	 Pregnancy
•	 Infertility
•	 Hypothyroid symptoms
a
•	 Diabetes mellitus
b
•	 Cardiac disease
b
•	 Dyslipidaemia
b
a Some practitioners advocate treatment of subclinical hypothyroidism 
if there are classic hypothyroidism symptoms, but this is controversial 
and the evidence base is lacking.
b Consider treatment because of increased cardiovascular disease risk.
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
399
uptake since the hyperthyroidism is not due to excessive 
synthesis of thyroid hormones but to the release of pre-
formed hormones. For the same reason, treatment with 
antithyroid drugs is ineffective, although a β-blocker may 
help to alleviate symptoms of hyperthyroidism.
Hypothyroidism resulting from Hashimoto 
thyroiditis
In Hashimoto disease, the commonest form of autoim-
mune hypothyroidism, destructive thyroiditis results 
from both a cell-mediated and humoral attack on the thy-
roid tissue. Females are affected with greater frequency 
than males. The gland is typically enlarged but small and 
firm in early cases, with a palpable pyramidal lobe. At this 
stage, hyperthyroidism may transiently occur, but further 
gland damage rapidly leads to permanent hypothyroid-
ism, at which stage goitre regresses and the gland rem-
nant is composed of fibrous tissue.
Diagnosis
Thyroid-directed autoantibodies (described earlier) are 
almost invariably present in the early phase of the disease, 
though they may ultimately become undetectable over a 
period of years. In about half of patients with Hashimoto 
thyroiditis, serum TSH is elevated and T4 normal (sub-
clinical hypothyroidism), the other patients having overt 
thyroid failure.
Immunological and biochemical evidence of other 
organ-specific autoimmune diseases such as diabetes, per-
nicious anaemia, Addison disease and hypoparathyroidism 
may also be found.
Other forms of thyroiditis
De Quervain thyroiditis is an unusual condition, which 
often follows a viral illness. Patients typically present 
with pain in the thyroid and neck region with fever and 
malaise. Thyroid function tests may transiently become 
hyperthyroid, then hypothyroid, before returning to 
normal. Rarely, permanent hypothyroidism may follow 
repeated episodes. Riedel thyroiditis is a condition of un-
known aetiology. Extensive replacement of the thyroid 
with fibrous tissue causes the gland to become stony hard. 
Hypothyroidism is a rare complication.
Hypothyroidism and the postpartum period
Postpartum thyroiditis, due to autoimmune thyroid dis-
ease, may develop during the early postpartum period, 
and is typically histologically and biochemically identical 
with Hashimoto disease. The classic presentation is of a 
transient hyperthyroid phase which is followed by a hy-
pothyroid phase. Published series suggest that the overall 
incidence of the condition is between 5% and 9% and that 
40% of patients have failed to recover euthyroid function 
by one year post-delivery. Of those who do recover nor-
mal thyroid function, a further 20–30% will have become 
hypothyroid within 3–4 years. After the initial episode, the 
future risk of developing the syndrome increases in succes-
sive pregnancies.
Although the presence of antithyroid antibodies during 
pregnancy is a risk factor for postpartum thyroid disease, 
at most only half of these women will go on to develop 
frank thyroid dysfunction. Swings in thyroid function 
may contribute to the aetiology of postnatal depression 
and thyroid function should be tested in all such patients.
NEOPLASIA
Thyroid neoplasia forms a small but clearly important pro-
portion of all thyroid disease. Thyroid cancer is the most 
common endocrine malignancy and accounts for more 
mortality than all the other endocrine cancers combined. 
The types of primary and secondary thyroid neoplasm are 
summarized in Box 19.6. The differentiated thyroid cancers 
(DTC), papillary and follicular thyroid cancer, are the most 
common histological types. Papillary thyroid cancer is most 
frequent in iodine sufficient parts of the world and is associ-
ated with a favourable prognosis. Papillary microcarcinomas 
(diameter <1 cm), are now increasingly detected owing to 
the growing use of imaging techniques such as ultrasound, 
computerized tomography or positron emission tomogra-
phy scans. Anaplastic thyroid cancer is relatively uncommon 
and typically follows an aggressive course with rapid thyroid 
enlargement and poor prognosis. Primary thyroid lympho-
mas almost always arise on a background of Hashimoto thy-
roiditis and also present with rapid gland enlargement.
Diagnosis
The usual presentation is with a solitary nodule in the thy-
roid. Although thyroid nodules are common in the general 
population, only about 5% of such nodules are malignant. 
Malignancy is suspected in patients with thyroid nodules if 
there is a history of rapid enlargement, a family history of 
thyroid cancer or a past medical history of head and neck 
irradiation as therapy for another disease (Box 19.7). Clinical 
suspicion of the diagnosis is further raised by the finding of 
a nonfunctioning solitary nodule on thyroid scintiscanning 
(Fig. 19.9D) that is shown on ultrasound examination to be 
solid (although cystic lesions may also be malignant). The 
diagnosis of thyroid carcinoma ultimately depends on histo-
logical examination of the gland following an excision biopsy 
or a fine needle aspirate of the nodule. Biochemical assess-
ment (other than establishing the usually euthyroid status of 
the patient and excluding evidence of autoimmune processes) 
plays little part in making the diagnosis. Measurement of 
BOX 19.6	
Typical thyroid malignancies
Primary neoplasms
•	 Papillary carcinoma
•	 Follicular carcinoma
•	 Anaplastic carcinoma
•	 Medullary carcinoma (calcitonin secreting; may form 
part of the syndromes of multiple endocrine neoplasia)
•	 Lymphoma
Other neoplasms
•	 Secondary deposits from extrathyroidal tumours
400	
Clinical biochemistry
plasma thyroglobulin is of no diagnostic value, but is essential 
for long-term monitoring for recurrence.
Treatment
The management of thyroid cancer should be under-
taken in a multidisciplinary care setting comprising 
health professionals with expertise in the field includ-
ing oncologists, surgeons, endocrinologists, pathologists 
and radiologists. For papillary and follicular carcinoma, 
treatment is by total thyroidectomy and, unless the car-
cinoma is small (<1 cm in diameter), in which case the 
prognosis is excellent, adjunctive treatment is given with 
ablative doses of 
131I. In order to maximize the effect of 
the radioiodine, the patient should stop any thyroxine 
for four weeks beforehand to achieve a serum TSH of 
>25 mU/L. Alternatively, symptomatic hypothyroidism 
can be avoided by increasing the serum TSH with the 
use of recombinant human TSH (rhTSH), thus ­allowing 
levothyroxine therapy to continue uninterrupted. Whole 
body scanning, taking advantage of the therapeutic 
131I, will identify any metastatic disease at this stage. 
Thereafter, thyroxine should be given either in sup-
pressive or replacement doses depending on individual 
patient risk (Box 19.8). The differentiated thyroid carci-
nomas are TSH dependent and suppression of TSH has 
been shown to improve outcomes in patients with high 
risk disease. Thus, full suppression (TSH <0.1 mU/L) is 
recommended for patients with persistent disease, while 
partial suppression (TSH 0.1–0.5 mU/L) is advised in 
disease-free high-risk patients. TSH suppression is not 
required in patients with low or very low risk (Box 19.8). 
Patients on suppressive therapy should undergo periodic 
cardiovascular and bone mineral density evaluation be-
cause of the risk of osteoporosis and atrial fibrillation. 
Further evaluation should be undertaken six months 
after initial treatment and should comprise a neck ex-
amination, cervical ultrasound and rhTSH-stimulated 
Tg measurement. Patients without clinical or ultrasound 
evidence of disease who have normal stimulated Tg con-
centrations (<1.0 ng/mL) are considered to be in remis-
sion and will then require long-term surveillance with 
annual neck examinations and basal Tg measurements.
Tumour markers
Following total thyroidectomy and 
131I ablation, there 
should be no normal thyroid tissue remaining, and any 
thyroglobulin detected in the serum must arise from 
the current tumour or from metastases. The sensitiv-
ity of the current thyroglobulin assays is poor and the 
most meaningful results are obtained following TSH 
stimulation, either as a result of thyroxine withdrawal or 
by rhTSH stimulation. An undetectable serum thyro-
globulin, which fails to increase following TSH stimula-
tion, is indicative of cure and a reason for less intensive 
follow-up. Response to treatment of recurrent disease 
or metastases can be monitored by measuring the serum 
thyroglobulin concentration. The utility of thyroglobulin 
measurements is limited in the presence of thyroglobu-
lin antibodies, as these antibodies interfere with the thy-
roglobulin assays. Tests of thyroglobulin recovery have 
been used in a bid to overcome this problem, but these 
tests are not entirely reliable and the clinician must be 
aware of the limitations of thyroglobulin assays in moni-
toring patients with differentiated thyroid cancer.
Medullary carcinoma of the thyroid secretes calcito-
nin, which may therefore, be used as a tumour marker. 
The tumour occurs in both sporadic and familial forms, 
and because of the association with syndromes of multiple 
endocrine neoplastic (MEN) disease, patients should be 
screened for the other manifestations of MEN (e.g. hyper-
parathyroidism and phaeochromocytoma). If the diagnosis 
of MEN is confirmed, first-degree relatives of the index 
patient should also be screened for these diseases. Multiple 
endocrine neoplasia is discussed in detail in Chapter 41.
SYNDROMES OF RESISTANCE TO  
THYROID HORMONES
These occur most commonly due to a mutation in the nu-
clear T3 receptor (TRβ). The mutation may be inherited 
(usually autosomal dominant) or occur de novo. Thyroid 
hormone resistance has been detected in approximately 
BOX 19.8	
Target ranges for serum TSH 
concentration in the follow-up of 
patients with differentiated thyroid 
cancer
1.	Patients with persistent disease: TSH suppression to 
<0.1 mU/L
2.	Disease-free high-risk patients
a: TSH suppression to 
­0.1–0.5 mU/L for 5 years
3.	Disease-free low-risk patients
a: TSH in low normal range, 
0.3–1 mU/L
4.	Disease-free very-low-risk patients
a: TSH in normal 
range, 1–2 mU/L
Modified from Cooper et al. 2009 Revised American Thyroid 
Association management guidelines for patients with thyroid 
nodules and differentiated thyroid cancer. Thyroid 19:1167–21, and 
Pacini F et al. 2010 ESMO Guidelines Working Group. Thyroid 
cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment 
and follow-up. Annals of Oncology 21(Suppl 5):v214–9.
N0: no regional lymph node involvement; N1: regional lymph node 
involvement; M0: no distant metastasis; M1: distant metastasis.
aHigh risk: any T3, any T4, any T with N1 or any M1; Low risk: 
T1–T2, N0, M0 or multifocal T1, N0, M0; Very low risk: unifocal, 
T1 (<1 cm), N0, M0. T1: tumour <2 cm; T2: tumour 2–4 cm; T3: 
tumour >4 cm; T4 tumour extending beyond the thyroid capsule or 
anaplastic histology.
BOX 19.7	
Clinical features suggestive of 
malignancy in patients with thyroid 
nodules
•	 Age <20 years or >80 years
•	 Hoarseness or voice change
•	 Breathlessness or stridor from upper airway obstruction
•	 Rapid enlargement of nodule
•	 Cervical lymphadenopathy
•	 Family history of thyroid cancer
•	 History of radiation exposure
•	 Smoking history
	
19  Thyroid dysfunction	
401
TABLE 19.8  Overview of factors that enable 
thyroid hormone resistance to be distinguished 
from TSH secreting adenomas
Factor
Thyroid hormone 
resistance
TSH-secreting 
adenoma
Thyroid status
Usually clinically 
euthyroid
Usually clinically 
thyrotoxic
Serum α TSH 
subunit
Normal
Elevated
Serum SHBG
Often high (85%)
Normal
TSH response 
to TRH 
stimulation
Rise in TSH
No response
MRI pituitary
No tumour 
visualized
Primary tumour 
visualized 
(However, 
incidentaloma 
detected in 
10% of normal 
subjects)
Genetic analysis of 
thyroid hormone 
receptor B gene
Mutation 
confirmed
No mutation
in 1 in 50 000 live births and affects males and females 
equally. The condition is characterized by elevated con-
centrations of total and free thyroid hormones, normal 
or slightly increased plasma TSH, normal or exagger-
ated response to TRH and absence of the usual symp-
toms and metabolic consequences of thyroid hormone 
excess. Goitre is often present. It is important to distin-
guish these patients from those with a pituitary TSHoma 
(Table 19.8). The SHBG concentration is often normal 
in patients with thyroid hormone resistance, but is in-
creased in TSHoma. Suppression of TSH secretion by 
high doses of T3 is suggestive of thyroid hormone resis-
tance rather than a TSHoma. A useful pointer to thyroid 
hormone resistance is to obtain thyroid function test re-
sults in first-degree relatives. DNA analysis to demon-
strate the mutation in the TRβ gene should be performed 
to confirm the diagnosis. Some patients appear to have a 
relatively selective pituitary resistance and present with 
hyperthyroid-type symptoms. Management is complex 
and should be reserved for specialist centres. In many 
cases no treatment is required.
SCREENING
Is screening for thyroid disease justified? There are un-
doubtedly some groups of patients in whom thyroid 
function testing is justified, even if there is no clinical 
evidence of thyroid disease. The question of screening 
in neonates has already been discussed. Screening is war-
ranted in all patients with a personal history of previous 
thyroid disease or neck irradiation, ophthalmic Graves 
disease, atrial tachyarrhythmias or a history of goitre 
or previous thyroiditis. In view of the increased preva-
lence of long-term thyroid dysfunction in patients who 
have previously received antithyroid drugs, this group of 
individuals should also be offered regular thyroid func-
tion testing. Screening patients with a personal or family 
history of autoimmune disorders such as type 1 diabetes, 
pernicious anaemia, coeliac disease, Addison disease and 
rheumatological disorders will also yield a significant pro-
portion of patients with undiagnosed thyroid disorders. 
Thyroid screening is also indicated in patients receiving 
medications which affect thyroid function such as amio-
darone, lithium, tyrosine kinase inhibitors, α-interferon, 
Campath
® and antiretroviral agents. Screening patients 
who have hyperlipidaemia (who have a higher preva-
lence of hypothyroidism than the normal population) is 
also justified. The situation is far less clear in the case 
of screening larger sections of the general population, 
such as the elderly female population or the hospital in-
patient population. In the former example, the cost of 
such a screening programme has to be balanced against 
the likely pick-up rate, and in the latter, the confounding 
influence of non-thyroidal illness is likely to reduce the 
value of screening in this circumstance. Screening pro-
grammes should probably be targeted on otherwise well 
but ‘at-risk’ individuals in the community, rather than on 
the hospital population at large.
The value of thyroid screening in all pregnant women 
is contentious. Most international endocrine associations 
do not recommend universal thyroid screening but pro-
pose screening only in pregnant patients at risk of thyroid 
disease, e.g. women with a personal or family history of 
thyroid disease, co-existent autoimmune disease, goitre, 
thyroid antibodies, history of head and neck irradiation, 
or history of poor obstetric outcomes. However, such 
a targeted case finding approach would miss a third of 
pregnant women with thyroid disease. A randomized 
controlled trial of a thyroid screening strategy in early 
pregnancy showed no beneficial effect on childhood 
­neurointellectual development at three years.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to thank Geoffrey J. Beckett and Anthony 
D. Toft who wrote the chapter in the previous edition of 
this book.
Further reading
Abalovich M, Amino N, Barbour LA et  al. Management of thyroid 
dysfunction during pregnancy and postpartum: an endocrine society 
clinical practice guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2007;92(Suppl. 
8):S1–S47.
Braverman LE, Utiger RD, editors. Werner and Ingbar’s the thyroid. 
A fundamental and clinical text. 9th ed Philadelphia: Lippincott 
Williams & Wilkins; 2005.
A comprehensive text covering all aspects of the thyroid.
British Thyroid Association. UK Guidelines for the use of thyroid 
function 
tests, 
http://www.british-thyroid-association.org/info-
for-patients/Docs/TFT_guideline_final_version_July_2006.pdf 
[Accessed October 2013].
Cooper 
DS, 
Biondi 
B. 
Subclinical 
thyroid 
disease. 
Lancet 
2012;379:1142–54.
Dayan CM. Interpretation of thyroid function tests. Lancet 
2001;357:619–24.
Ekins R. Measurement of free hormones in blood. Endocr Rev 1990; 
11:5–46.
Ferrara AM, Onigata K, Ercan O et al. Homozygous thyroid hormone 
receptor beta-gene mutations in resistance to thyroid hormone: three 
new cases and review of the literature. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 
2012;97:1328–36.
402	
Clinical biochemistry
Franklyn 
JA, 
Boelaert 
K. 
Thyrotoxicosis. 
Lancet 
2012;379: 
1155–66.
Okosieme OE. Thyroid hormone replacement: current status and 
challenges. Expert Opin Pharmacother 2011;12:2315–28.
Pacini F, Castagna MG, Brilli L et al. ESMO Guidelines Working Group. 
Thyroid cancer: ESMO clinical practice guidelines for diagnosis, 
treatment and follow-up. Ann Oncol 2010;21(Suppl. 5):v214–9.
Shivaraj G, Prakash BD, Sonal V et al. Thyroid function tests: a review. 
Eur Rev Med Pharmacol Sci 2009;13:341–9.
Warner A, Mittag J. Thyroid hormone and the central control of 
homeostasis. J Mol Endocrinol 2012;49:R29–35.
Woodmansee WW, Haugen BR. Uses for recombinant human TSH 
in patients with thyroid cancer and nodular goiter. Clin Endocrinol 
(Oxf) 2004;61:163–73.
403
C H A P T E R  2 0
Metabolic response to stress
Robin Berry  •  Philip Gillen
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  403
THE RESPONSE TO STRESS  403
Initiation of the stress response  403
Hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal axis  404
Adrenal medulla  405
STRESS AND THE KIDNEYS  406
CYTOKINES  406
STRESS AND INFLAMMATION  406
Catecholamines  407
Acute phase proteins  408
Coagulation factors  408
SHOCK  409
CARE OF THE SHOCKED PATIENT  409
Definitions  409
Management  410
CONCLUSION  411
INTRODUCTION
Stress can be defined as any influence, arising either in-
ternally or externally to the body, that threatens to disrupt 
normal structure, function or behaviour. Not surprisingly, 
complex mechanisms have evolved to protect the body 
against such threats, whether physical or psychological. 
It may be surmised that during man’s evolution, the most 
important stresses were external, e.g. attack and lack of 
food, water or shelter. For many people, such factors are 
now of little or no relevance, but others, for example psy-
chological stresses, have become more prevalent; stress-
ors such as trauma and infection remain universal.
The body’s response to stress tends to be qualitatively 
similar whatever the stress, although the severity of the 
stress affects the response quantitatively, albeit with con-
siderable intra- and interindividual variation.
It is reasonable to suppose that the development of 
the metabolic response to stress was subject to evolution-
ary pressures, and that the response is potentially benefi-
cial. For some aspects this clearly is the case, but, as will 
become apparent, some aspects of the response to severe 
stressors, particularly sepsis, appear potentially harmful 
to the body as a whole. One can only speculate how this 
might have come about. The metabolic response to stress 
is complex, and includes processes that act to propagate 
the response as well as to curtail it and thereby limit its 
extent, both physiologically and anatomically.
Conventionally, stressors are divided into four 
categories:
1.	 physical, e.g. heat, cold, immobilization and pain
2.	 psychological, e.g. anxiety and fear
3.	 social, e.g. bereavement, marital breakdown
4.	 cardiovascular and metabolic, e.g. exercise, haem-
orrhage and infection.
While this system helps categorize the nature of the 
stimulus, multiple stressors can be applied to an individ-
ual at any one time and these, in turn, can be ­either acute 
or chronic in nature. Stress responses are intended to be 
short lived and self-limiting, but are proportional to the 
intensity of the stimulus and, consequently, can range 
from simple localized reactions to complex processes. 
Systemic responses involve vascular, endocrine and 
­metabolic changes orchestrated by the hypothalamo–­
pituitary axis and sympathetic nervous systems. Centrally, 
there is facilitation of arousal, inhibition of vegetative 
functions (feeding and reproduction) and activation of 
counter-regulatory feedback loops. Respiratory and 
heart rates increase and there is an ­increase in vascular 
tone, resulting in a rise in blood pressure and hence oxy-
gen and nutrient supply to the brain, heart and skeletal 
muscles.
The intensity of stress may be gauged by peak concen-
trations of stress hormones and neurotransmitters, by phys-
iological changes, such as increases in heart rate and blood 
pressure, and by the length of time for which these changes 
persist during stress and following the cessation of stress. 
Whilst intended to confer a survival advantage, the stress 
response can become part of the pathological process. In se-
vere stress, responses that appear potentially advantageous 
if limited in extent (e.g. mobilization of muscle protein to 
provide glucose as an energy source) become harmful.
THE RESPONSE TO STRESS
Initiation of the stress response
Figure  20.1 summarizes the complexity of the sys-
temic responses to potential stimuli. Stimulation of the 
404	
Clinical biochemistry
hypothalamus and locus coeruleus leads to the release 
of pituitary hormones and activation of the sympathetic 
nervous system. The locus coeruleus, hypothalamus and 
brainstem are closely linked, both anatomically and func-
tionally. The locus coeruleus and hypothalamus mutually 
innervate and stimulate each other. This positive feed-
back system allows for activation of the systemic stress 
response by any stimulus that initiates either side of this 
loop. The locus coeruleus is located in the lateral floor 
of the fourth ventricle, and represents the major pool of 
noradrenaline (norepinephrine) secreting neurons in the 
brain. It receives afferents from many areas, including 
the hypothalamus, the cerebellum, prefrontal cortex and 
the hypoglossi. The cingulate gyrus and amygdala also 
innervate the locus coeruleus, transmitting emotional 
and pain stressors. Nerve fibres from this nucleus in-
nervate the spinal cord, brainstem, thalamic relay nuclei, 
cerebellum and hypothalamus and are predominantly 
excitatory in action. Adrenaline (epinephrine) secreting 
nerve terminals are also found within the locus coeruleus 
and are thought to represent part of the medullary regu-
latory circuit.
At the centre of the limbic system, the hypothala-
mus controls most of the vegetative (homoeostatic) and 
endocrine functions of the body. Combined with the 
locus coeruleus, it is the major effecter of the stress 
response.
The efferent neuronal pathways from the hypothala-
mus can be classified into two groups: direct monosyn-
aptic projections to pre-ganglionic neurons in the lower 
brainstem and spinal cord projections to brainstem cat-
echolaminergic neurons in the medulla that innervate 
neurons in the thoracic spinal cord.
Additionally, hypothalamic nuclei participate in other 
regulatory pathways, such as temperature control, energy 
homoeostasis and body fluid composition.
Hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal axis
Stimulation of the paraventricular nucleus by afferent 
­fibres from the limbic system and lower brainstem results 
in the secretion of corticotrophin-releasing hormone 
(CRH), into the primary capillary plexus of the hypophy-
seal portal system, from where it is transported to the an-
terior pituitary gland.
The hypothalamus also secretes the polypeptide argi-
nine vasopressin (AVP), which is transported along nerve 
tracts to the posterior pituitary. Under resting conditions, 
CRH and AVP are secreted in a circadian and highly 
concordant pulsatile fashion: stressors promote a surge 
in AVP secretion. Vasopressin increases water retention 
in the kidneys, is a potent vasoconstrictor, acts as a neu-
rotransmitter and has the ability to modulate a number of 
physiological processes including gluconeogenesis, plate-
let aggregation and inflammation.
Corticotrophin-releasing hormone and AVP act syn-
ergistically on the anterior pituitary to induce synthe-
sis of the large preprohormone, proopiomelanocortin 
(POMC). The POMC molecule is processed to form 
a series of smaller peptides, the nature of which is de-
pendent on the enzyme systems present within the tis-
sue type. Anterior pituitary corticotrophin cells express 
prohormone convertase 1 (PC1), which cleaves POMC 
into ACTH, N-terminal peptide, joining peptide and 
β-lipotropin. In the hypothalamus the enzyme PC2 
cleaves POMC to α-, β- and γ-melanocyte stimulating 
hormones and β-endorphin.
α-Melanocyte stimulating hormone acts on melano-
cortin receptors in the paraventricular nucleus of the hy-
pothalamus, stimulating the sympathetic nervous system. 
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone and the other peptide 
cleavage products of POMC have a negative feedback ef-
fect on the hypothalamus to limit CRH release.
Locus coeruleus
Hypothalamus
Arousal, stress, emotions, anxiety
Increased sympathetic outflow
Decreased parasympathetic outflow
Increased plasma
concentrations
of adrenaline,
noradrenaline,
glucose, glucagon
Metabolic activity
of brown adipose
tissue
O2 consumption
Baroreceptor reflex
Gastric acid secretion
Gastric emptying
Small intestinal transit
Large intestinal transit
FIGURE 20.1  ■ The systemic response to stress.
	
20  Metabolic response to stress	
405
While CRH and AVP act synergistically on the ante-
rior pituitary, only small amounts of ACTH are secreted 
in the absence of CRH, which is pivotal to an integrated 
stress response.
Cortisol
Following stimulation by ACTH, cortisol is the principle 
glucocorticoid produced by the adrenal cortex, account-
ing for 95% of glucocorticoid activity. Approximately 
90% of circulating cortisol is protein bound; some is at-
tached non-specifically to albumin, but the majority binds 
with high affinity to cortisol-binding globulin (CBG); 
only free cortisol is biologically active. Cortisol-binding 
globulin is an α2-globulin, produced in the liver, which 
behaves as a negative acute phase protein. The concen-
tration of CBG falls in response to some inflammatory 
stimuli, increasing the bioavailability of cortisol.
Cortisol is a major effector of the metabolic re-
sponse to stress. It is lipid soluble and readily crosses 
cell membranes, its activity being mediated via the 
glucocorticoid receptor (GR). Two isoforms of GR 
have been isolated, GRα, which binds cortisol and the 
GRβ, which does not bind cortisol and may act to in-
hibit the effect of endogenous glucocorticoid action. 
The hormone receptor ­complex is translocated to the 
nucleus where it interacts with glucocorticoid response 
elements and, following recruitment of co-activators, 
leads to increased gene transcription. Other actions 
are DNA independent and involve direct interactions 
with transcription factors, such as ­nuclear factor-κβ 
(NF-κβ), This is important in the modulation of the 
stress response, since NF-κβ activates the expression 
of interleukin-1(IL-1), IL-6 and tumour necrosis fac-
tor α (TNFα), all of which are key components of the 
inflammatory response and interact with the hypothalamo–­
pituitary–adrenal axis (HPAA).
Cortisol exerts a negative feedback effect on CRH and 
ACTH release, affects carbohydrate, protein and fat me-
tabolism, and modulates the immune response. Cortisol 
limits glucose utilization in cellular respiration, perhaps 
by reducing the oxidation of NADH to NAD+ in the 
tricarboxylic acid cycle. High concentrations of corti-
sol reduce the sensitivity of peripheral tissues to insulin. 
This anti-insulin effect is particularly marked in skeletal 
muscle and adipose tissue, reducing glucose uptake and 
metabolism.
In extra-hepatic tissues, there is increased protein 
catabolism and decreased protein synthesis through re-
duced RNA formation and amino acid uptake. Within 
the liver, however, this metabolic picture is reversed, 
with increased amino acid uptake and the synthesis of 
acute phase proteins. Additionally, cortisol enhances the 
mobilization of fatty acids from adipose tissue, shifting 
oxidative metabolism to favour energy generation from 
glucose to fatty acids.
Thyroid hormones
Major disturbances of thyroid hormone metabolism and 
plasma concentration occur during the metabolic re-
sponse to stress, typically with falls in the concentrations 
of tri-iodothyronine and often of thyroxine and, some-
times, in the critically ill, a fall in the concentration of 
thyroid stimulating hormone. (These changes are dis-
cussed further in Chapter 19.)
Sex hormones
The effects of trauma and sepsis on sex hormones are 
complex and dependent on the type of injury. Plasma 
concentrations of free testosterone may fall without any 
consistent change in the concentration of luteinizing 
hormone (LH), suggesting a change in the sensitivity 
of Leydig cells to LH or a disturbance of normal feed-
back regulation. The effects tend to be more marked in 
women, with reduced activity of the entire hypothalamo–
pituitary–gonadal axis. Corticotrophin releasing hor-
mone is known to have inhibitory effects at various levels 
in this axis, including antagonizing the effects of LH on 
Leydig cells. Chronic activation of the hypothalamo–­
pituitary–gonadal axis, such as has been demonstrated in 
long distance runners and ballet dancers, causes suppres-
sion of gonadal function in males and females.
Growth hormone
The anterior pituitary secretes growth hormone, stimu-
lated by growth hormone releasing hormone, produced by 
the ventral medial nucleus of the hypothalamus. Growth 
hormone is a small protein that is active in most cells of 
the body, where it enhances amino acid uptake and pro-
tein synthesis. Under the influence of growth hormone, 
free fatty acids are used as an energy source in preference 
to carbohydrates and proteins. Growth hormone reduces 
glucose uptake by skeletal muscle and fat cells, promotes 
gluconeogenesis by the liver and consequently increases 
insulin secretion by the pancreas.
Adrenal medulla
Activation of the locus coeruleus by stressors causes the 
release of noradrenaline and increased sympathetic dis-
charge via the brainstem and spinal cord. Pre-ganglionic 
sympathetic nerves pass through the sympathetic chain 
to innervate modified neuronal cells in the adrenal me-
dulla. These cells secrete noradrenaline and adrena-
line into the circulation. Catecholamine synthesis is 
an energy-dependent process with many mitochondria 
packing the terminal varicosities containing the secre-
tory vesicles. Tyrosine is converted to l-DOPA and 
then to dopamine, which is transported into the secre-
tory vesicles where a hydroxylation reaction converts 
it into noradrenaline. The majority of noradrenaline 
is then metabolized to adrenaline. The sympathetic 
nerve impulse to the adrenal medulla results in the in-
flux of intracellular calcium and the discharge of the 
catecholamine secretory vesicles (in the ratio of 80:20, 
adrenaline:noradrenaline) directly into the circulation. 
The combined effect of this circulating adrenaline and 
noradrenaline is identical to that caused by direct sym-
pathetic nervous system stimulation, but has a longer 
duration and can reach all cells of the body irrespective 
of their autonomic innervation.
406	
Clinical biochemistry
STRESS AND THE KIDNEYS
Fluid conservation occurs as part of the stress response, 
often resulting in low urine outputs despite euvolaemia. 
Increased sympathetic nervous system activity, combined 
with raised concentrations of circulating catecholamines, 
reduces renal blood flow. This initiates the metabolism 
of prorenin to renin in the juxtaglomerular cells of the 
kidneys. Renin is released into the blood where it acts on 
angiotensinogen to form angiotensin I. Under the influ-
ence of angiotensin-converting-enzyme, predominantly 
in the lung, angiotensin I is converted to angiotensin II, 
a potent vasoconstrictor. Angiotensin II stimulates AVP 
release from the hypothalamus, as well as having a direct 
affect on the kidney to increase salt and water retention. 
Furthermore, under the influence of angiotensin II, the 
mineralocorticoid aldosterone is synthesized in the zona 
glomerulosa of the adrenal cortex, by metabolism of cor-
ticosterone by the enzyme aldosterone synthase. Whilst 
ACTH has a permissive role in aldosterone synthesis, 
it does not control the rate of release. Aldosterone acts 
on the cortical collecting tubules where it stimulates a 
Na+,K+-ATPase, leading to the retention of sodium and 
water. (Salt and water balance is considered further in 
Chapter 4 and renal function in Chapter 7.)
CYTOKINES
Cytokines are peptides secreted by many cell types in-
cluding mast cells, macrophages and endothelial cells. 
They are released into the extracellular fluid and can 
function as autocrine, paracrine or endocrine hormones 
and they trigger the acute phase response.
Major changes in the plasma concentrations of cy-
tokines occur during trauma and sepsis: they are also 
released during psychological stress. Cytokines are pro-
duced by activated cells of the immune system and me-
diate communication between the immune, endocrine 
and central nervous systems. Cytokines are classified 
into three groups dependent on their function. Group 1 
(IL-2, IL-3, IL-4, IL-7, IL-10, IL-11, IL-12 and granu-
locyte–macrophage colony stimulating factor) act on a 
variety of cell types as positive or negative growth factors, 
whilst group 2 (TNFα/β, IL-1α/β, IL-6, IFN-α/γ, IL-8 
and macrophage inhibitory protein-1) have proinflam-
matory properties. Group 2 cytokines are responsible for 
the induction of fever, muscle catabolism, activation of 
white blood cell precursors and growth of inflammatory 
fibroblasts and macrophages. Group 3 contains cytokines 
with anti-inflammatory activity (IL-1 receptor antago-
nists, soluble IL-1 receptors, TNFα binding protein and 
IL-1 binding protein). Endothelial cells and macrophages 
are major producers of IL-1, IL-6 and TNFα, but virtu-
ally all nucleated cells have the ability to synthesize them.
Physical damage to cells results in the release of cyto-
kines, some of which are chemotactic (e.g. IL-8), attract-
ing large numbers of macrophages and neutrophils to the 
site of injury, where they are activated by TNFα, IL-1 
and IL-6 to phagocytose dead tissue and bacteria.
Whether cytokines have localized (paracrine) or gener-
alized (endocrine) effects is an important determinant of 
the extent of the inflammatory response. Cytokines having 
local actions are also released into the circulation where 
they initiate some of the systemic features of the metabolic 
response, such as fever (IL-1) and stimulation of hepatic 
protein synthesis to produce acute phase proteins (IL-6): 
IL-6 is also a potent stimulator of ACTH (and hence 
cortisol) secretion, which amplifies the stress response.
Interleukin-1, IL-6 and TNFα are particularly important 
cytokines. Interleukin-1 is produced by activated macro-
phages and mediates the inflammatory response, stimulates 
the HPAA and potentiates amino acid flux in skeletal mus-
cle. Tumour necrosis factor-α, produced by macrophages 
and lymphocytes has similar properties to IL-1, and acts 
synergistically with it. Tumour necrosis factor-α stimu-
lates inducible nitric oxide synthase, causing vasodilatation 
whilst also stimulating the production of cyclooxygenase, 
which in turn facilitates prostaglandin and thromboxane 
synthesis. Prostaglandin E2 acts on the hypothalamic ther-
moregulatory centre to cause fever and is also immunosup-
pressive; other prostaglandins excite A and C pain fibres. 
Thromboxanes stimulate platelet function and are proco-
agulant. Interleukin-6 may also contribute to the activation 
of the HPAA and to insulin resistance. Tumour necrosis 
factor-α, IL-1β and IFN-γ are crucial for the induction of 
other cytokines (e.g. IL-6 and IL-8), platelet activating fac-
tor, prostaglandins, ­leukotrienes and nitric oxide.
STRESS AND INFLAMMATION
Stress and glucocorticoid hormones can either enhance 
or suppress immune function, depending on the follow-
ing factors:
•	 the duration of the stress
•	 changes in leukocyte distribution and the compart-
ments involved
•	 the concentration, duration and nature of the gluco-
corticoid exposure
•	 the timing of stress or stress hormone exposure rela-
tive to the stage of an immune response.
The stress response promotes a physiological syn-
chronization of cardiovascular, musculoskeletal and 
neuroendocrine systems to confer a survival advantage. 
Despite the known anti-inflammatory effects of glu-
cocorticoids, the body is unlikely to suppress immune 
function when the host is liable to wounding and infec-
tion. Indeed it is more likely that acute stress may serve 
to enhance the immune response.
Tissue injury (trauma, infection, hypoxia) causes the 
release of proinflammatory mediators such as heat shock 
proteins, adenosine and high mobility group box pro-
tein 1 in a characteristic damage-associated molecular 
pattern, and they are known collectively as ‘alarmins’. 
Effective immunoprotection requires rapid recruitment 
of leukocytes to the site of damage, which is facilitated 
by the binding of alarmins to endogenous receptors on 
neutrophils and macrophages. Subsequently, the activa-
tion of NK-κβ leads to the transcription of proinflam-
matory proteins, including the cytokines IL-1, IL-6 and 
TNFα. Following release, these cytokines further acti-
vate inflammatory cells and the vascular system leading 
to a systemic response.
	
20  Metabolic response to stress	
407
Cortisol and adrenaline act synergistically to induce 
rapid changes in leukocyte distribution and to enhance 
cell mediated and contact hypersensitivity immunity. 
Stress-induced changes include a reduction in the num-
bers of lymphocytes and monocytes but an increase in 
the number of neutrophils. These changes are rapidly 
reversed upon cessation of the stress.
Glucocorticoids act synergistically with cytokines to 
enhance specific immune reactions, by inducing their 
release and potentiating their actions. Synergistic in-
teractions between glucocorticoids and cytokines may 
be mediated by glucocorticoid induced upregulation of 
cytokine receptors on target cells as determined by in-
creased cytokine binding or cytokine receptor mRNA 
expression. For example, glucocorticoid-induced TNF 
receptors have been shown to promote survival and serve 
as a stimulatory receptor for T cells. Furthermore, glu-
cocorticoids increase IL-1 binding to human peripheral 
blood B cells.
Acute psychological stress is known to increase circu-
lating TNFα, IL-1β and IL-10, with glucocorticoids also 
enhancing the biological activity of IL-2, interferon γ 
(IFN-γ) and granulocyte colony stimulating factor. Acute 
stress responses may induce a biphasic shift in leukocyte 
numbers. Initially, catecholamine hormones and neu-
rotransmitters induce leukocytes to exit the spleen and 
bone marrow and to enter blood vessels and lymphatics. 
Consequently, there is an increase in blood leukocytes, 
predominantly natural killer (NK) cells and granulocytes. 
As the stress response evolves, glucocorticoid hormones 
initiate migration of lymphocytes to sites of infection. 
This redistribution leads to a reduction in the numbers of 
circulating lymphocytes, but is not an anti-inflammatory 
effect.
In contrast to acute stress, chronic stress has been shown 
to dysregulate immune responses by altering the cytokine 
balance from type 1 to type 2. Immunosenescence is ac-
celerated and immunity decreased owing to a reduced 
number of circulating protective cells and increased pop-
ulations of suppressor T lymphocytes.
To limit potential tissue damage after activation of the 
immune system, a counter-regulatory response is simul-
taneously triggered by inflammation and hypoxia. An 
important physiological role of endogenous glucocorti-
coids might be to suppress an ongoing immune response. 
Studies have demonstrated the existence of a negative 
feedback loop between the immune system and HPAA 
such that proinflammatory mediators arising from ongo-
ing immune reactions stimulate the axis, which in turn 
results in the secretion of cortisol, which suppresses the 
immune response and prevents it from potentially dam-
aging the host.
Cortisol exerts its anti-inflammatory effects through 
a number of mechanisms. By stabilizing lysosomal mem-
branes, cortisol reduces the release of proinflammatory 
proteolytic enzymes and reduces damage to the vascular 
endothelium, thereby decreasing capillary leak. Cortisol 
is thought to have an anti-inflammatory action through 
the non-genomic binding of the GR-cortisol complex to 
the transcriptase NK-κβ, reducing the formation of pros-
taglandins and cytokines that would act as positive che-
motactic agents for phagocytic white blood cells. Cortisol 
inhibits the production of IL-2, which stimulates the 
proliferation of T cells. It also induces the synthesis of 
lipocortin, an inhibitor of phospholipase A2, which is 
required for the synthesis of prostaglandins and leu-
kotrienes. Concurrently, there is secretion of IL-6 an 
­anti-inflammatory cytokine that inhibits the production 
of IL-1 and TNFα and thus provides negative feedback 
for the inflammatory cascade.
Cortisol can promote increased transcription of 
anti-inflammatory genes. Mitogen activated protein 
­kinases (MAPKs) form intracellular signalling pathways 
that result in the production and post-transcriptional 
­modification of proinflammatory mediators. MAPK 
phosphatases dephosphorylate MAPKs rendering them 
inactive; glucocorticoids increase the expression of 
MAPK phosphatases and thus can down regulate the in-
flammatory response.
Cells that surround the inflamed tissues express specific 
tissue protective receptors (TPR) that bind the type 1 cy-
tokine erythropoietin. Binding of this ligand inhibits pro-
inflammatory cytokine production, inhibits macrophage 
activity and delimits the volume of injury by countering 
apoptosis. Activation of TPRs also acts to recruit vascular 
and tissue specific stem cells and enhances tissue repair.
Catecholamines
Noradrenaline is released mainly from the postganglionic 
nerve endings, while the adrenal medulla is the major 
source of adrenaline in the circulation.
Stimulation of the sympathetic nerves to the adrenal 
medulla results in large quantities of adrenaline and nor-
adrenaline being released into the circulation. The ac-
tion of these catecholamines is mediated via cell surface 
adrenergic receptors, which are themselves bound to pro-
tein molecules that traverse the cell membrane. Binding 
to these receptors causes a conformational change in the 
protein, resulting in the opening of an ion channel or 
the stimulation of a second messenger enzyme system. 
There are two major groups of adrenergic receptors, α 
and β, which are further divided into subgroups (α1–2, β1–3). 
Noradrenaline preferentially excites α receptors in addi-
tion to having some β activity, whilst adrenaline is equally 
effective across both receptor groups. Sympathetic stimula-
tion is excitatory in some tissues and inhibitory in others and 
similarly α and β receptors may be excitatory or inhibitory.
Circulating catecholamines enhance the sympathetic 
nervous system’s stimulation of the cardiovascular system. 
This results in arteriolar and venous constriction and in-
creased heart rate and force of myocardial contraction. 
The net result is raised ventricular blood volume causing 
increased muscle fibre stretching, improving cardiac out-
put and raising blood pressure.
During stress, noradrenaline and adrenaline both 
cause hyperpolarization of gut smooth muscle and de-
creased bowel motility. Circulating adrenaline stimulates 
the phosphorylase enzyme via cAMP, causing rapid gly-
cogenolysis especially in the liver and skeletal muscle. 
Combined with the anti-insulin effects of cortisol, adren-
aline and noradrenaline activate triglyceride lipase in fat 
cells, causing the rapid mobilization of fatty acids, shift-
ing energy metabolism away from glucose.
408	
Clinical biochemistry
Brain catecholaminergic systems utilize noradrena-
line, adrenaline, dopamine and l-DOPA. Stressful 
stimuli accelerate both the synthesis and release of 
brain catecholamines, with adrenergic and noradren-
ergic neurons involved in the central processing of the 
stress response. The effect of these neurotransmitters 
is dependent on which receptors and transporters are 
expressed on target cells. Adrenaline binds to the same 
receptors as noradrenaline and adrenergic neurons may 
use noradrenaline transporters for reuptake from syn-
aptic clefts.
Acute stress leads to transient alterations in brain cate-
cholamine systems with transient activation of the HPAA. 
After a short period of time and depending on the nature 
of the stressor, the activity of these catecholaminergic 
neurons can return to baseline. Chronic, long-term or re-
peated stressors may induce permanent changes and keep 
catecholamine producing neurons chronically active.
In response to the majority of stressors, brainstem 
noradrenaline producing neurons stimulate the HPAA 
non-specifically via adrenergic receptors. In contrast, 
stimulation of the paraventricular nucleus of the hypo-
thalamus is stressor specific.
Acute phase proteins
Hepatic protein synthesis shifts from constitutive pro-
teins (e.g. albumin and transferrin), to acute phase pro-
teins (e.g. C-reactive protein (CRP) and fibrinogen), 
following activation of the systemic stress response. This 
causes increased plasma concentrations of CRP, coagula-
tion proteins, protease inhibitors and complement pro-
teins. These acute phase proteins are arbitrarily divided 
into type I, e.g. haptoglobin and α1-acid glycoprotein that 
are mediated by IL-1 and TNF-like cytokines, and type 
II acute phase proteins mediated by IL-6-like cytokines. 
Since the synthesis of this group of proteins increases un-
der stress, they are referred to as positive acute phase pro-
teins. In contrast, constitutive proteins such as albumin 
and the hormone binding proteins are downregulated and 
classified as negative acute phase proteins. Under stress 
conditions, the amino acids required for this protein syn-
thesis are derived from extrahepatic tissues, where prote-
olysis and reduced amino acid uptake occur, secondary to 
the influence of cortisol and the catecholamines.
Positive acute phase proteins have diverse functions 
in opsonization and trapping of microorganisms, activat-
ing complement, binding cellular remnants, neutralizing 
enzymes, scavenging free radicals and in modulating the 
host’s immune response.
C-reactive protein is a ring-shaped protein that binds 
to phosphocholine on the surface of dead cells and some 
bacteria where it acts as an opsonin, activating comple-
ment by the classical pathway. Haptoglobin binds free 
haemoglobin, inhibiting its oxidative activity and has 
anti-inflammatory capabilities, binding to major recep-
tors on the cell membranes of leukocytes. It is removed 
from the circulation, along with any bound molecules, by 
the reticuloendothelial system. Fibrinogen (factor 1) is a 
high molecular weight glycoprotein involved in the clot-
ting cascade and inflammation. It is converted by the en-
zyme thrombin into fibrin monomers that automatically 
polymerize to form fibrin fibres as part of clot forma-
tion. Fibrinogen and fibrin contribute to inflammation 
by inducing leukocyte migration and by modulating the 
inflammatory response of leukocytes and endothelial 
cells via an increased responsiveness to cytokines and 
chemokines.
Coagulation factors
Coagulation may be enhanced during the stress response 
to infection, with the inflammatory and clotting cascades 
being closely linked. Endothelial cell injury activates the 
clotting cascade through binding of factor VIIa to tis-
sue factor, leading to the generation of thrombin. This 
catalyses the formation of fibrin and activates platelets, 
resulting in the formation of a clot. During stress, there 
are increased concentrations of circulating procoagulants 
such as fibrinogen and the cytokine IL-6, which stimulate 
the expression of tissue factor. Concurrently, platelets are 
activated by proinflammatory cytokines and adrenaline. 
There is downregulation of physiological anticoagulant 
mechanisms such as proteins C and S (negative acute phase 
proteins) and inhibition of fibrinolysis. Consequently, 
inflammation-induced coagulation is characterized by 
widespread intravascular fibrin deposition. Impairment of 
thrombolysis occurs because of high circulating concen-
trations of plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1.
By binding to protease activated receptors (PARs), 
thrombin induces leukocyte migration to the surface of 
the endothelium and by induction of the expression of 
cytokines and chemokines by leukocytes. The four iso-
forms of PARs (PAR 1–4) belong to a family of G-coupled 
receptors activated by proteolytic cleavage.
Procoagulant activity is regulated by three impor-
tant anticoagulant pathways: antithrombin, the protein 
C system and tissue factor pathway inhibitor. During 
­inflammation-induced coagulation, the function of all 
three pathways can be impaired.
The serine protease inhibitor antithrombin is the main 
inhibitor of thrombin. During severe inflammatory re-
sponses, antithrombin concentrations are markedly de-
creased owing to impaired synthesis (negative acute phase 
response), degradation by elastase from activated neutro-
phils and consumption by ongoing thrombin generation.
Antithrombin has an anti-inflammatory effect, by stim-
ulating prostacyclin release from endothelium. The anti-
inflammatory effects of cytokines are the result of blockade 
of both cytokine production by neutrophils and their teth-
ering to vascular endothelium. Antithrombin also binds to 
specific receptors on neutrophils, monocytes and lympho-
cytes, blocking their interactions with the endothelium.
In severe inflammation, plasma concentrations of pro-
tein C are low due to impaired synthesis, consumption 
and degradation by proteolytic enzymes such as neutro-
phil elastase. There is also a significant downregulation 
of thrombomodulin, a protein cofactor expressed on the 
surface of endothelial cells. Under normal conditions, 
the thrombin–thrombomodulin complex activates pro-
tein C, but in severe inflammation the expression of this 
protein is inhibited by the inflammatory cytokines TNFα 
and IL-6. Low plasma concentrations of free protein S 
may compromise the function of the protein C system. 
	
20  Metabolic response to stress	
409
In plasma, 60% of the cofactor protein S is bound to 
complement regulatory protein C4b binding protein 
(C4bBP). Increased plasma concentrations of C4bBP, 
as a consequence of the acute phase response, result in 
a relative protein S deficiency. In sepsis, the endothelial 
protein C receptor is downregulated, further impeding 
the function of this anticoagulant.
SHOCK
Shock can be classified according to its aetiology: cardiac 
dysfunction (either primary or secondary); loss of circu-
lating volume (fluid loss or redistribution), or failure to 
maintain systemic vascular resistance. These may occur 
in combination, particularly when entering the final com-
mon pathway of refractory shock. If untreated, the end 
result, whatever the cause, is tissue hypoperfusion and im-
pairment of cellular metabolism.
The amount of oxygen delivered to tissues is a func-
tion of the cardiac output and arterial oxygen content. In 
haemorrhagic shock, cardiac output falls because of re-
ductions in preload, force of contraction and stroke vol-
ume. These changes promote compensatory sympathetic 
responses inducing tachycardia, peripheral vasoconstric-
tion, tachypnoea and the activation of neurohumoral 
mechanisms. The adrenal glands secrete adrenaline, 
noradrenaline and cortisol, whilst renal hypoperfusion 
activates the renin–angiotensin system. Angiotensin II, a 
vasoconstrictor, stimulates the release of vasopressin and 
aldosterone. Vasopressin, a pressor agent, increases the 
permeability of the renal collecting ducts to water, result-
ing in water retention, whilst aldosterone acts at the distal 
renal tubule to promote sodium retention.
If the stress response is inadequate for the metabolic 
challenge imposed upon the body, endothelial cells 
switch to anaerobic metabolism, absorb interstitial fluid 
and swell. This causes narrowing of the lumen of arte-
rioles, further restricting the oxygen supply. Ischaemic 
cells accumulate lactic acid and free radical species, which 
are directly cytotoxic, prompting the release of inflam-
matory mediators and the adhesion of neutrophil leuko-
cytes cells. As the inflammatory cascade is propagated, 
the cumulative anaerobic metabolites become negatively 
inotropic, and energy-dependent potassium channels fail, 
causing arterioles to dilate, heralding the onset of refrac-
tory shock.
CARE OF THE SHOCKED PATIENT
The response to stress is typically well regulated but 
homoeostatic control can be lost in the presence of pow-
erful stimuli or if a second insult occurs, for example an 
infection or a need for surgery after trauma.
Definitions
Patients are admitted to critical care units because of 
various underlying disorders, yet may display similar 
clinical manifestations regardless of the clinical insult. 
This observation led to the introduction of the term 
‘systemic inflammatory response syndrome’ (SIRS) and 
to attempts to define shock in order to establish a con-
sistent basis to assist diagnosis and treatment (Box 20.1). 
Such a classification also facilitates design of clinical tri-
als and incorporation of their results into routine clinical 
practice. The term multi-organ dysfunction syndrome 
(MODS) is now preferred to the previously used term 
‘multi-organ failure’. Multi-organ dysfunction syn-
drome is defined by organ specific criteria, involving 
clinical and investigation findings. It is now preferred 
as a concept as it is acknowledged that it may be ap-
propriate to offer organ support before the function of 
individual organs has deteriorated to a life-threatening 
extent. Signs of organ system dysfunction are shown in 
Box 20.2.
BOX 20.1	
Definitions used in critically ill 
patients
Infection: a microbial phenomenon characterised by an 
inflammatory response to the presence of micro-organisms 
or the invasion of normally sterile host tissues or fluids by 
these organisms
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS): two 
or more of the following:
•	 temperature >38 °C or <36 °C
•	 heart rate >90 beats/minute
•	 respiratory rate >20 breaths/minute or PaCO2 <4.3kPa
•	 white cell count >12 × 109 or <4 × 109 or >10% immature 
forms
Severe sepsis: infections causing SIRS with associated 
organ failure, hypoperfusion or hypotension (systolic BP 
<90 mmHg)
Septic shock: severe sepsis with arterial hypotension 
refractory to fluid replacement
BOX 20.2	
Signs of organ system dysfunction
Neurological dysfunction: altered mental status (reduced 
Glasgow Coma Scale)
Respiratory dysfunction: arterial hypoxaemia (PaO2 
<10kPa) and/or hypercapnia (PaCO2 >6.5kPa); the pres-
ence of infiltrates radiologically and the requirement for 
respiratory support
Cardiovascular dysfunction: ischaemia, tachydysrhythmias, 
systolic hypotension (<90 mmHg) and a requirement for 
vasopressor and/or inotropic support. Increased capillary 
refill times and hyperlactataemia (>2 mmol/L)
Renal dysfunction: acute oliguria (urine output <0.5 mL/
kg/hr) with increased serum creatinine concentration, 
acid base and electrolyte disturbances
Hepatic dysfunction: elevated liver enzymes, hyperbiliru-
binaemia and coagulopathy; hypoglycaemia in severe cases
Gastrointestinal dysfunction: intolerance of enteral feeding, 
ileus, gastrointestinal bleeding and ischaemia
Haematological dysfunction: leukocytosis or leukopenia, 
thrombocytopenia and platelet dysfunction, disseminated 
intravascular coagulation
Endocrine dysfunction: hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal 
axis failure; hyperglycaemia, hypertriglyceridaemia
Immunological dysfunction: hospital-acquired infection
Multi Organ Dysfunction Syndrome (MODS): when two 
or more organs are involved
410	
Clinical biochemistry
Management
The mortality and morbidity of critically ill patients has 
been much improved by the Surviving Sepsis Campaign 
(SSC), an international forum launched in 2004 to im-
prove the management of sepsis. Since the majority of 
patients with SIRS, shock and MODS have infection as 
a contributory factor, appropriate management of sepsis 
is essential.
Immediate care
Immediate measures include removing the source of in-
fection (if practicable), collection of tissues and fluids for 
microbiology and the commencement of antimicrobials. 
Targets in this phase of management include a heart rate 
<90 bpm, systolic BP >90 mmHg (MAP >65 mmHg), a 
urine output >0.5 ml/kg/min and normalisation of serum 
lactate concentration (if previously raised).
Initial antimicrobial therapy must be empirical, on the 
basis of the likely causative organisms until the results of 
culture and sensitivity are known. Factors to consider in-
clude the site of the infection, knowledge of the patient’s 
pre-morbid condition, previous antibiotic exposure and 
local prescribing guidelines. In the case of antibiot-
ics, broad-spectrum agents can often be replaced with a 
tailored regimen once sensitivities are known. This ap-
proach reduces the risk of promoting multi-drug resis-
tance in pathogenic bacteria. Gram staining of specimens 
may reveal bacteria and recently the application of PCR 
(polymerase chain reaction) technology has led to rapid 
diagnostics in some infections.
Organ support
Balanced salt solutions (e.g. Hartmann’s, lactated 
Ringer’s) are the fluids of choice in the resuscitation of 
septic shock. Norepinephrine (noradrenaline) is typically 
the favoured vasopressor (because of its predominant 
α-adrenergic effects), often in combination with the 
vasodilating inotrope, dobutamine. In cases of refrac-
tory shock, vasopressin is a valuable and potent pressor 
agent, usually used in combination with noradrenaline 
and intravenous steroids. Frequently, the use of vaso-
pressin will allow a reduction in the dose of noradrena-
line, potentially limiting some of its deleterious effects. 
Glucocorticoids enhance vascular responsiveness to cate-
cholamines by mechanisms that may include adrenocep-
tor function and prostaglandin action. Hydrocortisone is 
prescribed at a dose of 200 mg daily in divided aliquots 
or as a continuous infusion. Whilst it is not necessary to 
perform a tetracosactide test to identify adrenal suppres-
sion, hydrocortisone should not be commenced in septic 
patients who are not shocked, because of its immunosup-
pressive effects.
Respiratory support should be given as required. 
Patients receiving mechanical ventilation should undergo 
intermittent, planned interruptions to assess the need for 
ongoing assistance. If their underlying condition permits, 
they should also be nursed with the head of the bed ele-
vated to 30–45o as this has been shown to limit aspiration 
and reduce the risk of pneumonia.
Red cell transfusion should generally be reserved 
for patients whose haemoglobin concentration falls to 
<70 g/L, once tissue hypoperfusion has resolved, except 
in particular circumstances such as acute haemorrhage 
or myocardial ischaemia. Platelet transfusion should 
be administered prophylactically in severe sepsis when 
platelet counts are <10 × 109/L, in the absence of severe 
bleeding and 50 × 109/L in the context of active bleed-
ing, surgery or invasive procedures. Intravenous immu-
noglobulins are not recommended in severe sepsis or 
septic shock.
Continuous renal replacement therapy and intermit-
tent haemodialysis have been shown to be of equal ben-
efit in patients with severe sepsis. However, continuous 
therapies facilitate fluid balance in patients who are hae-
modynamically unstable.
In the first 48 h after a diagnosis of severe sepsis or 
septic shock, it is preferable to administer nutrition en-
terally, as tolerated, rather than to fast the patient or 
to provide only intravenous glucose. Current evidence 
suggests that intravenous glucose and low dose enteral 
feeding, increased as tolerated, is preferable to parenteral 
feeding in the first week of illness. Various immunomod-
ulating agents have been used in nutritional formulations 
but none is currently recommended for use in patients 
with sepsis. The reduction in the availability of arginine 
in sepsis has the potential to lower nitric oxide synthesis 
and increase production of superoxide and peroxynitrite. 
Conversely, arginine supplementation has the potential 
to cause vasodilatation and hypotension and studies of its 
use in nutritional preparations have had conflicting re-
sults. Plasma glutamine concentration is reduced during 
severe illness. A previous meta-analysis showed a reduc-
tion in mortality associated with its use but this has not 
been reflected in other studies. Whilst there do not ap-
pear to be adverse effects of glutamine supplementation, 
a large trial (the REDOXS study) is currently in prog-
ress to investigate its use. There is some initial evidence 
that the administration of selenium may have a benefi-
cial effect in SIRS and shock by providing an antioxidant 
defence. Further studies are required before its adminis-
tration can be recommended for this specific purpose, but 
its use as part of standard trace element supplementation 
is endorsed.
There should be protocols in place for the manage-
ment of blood glucose. Initially, blood glucose should 
be monitored every 1–2 h and insulin infusion begun if 
two consecutive concentrations are >10 mmol/L. Once 
glucose concentrations and insulin infusion rates are 
stable, the frequency of monitoring may be reduced to 
every four hours. The upper acceptable limit for blood 
glucose should be 10 mmol/L in this group of patient; the 
stricter target of 6.1 mmol/L advocated previously was 
not associated with reduced mortality, but predisposed to 
hypoglycaemia.
Patients with severe sepsis should receive mechani-
cal prophylaxis against venous thromboembolism using 
graduated compression stockings or mechanical com-
pression devices. In addition, they should receive phar-
macoprophylaxis with low molecular weight heparin 
unless contraindicated, e.g. thrombocytopenia, active 
bleeding, recent intracerebral haemorrhage.
	
20  Metabolic response to stress	
411
Patients with severe sepsis and risk factors for bleed-
ing (e.g. coagulopathy, mechanical ventilation for at 
least 48 h and possibly hypotension) are at risk of stress 
ulceration and should be given prophylaxis using proton 
pump inhibitors in preference to H2 receptor blockers.
Immunomodulation
The body has a non-specific, or innate, immune response 
provided by mechanical barriers such as the skin and gas-
tric acid secretion, and a more specific acquired immune 
response. Both may be altered by treatment, either directly 
or as a secondary effect, e.g. proton pump inhibitors given 
for stress ulceration reduce gastric acidity (potentially 
compromising innate immunity) and nutritional support 
may have a beneficial effect on the immune response.
As the pathogenesis of SIRS, shock and MODS in-
volves immune mediators, it is logical to attempt to treat 
the conditions by their specific modulation. Various 
agents have been tried for this purpose.
The use of glucocorticoids for their vasopressor effect 
in shock has been described above. Their effect on the 
immune response is via a reduction in the production of 
proinflammatory cytokines, particularly TNFα and IL-6, 
although trials of the use of glucocorticoids for immuno-
modulation have not shown great benefit. Similarly, trials 
of anti-cytokine therapies, such as monoclonal antibod-
ies to TNFβ and recombinant IL-1 receptor antagonist, 
have not proven their efficacy.
Inflammatory and procoagulant responses are inti-
mately linked and may lead to widespread injury to vas-
cular endothelium, contributing to MODS. Protein C 
acts to promote fibrinolysis and has inhibitory actions on 
thrombosis and inflammatory responses which make it a 
potential therapeutic target. Activated protein C has been 
used in the treatment of severe sepsis but has now been 
withdrawn due to lack of evidence of benefit on 28-day 
mortality.
Some agents used routinely in the critically ill, e.g. 
sedatives such as propofol and benzodiazepines, and non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory agents, have been shown, 
particularly in animal studies, to modify the immune re-
sponse, although a precise clinical role is unclear. Recent 
evidence suggests that statins may modify the immune 
response but the results of clinical trials to evaluate this 
further are awaited.
One explanation for the lack of clinical benefit from 
immunomodulating therapies may be the redundancy of 
action that exists between the cytokines; blocking of one 
pathway still allows for activation and release of media-
tors by an overlapping route. A further reason could be 
that the timing of the administration of the immuno-
modulating agent may be of critical importance for the 
success of a response.
CONCLUSION
The body’s response to stress tends to be qualitatively 
similar whatever the stress, although the severity of 
the stress affects the response quantitatively. In severe 
stress, responses that appear potentially advantageous 
if limited in extent become harmful. There have been 
improvements in the survival of critically ill patients 
as a result of better organ support and more effective 
treatment of infection, but attempts at specific immu-
nomodulation of the inflammatory response have been 
disappointing.
Further reading
Dellinger RP, Levy MM, Rhodes A et al. Surviving sepsis campaign: 
international guidelines for management of severe sepsis and septic 
shock: 2012. Crit Care Med 2012;41:580–637.
Kvetnansky R, Esther L, Sabban EL et al. Catecholaminergic systems 
in stress: structural and molecular genetic approaches. Physiol Rev 
2009;89:535–606.
412
C H A P T E R  2 1
Disorders of puberty and sex 
development
S. Faisal Ahmed  •  Jane D. McNeilly
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  412
NORMAL SEX DEVELOPMENT  412
NORMAL PUBERTAL DEVELOPMENT  414
Endocrinology of normal puberty  414
Physical signs of normal puberty  414
DISORDERS OF SEX  
DEVELOPMENT  416
Terminology of disorders of sex  
development  416
General principles of management  417
General examination of a newborn with 
­suspected DSD  417
Evaluation of the external genitalia  417
Evaluation of the internal anatomy  418
Investigating the newborn with DSD  418
Investigating the adolescent with  
DSD  419
Steroid measurement and its  
interpretation  420
Anti-Müllerian hormone  420
Insulin-like factor 3  420
Inhibins  421
The human chorionic gonadotrophin  
(hCG) stimulation test  422
The role of the clinical geneticist  422
Classification of disorders of sex 
­development  423
DISORDERS OF PUBERTY  428
Precocious puberty  428
Gonadotrophin dependent puberty  
(central causes)  428
Delayed puberty  429
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism  430
Primary hypogonadism  431
INTRODUCTION
The clinician is most commonly faced with the 
­investigation and management of abnormal sexual devel-
opment at two age periods: birth and puberty. Abnormal 
sexual ­development at birth is the result of a disorder of 
sex development (DSD) presenting with genitalia that 
are either atypical for sex or ambiguous. Disorders of 
sex development can also present at adolescence as ab-
normalities of pubertal development. However, in most 
cases, abnormal pubertal development is due to an altera-
tion in the regulation of puberty in an individual with-
out a DSD. To understand these disorders there is a need 
to understand the normal processes of sex and pubertal 
development.
NORMAL SEX DEVELOPMENT
Male or female sex development is programmed at fer-
tilization, depending on whether the zygote is hetero-
gametic (46XY) or homogametic (46XX). A scheme 
summarizing the embryology and genetic control of sex 
development in the male and female fetus is shown in 
Figure 21.1. The indifferent, or primitive, gonad devel-
ops from a thickened ridge of coelomic epithelium that 
arises from the intermediate mesoderm. Cell precursors 
from this region give rise to the kidneys, adrenals and go-
nads. The adrenogenital primordium comprises a single 
population of steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1) immunore-
active cells. The gonadal ridge becomes populated with 
primordial germ cells that have migrated from the wall 
of the yolk sac.
The first histological expression of fetal testicular de-
velopment is the appearance of seminiferous or sex cords 
at between six and seven weeks of gestation. Surrounding 
the sex cords is the interstitial region, which contains the 
precursors of Leydig cells and also the peritubular my-
oid cells. Primitive interstitial cells differentiate later into 
Leydig cells, an event that coincides with the onset of 
testosterone synthesis by the fetal testis. Steroidogenesis 
is placental human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)-­
dependent and results in the production of fetal testos-
terone concentrations within the normal adult male 
range. The pivotal role for the Y chromosome in male 
sex ­differentiation has been recognized for more than 
	
21  Disorders of puberty and sex development	
413
40 years, based on the phenotype of individuals with sex 
chromosome aneuploidies such as XXY and XO. The 
study of sex-reversed XX males and XY females led to the 
identification of the SRY gene (sex-determining region 
Y) on the short arm of the Y chromosome. That this is 
the prime testis-determining gene is illustrated by the 
introduction of the Sry homologue into a transgenic XX 
mouse and a resulting male phenotype. The majority of 
XX males are positive for the SRY gene, as a result of ter-
minal exchange between the X and Y chromosomes dur-
ing paternal meiosis. In the case of XY females, mutations 
have been identified that disrupt the function of the SRY 
protein, which acts as a transcription factor. However, 
these are found in only 15–20% of patients, indicating 
there are other genes also involved in testis determination. 
SRY acts to up-regulate the transcription of the related 
gene, Sox9 in the Sertoli cell lineage. High concentrations 
of SOX9 protein are maintained in these cells through a 
positive interaction with the secreted molecules fibroblast 
growth factor 9 (FGF9) and prostaglandin D2 (PGD2). 
These molecules are important in securing two other 
necessary steps in testis development: the recruitment of 
other somatic cells to differentiate into the Sertoli cell lin-
eage and, in the case of FGF9, spread of the initial cen-
tral testis-­determining signal to the anterior and posterior 
poles of the gonad. Not only does SOX9 promote testis 
development, but it also antagonizes the Wnt signalling 
pathway and FOXL2, both of which are crucial for ovar-
ian development and which can, themselves, antagonize 
SOX9 action.
With the committed development of the gonad as a tes-
tis, two trophic factors produced by the testis control sub-
sequent differentiation of internal and external genitalia in 
the male. Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) is produced by 
the Sertoli cells and signals through two trans-membrane 
receptors expressed in the mesenchyme that gives rise to 
the Müllerian ducts. Anti-Müllerian hormone acts ipsilat-
erally to cause regression of the Müllerian ducts, the an-
lage (rudimentary precursor) of the uterus, fallopian tubes 
and upper two-thirds of the vagina. Circulating concen-
trations of AMH in males are high in early infancy and 
fall gradually throughout childhood, until they become 
undetectable after puberty; its measurement is useful for 
detecting testicular tissue, ­especially in early childhood. 
Testosterone is the other key trophic factor produced by 
the early developing testis. There is indirect evidence, 
based on luteinizing hormone (LH) receptor mouse 
knockout models and human LH β-chain mutations, that 
production is initially autonomous, but, thereafter, is un-
der the control of hCG and then fetal pituitary gonadotro-
phin secretion. High local concentrations of testosterone 
stabilize Wolffian duct development in the male to dif-
ferentiate into the vas deferens, epididymis and seminal 
vesicles. The external genitalia in both sexes develop from 
a common anlage, comprising the urogenital sinus, genital 
tubercle and swellings and urethral folds. In the male, an-
drogens, again, play the key role in differentiation of these 
primordial structures, to develop as the penis, scrotum and 
opening of the urethra on the glans. Dihydrotestosterone 
(DHT) is necessary to provide an amplification of the an-
drogenic effect. The evidence for DHT dependency is 
illustrated by the predominantly female external genital 
phenotype in 5α-reductase deficiency.
In the absence of the testis-determining factors, tes-
tosterone and AMH, and in the presence of the trophic 
proteins necessary for ovarian development, the gonad 
associated with the 46XX karyotype develops as an ovary 
and the Müllerian ducts differentiate normally into fe-
male internal genital ducts. The external genital anlage, in 
the absence of androgens, remains underdeveloped with 
respect to growth of the genital tubercle and the absence 
of midline fusion of the labioscrotal folds and swellings. 
Gonadal 
development
Genital
development
Intermediate
mesoderm
Testis
WT1, NR5a1, 
NR0b1, Lhx9, Cbx2
Bipotential
gonad
Ovary
Leydig cells
Sertoli cells
Testosterone
AMH
Male internal genitalia
Regression of
Müllerian ducts
Male external genitalia
GATA4, FOG2, WT1, SF1/ 
NR5a1, SRY, PGDS, 
FGFR1, DMRT1, FGF9, 
SOX9, SOX8, MAP3K4 
DHT
WT1, SF-1
AMH-R
LHR
Steroid
synthesis
AR
Development of
Müllerian ducts
WNT4, RSPO1, SOX3,
b-Catenin, BMP2
FIGURE 21.1  ■  Embryology and genetic control of fetal sex development. LHR, LH receptor; AR, androgen receptor; DHT, dihydrotes-
tosterone; AMH-R, anti-Müllerian hormone-receptor.
414	
Clinical biochemistry
The development of the lower part of the vagina from 
canalization of the vaginal plate is incompletely under-
stood, but the process is probably influenced by oestro-
gens. Virilization of the female external genitalia from an 
extraneous source of androgens leaves the development 
of the female internal genitalia intact.
NORMAL PUBERTAL DEVELOPMENT
Endocrinology of normal puberty
The precise trigger that initiates the onset of puberty in 
the human remains an enigma. There is activation of pitu-
itary gonadotrophin secretion both in early fetal life and, 
again, after birth for several months. During this latter 
period, plasma concentrations of gonadotrophins and sex 
steroids may reach values normally observed at puberty. 
Throughout later infancy and childhood, gonadotrophin 
concentrations remain low, although evidence of pulsatile 
LH secretion using more sensitive immunoassays can be 
detected in some children. Consequently, puberty repre-
sents the reactivation of gonadotrophin secretion that has 
been restrained during childhood.
The initial endocrine event at puberty is an increase in 
nocturnal pulsatile LH secretion in response to gonado-
trophin releasing hormone (GnRH) released into the pi-
tuitary portal system. The neurons that release GnRH 
migrate to the hypothalamus, from the medial olfactory 
placode, during fetal development. A failure of such mi-
gration is considered to be the cause of some inherited 
forms of hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism that are as-
sociated with anosmia (Kallman ­syndrome). A GnRH 
pulse generator controls the onset of puberty by causing 
a progressive increase in amplitude and frequency of LH 
pulses, which occurs about one year before the onset of 
physical signs of puberty. The neuroendocrine mecha-
nisms that cause activation of the GnRH generator at 
the appropriate age are extremely complex, but appear 
to involve excitatory amino acids, catecholamines, neu-
ropeptide Y, leptin and ­acetylcholine, as well as ­external 
influences such as nutritional intake. Furthermore, an 
additional factor discovered as a result of studies in pa-
tients with hypogonadotrophic ­hypogonadism, is the kis-
speptin/GPR54 system, which appears to be a gatekeeper 
of reproductive development. GPR54 is a G-protein-
coupled receptor whose ­endogenous ­ligand is a 54-amino 
acid peptide, cleaved from the parent 145-amino acid 
peptide encoded by the ­KISS-1 gene. GPR54-deficient 
mice are infertile and have low circulating gonadotro-
phin concentrations. Mutations in the GPR54 gene cause 
­hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism in humans. It appears 
that GPR54 is one of the key factors in the control of 
puberty. Administration of ­kisspeptin stimulates LH and 
follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) secretion, which can 
be blocked by GnRH antagonists, indicating that the 
kisspeptin/GPR54 system effect on the hypothalamic–­
pituitary–gonadal axis is mediated via GnRH release.
Increased gonadotrophin secretion leads to a gradual 
increase in the secretion of gonadal steroids, principally 
testosterone in males and oestradiol in females. Random, 
daytime sex steroid measurements are seldom predictive 
of pubertal events in an individual, although early morn-
ing testosterone concentration as a reflection of noctur-
nal secretion is more useful. Inhibin B, a marker of Sertoli 
cell function, increases early in puberty and reaches adult 
concentrations by mid-puberty. Spermatogenesis starts 
between 11 and 15 years of age and sperm can be detected 
in early morning urine specimens by 13 years of age.
The attainment of reproductive capacity in the ­female 
is dependent on cyclical gonadotrophin secretion to en-
sure ovulation. Follicle stimulating hormone-induced 
oestrogen secretion, by developing ovarian follicles, 
leads to a positive feedback on LH secretion and a mid-
cycle surge that induces rupture of the mature follicle. 
After ovulation, the luteinized follicle secretes proges-
terone while oestradiol concentrations fall. Inhibin B 
­secretion predominates during the follicular phase, while 
inhibin A secretion is dominant during the luteal phase. 
All these events are coordinated by pulsatile release of 
GnRH ­secretion and modulation of gonadotrophin and 
sex steroid production, by both negative and positive 
feedback loops. It is not surprising that there is ­generally 
a ­1–2-year interval after menarche before the majority 
of girls are ovulating regularly. Ultrasonography can be 
used to assess the development of reproductive func-
tion in girls. Enlargement of the uterus and endometrial 
thickening are evident after birth because of the ­effect 
of maternally derived oestrogens. Multiple ovarian 
­follicular cysts are often seen on ultrasound at this time. 
The effect of increasing ­secretion of oestradiol during 
puberty can be observed by appropriate morphological 
changes in the appearance of the uterus. The prepuber-
tal uterus starts to increase in size from seven years of 
age onwards.
The onset of increased production of dehydroepian-
drosterone (DHEA) and its sulphate (DHEAS) by the 
zona reticularis of the adrenals, between six and eight 
years of age, defines the phenomenon of adrenarche. 
Concentrations of DHEAS thereafter increase through-
out puberty into early adult life in micromolar amounts 
and then start to decline gradually in older age (adreno-
pause). There is no concomitant increase in adrenal glu-
cocorticoid and mineralocorticoid secretion, so ACTH is 
not the primary trophic factor controlling DHEA pro-
duction. Intra-adrenal modulation of steroidogenesis, by 
post-translational regulation of the 17-hydroxylase en-
zyme (by phosphorylation on serine/threonine residues, 
and electron transfer by the P450-oxidoreductase en-
zyme), is the key factor in the production of C19 steroids 
such as DHEA. There is also a relative underexpression 
of the enzyme 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase enzyme 
in the zona reticularis that contributes to a preponder-
ance of Δ
5 steroids. Extra-adrenal factors postulated to 
play a role in adrenarche include prolactin, oestrogens, 
growth factors and cytokines. There is an association be-
tween leptin concentration and the timing of adrenarche 
in obese children.
Physical signs of normal puberty
Puberty is the transitional period between childhood 
and adulthood that spans adolescence and leads to the 
acquisition of reproductive capacity. The time span for 
	
21  Disorders of puberty and sex development	
415
the physical changes to take place is generally 4–5 years, 
but individual variations can result in a time interval of 
2–6 years. This is referred to as the tempo of puberty. 
The age of onset of puberty also varies considerably, with 
epidemiological evidence suggesting that puberty may 
now be starting earlier.
The first sign of puberty in girls is breast develop-
ment, starting, on average, at 11 years with an age range 
of 8–13 years (see Fig. 21.2A). This is termed ‘thelar-
che’ and starts as a small mound of tissue beneath the 
nipple manifest as a breast ‘bud’, which is usually distin-
guishable, on palpation, by its firmness compared with 
the softer and more diffuse texture of subcutaneous fat. 
Further development of the nipple, areola and underly-
ing breast tissue takes place over the ensuing four years 
or so (Tanner stages B2–B5). Epidemiological studies 
conducted in the USA indicate that 25% of girls may 
have already started thelarche by eight years of age. 
However, it is unclear whether misinterpretation of 
adipose tissue as breast development may have skewed 
the data.
Coincident with breast development is the onset of 
growth of pubic hair which may precede thelarche in 
10% of girls. Hair growth usually starts on the labia be-
fore spreading over the mons pubis and is quantified as 
Tanner stages PH2–5. Sometimes there may be further 
growth on the upper medial aspects of the thighs and 
along the linea alba (PH6). Axillary hair starts to appear 
at about 12.5 years of age and takes a further 18 months 
to reach adult distribution.
FIGURE 21.2  ■ Tanner staging of physical development, based on external primary and secondary sexual characteristics in children, 
adolescence and adults. M, menarche; Circuled figures, testicular volume (mL); PHV, peak height velocity; PH, B, G, see text.
Age (years)
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
B5
B4
B3
B2
PH5
PH4
PH3
PH2
PHV
M
I
II
III
IV
V
Girls
I
3
II
III
IV
V
4
10
16
25
Age (years)
9
10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18
G5
G4
G3
G2
PH5
PH4
PH3
PH2
PHV
Boys
416	
Clinical biochemistry
Menarche, the onset of menses, is a relatively late event 
in the pubertal process and occurs at around 12.5–13 years 
of age. This coincides with breast stage B4. A trend in the 
lowering of the age of menarche has occurred in the past, 
but the reduction has only been by a few months during 
the past 30 years. There are racial differences as well as 
geographical variations. The age of menarche tends to be 
slightly higher in Northern than Southern Europe.
Increased growth velocity is a measurable, indirect 
sign of puberty. In girls, peak height velocity (defined as 
the maximum rate of growth achieved during puberty, 
which is usually ~10 cm/year) is achieved relatively early 
in puberty (during breast stages B2–3) and before the 
onset of menarche. By the time of menarche, the major-
ity of adult height has been achieved. Changes in body 
composition also occur, particularly with respect to fat 
distribution.
The first sign of puberty in boys is an increase in tes-
tis size (see Fig. 21.2B). Testicular size can be assessed 
clinically by the use of a series of standard ovoids (the 
Prader orchidometer). Testicular volume remains be-
tween 2–3 mL throughout infancy and childhood, an in-
crease to 4 mL heralds the onset of puberty that occurs, 
on average, at 11.5 years with an age range of 9–14 years. 
Progressive enlargement of the testes takes place over 
three years with testicular volumes reaching up to 25 mL 
in adult life. Leydig cells constitute only a small part of 
testicular volume, the majority being the result of an 
increase in Sertoli cell and seminiferous tubule number 
and size.
Pubic hair growth, which may start as a few scrotal 
hairs, follows closely on testicular development and is 
quantified as Tanner stages PH2–5. Spread of hair up the 
abdominal wall is characteristic in many men and is clas-
sified as stage PH6. Growth of the penis, first in length 
and then in breadth, occurs concomitantly and is rated 
G1–G5. Growth of axillary and facial hair, are both later 
events in puberty, ranging in age from 14 to 16  years. 
‘Breaking’ of the voice is due to enlargement of the lar-
ynx and elongation of the vocal cords and does not occur 
until stages G3–G4.
Peak height velocity in boys corresponds with stages 
G4 and PH4 and testicular volumes of 12–15 mL. This 
occurs, on average, at a chronological age of 14 years, as 
opposed to 12 years in girls. The adult male is, on aver-
age, taller than the adult female by 13 cm. This is partly 
due to the fact that boys start the growth spurt later and 
are, therefore, taller at its onset. In addition, the mag-
nitude of growth achieved during the growth spurt is 
greater in boys (28 cm in males and 20 cm in females). 
Body composition alters in favour of increased muscle 
bulk and relatively less subcutaneous fat.
DISORDERS OF SEX DEVELOPMENT
Terminology of disorders of sex 
development
It is important to define terms used in relation to the 
investigation and management of disorders of sex 
development that present at birth or in childhood. 
Sex assignment (often used interchangeably with gender 
assignment), is the sexing of an infant at birth as be-
ing male or female. This is straightforward in the vast 
majority; indeed, sex assignment is increasingly an ac-
tivity that occurs before birth. Gender identity refers to 
how individuals perceive themselves as being male or 
female, while gender role describes characteristics that 
are sexually dimorphic within a normal population. In 
childhood, for example, male-typical behaviour is at-
tributed to toy preferences being vehicles and soldiers 
as opposed to playing with dolls, generally preferred 
by girls. This rather simplistic illustration of sexual di-
morphism has some physiological underpinning from 
observations of girls’ play behaviour following expo-
sure to androgens in utero. Thus, gender role is more 
male-typical in girls with congenital adrenal hyper-
plasia. There is less convincing evidence that prenatal 
hormones affect gender identity. Sexual orientation re-
fers to the subject of erotic arousal, which may be het-
erosexual, homosexual or bisexual. Gender dysphoria or 
gender identity disorder are terms that describe gender 
dissatisfaction. The phenomenon appears to be more 
common in individuals with disorders of sex develop-
ment than in the general population, but it is difficult 
to identify predisposing factors related to the specific 
disorder.
The use of terminology that is clear and easy to use 
and understand by all health professionals, patients and 
their families is fundamental to the understanding, in-
vestigation and management of affected newborns and 
children. In addition, terminology should respect the 
individual and avoid terms that might cause offence. 
The term ‘intersex’ has had variable connotations even 
among professionals; some employed it as a term that 
covered all affected newborns while at the other end 
of the spectrum, some believed that the term should 
only apply to those where there is complete mismatch 
between chromosomal and anatomic sex. The consen-
sus reached in Chicago in 2005 on the management 
of these patients, stressed the importance of termi-
nology and recommended a substitution for the term 
‘intersex’ for ‘disorder of sex development (DSD)’, 
which is defined as any congenital condition in which 
development of chromosomal, gonadal or anatomic 
sex is atypical. It also recommended the abandon-
ment of terms such as ‘pseudohermaphroditism’ and 
‘true hermaphroditism’. While this new nomenclature 
(Table  21.1) is easier to use and understand, it will 
nevertheless evolve over time as our understanding of 
long-term outcome and molecular aetiology improves. 
Given that genital anomalies may occur as commonly 
as 1 in 300 births and may not always be associated 
with a functional abnormality, some have advocated 
the use of ‘differences’ in preference to the term ‘dis-
order’. The strength of the abbreviation ‘DSD’ is that 
it can be used to cover both differences and disorders 
of sex development. However, the likelihood of this 
difference existing as a disorder will depend on the 
functional implications of the condition, which may 
be heavily influenced by the social and cultural frame-
work within which the child exists.
	
21  Disorders of puberty and sex development	
417
General principles of management
The management of a child with an abnormality of gen-
ital development can often be difficult, particularly in 
patients for whom the sex of rearing is uncertain. The 
initial contact with the parents of a child with a DSD 
is important as first impressions from these encounters 
often persist. A key point to emphasize is that a child 
with a DSD has the potential to become a well-adjusted, 
functional member of society. Establishing a dialogue 
and building rapport with the affected child and the par-
ents, evaluating the child and then developing a logical, 
as well as pragmatic, plan for investigations are central 
to the initial approach and ongoing management. It is 
paramount that any child or adolescent with a suspected 
DSD is assessed by an expert with adequate knowledge 
about the range of variation in the physical appearance 
of genitalia. If there is any doubt, the patient should be 
discussed with the regional team. For most patients, 
particularly in the case of the newborn, the paediatric 
endocrinologist within the regional DSD team acts as 
the first point of contact. The underlying pathophysiol-
ogy of DSD and the strengths and weaknesses of the 
tests that can be performed, should be discussed with 
the parents and child, as appropriate, and tests under-
taken in a timely fashion. With babies in whom there 
is true genital ambiguity, it should be explained to the 
parents that the best course of action may not initially 
be clear, but the healthcare team will work with the fam-
ily to reach the best possible set of decisions in the cir-
cumstances. Finally, in the field of rare conditions, it is 
imperative that the clinician shares the experience with 
others through national and international clinical and 
research collaboration.
General examination of a newborn  
with ­suspected DSD
The physical examination should determine whether 
there are any dysmorphic features and the general health 
of the baby. Affected infants, particularly those who have 
XY DSD, are more likely to be small for gestational age 
and may display other developmental abnormalities. In 
addition, the affected infant should be examined for mid-
line defects which may point towards an abnormality of 
the hypothalamo-pituitary axis. The state of hydration 
and blood pressure should be assessed, as adrenal ste-
roid biosynthetic defects can be associated with a vari-
able extent of salt loss, masculinization and hypertension. 
In congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH), cardiovascular 
collapse with salt loss and hyperkalaemia does not usually 
occur until the second week of life (with salt loss usu-
ally evident from day four) and so will not be apparent 
at birth in the well neonate, but should be anticipated if 
the diagnosis is suspected. Jaundice (both conjugated and 
unconjugated) may be observed in babies with hypopitu-
itarism or cortisol deficiency. Urine should be checked 
for protein as a screen for any associated renal anomaly 
(e.g. Denys–Drash or Frasier syndromes) and a pre-feed 
blood glucose concentration should be measured to ex-
clude hypoglycaemia (suggestive of hypopituitarism, or 
occasionally CAH, e.g. 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydroge-
nase deficiency). Renal tract anomalies, such as uretero-
pelvic junction obstruction, vesicoureteric reflux, pelvic 
or horse-shoe kidney, crossed renal ectopia and renal 
agenesis, are reported to be more common in children 
with DSD.
Evaluation of the external genitalia
If the appearance of the external genitalia is sufficiently 
ambiguous to render sex assignment impossible, or the 
phenotype is not consistent with prenatal genetic tests, 
then investigations are clearly required. However, the 
ability to evaluate external genitalia fully may depend on 
the expertise of the observer and, before presentation to 
a specialist, the label of ambiguous genitalia has often al-
ready been assigned to newborns where the most appro-
priate sex of rearing was not clear to those present at the 
child’s birth. The birth prevalence of genital anomalies 
may be as high as 1 in 300 births but the birth prevalence 
of complex anomalies that may lead to true genital ambi-
guity on expert examination may be as low as 1 in 5000 
births.
Apart from those whose genitalia are truly ambigu-
ous, infants can often be divided into those who overall 
seem to have largely male or female genitalia but with 
some unusual features. However, it is very important to 
bear in mind that a 46XX newborn infant with congeni-
tal adrenal hyperplasia can either present as a girl with 
clitoromegaly or as a boy with bilateral undescended tes-
tes. When evaluating these infants, the clinical features 
of the external genitalia that require examination include 
the presence of gonads in the labioscrotal folds, the fu-
sion of the labioscrotal folds, the size of the phallus and 
the site of the urinary meatus on the phallus, although 
the real site of the urinary meatus may, sometimes, only 
become clear on surgical exploration. These external 
features can be individually scored to provide an ag-
gregate score, the external masculinization score (EMS) 
(see Fig. 21.3A), or they can be graded according to their 
overall description as classically described by Prader 
staging (see Fig. 21.3B).
Infants with suspected DSD who require fur-
ther clinical evaluation and need to be considered for 
TABLE 21.1  Old and new terminologies for 
­abnormal sex development
Previous
Proposed
Intersex
Disorders of sex 
development (DSD)
Male pseudohermaphrodite. 
Undervirilization of an XY 
male, undermasculinization 
of an XY male
46XY DSD
Female pseudohermaphrodite. 
Overvirilization of an XX 
female, masculinization of an 
XX female
46XX DSD
True hermaphrodite
Ovotesticular DSD
XX male or XX sex reversal
46XX testicular DSD
XY sex reversal
46XY complete gonadal 
dysgenesis
418	
Clinical biochemistry
investigation by a specialist, should include those with 
isolated perineal hypospadias, isolated micropenis, iso-
lated clitoromegaly, any form of familial hypospadias 
and those who have a combination of genital anomalies 
with an EMS of less than 11. This will avoid unneces-
sary detailed investigations of boys with isolated glan-
dular or mid-shaft hypospadias and boys with unilateral 
inguinal testis. The coexistence of a systemic metabolic 
disorder, associated malformations or dysmorphic fea-
tures would lower the threshold for investigation as 
would a family history of consanguinity, stillbirths, 
multiple miscarriages, fertility problems, genital abnor-
malities, hernias, delayed puberty, genital surgery, un-
explained deaths and the need for steroid replacement. 
In addition, maternal health and drug exposure during 
pregnancy, and the pregnancy history itself, may hold 
key information.
Evaluation of the internal anatomy
Examination and assessment by a paediatric surgeon with 
experience of DSD is critically important for defining 
the internal and the external anatomy in the affected pa-
tient. Combining examination with endoscopic visualiza-
tion and radiological assessment can provide information 
on the location and state of the gonads, the urogenital 
sinus and Müllerian structures. Ultrasonography is the 
first-line imaging modality but the reliability is child and 
operator dependent. In the neonate the uterus, ovaries 
and adrenals should be identifiable. In the adolescent, it 
is sometimes difficult to confirm the presence of a pre-
pubertal uterus by ultrasonography and there may be 
a place for repeat imaging after a six-month course of 
oestrogen. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may be 
reserved for patients where ultrasonography has failed 
to delineate the relationship of the Müllerian structures 
and where there are abnormalities of the urinary tract. 
In adolescents, MRI can delineate structural anomalies 
such as hydrometrocolpos or hydronephrosis and iden-
tify secretory tumours. Nowadays, the ‘genitogram’ 
has been superseded by endoscopic examination of the 
genital tract (genitoscopy), which provides a more de-
tailed and thorough assessment. Laparoscopy is a very 
effective method of visualizing the internal sex organs 
and facilitates direct inspection, biopsy or excision of 
intra-abdominal gonads. In 46XY DSD, laparoscopy is 
clearly indicated in all children with impalpable testes 
as the gonads need to be identified and brought down to 
the scrotum if possible.
Investigating the newborn with DSD
In all infants with ambiguous genitalia and/or bilateral 
impalpable gonads, a first tier of investigations should be 
undertaken to define the sex chromosomes, delineate the 
internal genitalia by pelvic ultrasound and to exclude life-
threatening congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) – the 
commonest cause of ambiguous genitalia of the newborn. 
This first tier should, therefore, also include plasma glu-
cose, 17OH-progesterone (17OHP), and measurement 
of sodium and potassium. 17OH-Progesterone measure-
ment is usually unreliable before the age of 36 h and in 
the salt losing form of CAH, electrolytes usually do not 
become abnormal before day four of life. The results of 
FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization) analysis using 
Y- and X-specific probes should be available within one 
working day and the 17OHP results should be available 
within a maximum of two working days in all specialist 
DSD centres. In situations where the level of suspicion 
of CAH is very high and the infant needs immediate ste-
roid replacement therapy, samples should be collected 
and stored before starting therapy. These should be of a 
sufficient volume to assess 17OHP, testosterone, andro-
stenedione and, possibly, renin, in that order of priority. 
At least one spot or 24-h urine sample for a urine steroid 
profile should be collected before starting therapy. The 
3
2
1
0
Scrotal
fusion
Micro
penis
Urethral
meatus
Right
gonad
Left
gonad
No
Yes
Prox
Abs
Abs
Mid
Ing
Ing
Scro
Scro
Distal
Yes
No
Normal
0.5
0
1
1.5
I
II
III
IV
V
Normal
Normal
A
B
FIGURE 21.3  ■  (A) External Masculinization Score. Each individual feature of the genitalia (phallus size, labioscrotal fusion, site of the 
gonads and location of urethral meatus) can be individually scored to provide a score out of 12. Microphallus refers to a phallus 
smaller than normal for age. Scro, scrotal; Ing, inguinal; Abs, abdominal or absent on examination. (B) Differential virilization of the 
external genitalia using the staging system of Prader from normal female (left) to normal male (right).
	
21  Disorders of puberty and sex development	
419
results of these initial investigations will often dictate the 
second tier of investigations.
In an infant with impalpable gonads, a karyotype 
of 46XX, a significantly elevated plasma 17OHP con-
centration and the presence of a uterus, CAH due to 
21-­hydroxylase deficiency is the most likely diagnosis. 
A urine steroid profile can confirm this diagnosis and 
identify other rarer forms of CAH, which may also be as-
sociated with a raised 17OHP concentration in the new-
born. In infants with sex chromosomes other than 46XX, 
a second tier of investigations is necessary to determine 
the presence of testes and the adequacy of androgen pro-
duction and action. These tests include measurement of 
AMH, an hCG stimulation test, further imaging and lapa-
roscopy. Confirmation of a specific diagnosis will often 
require biochemical identification of a defect in the an-
drogen biosynthesis pathway and detailed genetic analysis.
Investigating the adolescent with DSD
Adolescents typically present with a suspected DSD in 
three ways – as a girl with primary amenorrhea (with 
or without breast development), as a girl who viril-
izes at puberty, or, as a boy with pubertal delay (see 
Fig. 21.4). The potential psychological impact of a thor-
ough physical examination and medical photography 
on an adolescent should be carefully considered and, 
in some circumstances may be appropriate only under 
an anaesthetic. In girls with primary amenorrhoea, in-
vestigations should be considered at the age of 14 years 
if there is no pubertal development and at 16 years if 
other aspects of puberty, particularly breast develop-
ment, have progressed normally. History should include 
a family history and an assessment of coexisting chronic 
disease, exercise and weight changes. Physical exami-
nation should include measurement of blood pressure, 
height and weight and assessment of secondary sexual 
characteristics including clitoral enlargement. Vaginal 
examination to assess vaginal length is rarely indicated 
if imaging is informative and, if carried out, should be 
clearly explained and performed by a gynaecologist. 
An initial investigation screen should comprise mea-
surements of LH, FSH, prolactin, thyroid stimulating 
hormone (TSH), free thyroxine (FT4), sex hormone 
binding globulin (SHBG), androstenedione, oestradiol 
and testosterone, and transabdominal pelvic ultrasound, 
performed by a sonographer with experience of adoles-
cent appearances. Raised gonadotrophins, or an absent 
uterus in the presence of normal breast development, 
are indications for karyotyping.
The appearance of clitoromegaly and hirsutism at pu-
berty, in the presence of primary amenorrhoea, is a classi-
cal presentation of two 46XY DSDs: 17β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase type 3 deficiency and 5α-reductase type 
2 deficiency. It is less typical of partial androgen insensi-
tivity syndrome (PAIS), which is usually associated with 
ambiguous genitalia at birth. Müllerian structures will 
not be detectable in any of these conditions. In partial 
gonadal dysgenesis and ovotesticular DSD, mild clito-
romegaly that may have been present at birth but may 
have been overlooked, becomes a more prominent fea-
ture at adolescence. The differential diagnosis would also 
High
Absent
Present
Normal
Uterus ultrasound
Breast development?
Delayed
FSH
Low or
normal
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
Hypothalamic amenorrhoea
46XY – AIS
46XX – Disorders of Müllerian
             development
Gonadal dysgenesis
46XX – Ovarian failure
45X    – Turner syndrome
46XY – Swyer syndrome
– PCOS
– Outflow obstruction
Primary amenorrhoea
FIGURE 21.4  ■  Approach to investigating adolescent girls with primary amenorrhoea. AIS, androgen insensitivity syndrome; PCOS, 
polycystic ovary syndrome.
420	
Clinical biochemistry
include CAH and androgen-secreting tumours of the 
ovary or adrenal gland, but in these conditions Müllerian 
structures are present. Investigations include measure-
ment of LH, FSH, DHEAS, SHBG, androstenedione, 
testosterone, dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and 17OHP. 
A 24 h urine collection for urinary steroid profiling will 
confirm 5α-reductase type 2 deficiency, CAH or adreno-
cortical tumour. A pelvic ultrasound will assess the pres-
ence of a uterus and determine the need for a karyotype.
Although the commonest cause of delayed puberty 
is constitutional delay, all boys with delayed puberty 
who are over the age of 14 years should be assessed. 
Overweight boys need careful examination so that a 
buried penis is not mistaken for micropenis. Rarely, 
PAIS, a disorder of testosterone biosynthesis or mild 
forms of testicular dysgenesis can present in this age 
group; often there is a history of hypospadias repair 
or orchidopexy. Investigations include a bone age and 
measurements of LH, FSH, testosterone and pro-
lactin. For those with raised gonadotrophins, karyo-
type should be performed to exclude disorders such 
as Klinefelter syndrome (47XXY and variants) or 
45XO/46XY mosaicism.
Steroid measurement and its interpretation
Steroid hormone analysis is a vital component of the bio-
chemical evaluation of the child with DSD but the method 
of analysis can have a significant impact on the result. 
Analysis is most often performed by non-extraction (direct) 
immunoassays on automated platforms and these are sub-
ject to concerns of analytical specificity and variability be-
tween manufacturers. Liquid chromatography linked with 
tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) allows multiple 
analyte analysis from a single sample whilst maintaining 
analytical specificity. Thus, in patients with DSD steroid 
measurement by either LC-MS/MS or immunoassay after 
organic solvent extraction is preferred. As these methods 
tend to be labour intensive, close communication between 
the clinical and laboratory personnel within the DSD team 
is vital to ensure timely availability of results.
Urinary steroid profile (USP) analysis by gas chro-
matography mass spectrometry (GC-MS) provides 
qualitative and quantitative data on excretion of steroid 
metabolites (see Fig. 21.5). It is ideal for detecting altered 
steroid metabolites, especially in patients with CAH, 
where the activity of a combination of steroidogenic en-
zymes can produce unusual metabolites which can cross-
react in traditional direct serum assays. The diagnosis of 
rarer forms of CAH such as P450 oxidoreductase defi-
ciency (ORD) is best established using urinary GC-MS 
analysis as it allows for concurrent determination of all 
adrenal-derived steroid metabolites. As concentrations 
of gonadotrophins, androgens and precursors fluctuate 
markedly over the first few months of life it may be appro-
priate to consider an early neonatal collection as well as 
further samples at a later stage. A urine sample can be fro-
zen and stored for many years and may help with a review 
of the diagnosis at a later stage. Urinary steroid profiling 
is not appropriate for suspected cases of 5α-reductase type 
2 deficiency until after three months of age as diagnostic 
ratios of 5β to 5α reduced metabolites are not detectable 
before then. Infants, particularly boys, normally have sig-
nificant changes in steroid and other endocrine hormone 
concentrations during the first 100 days of life. In boys, 
serum testosterone and DHT may ­initially be high at 
birth but decline to <1 nmol/L and undetectable, respec-
tively by around day 30. Concentrations then rise to peak 
at day 70 before declining to normal prepubertal values. 
These normal variations may influence the interpreta-
tion of sex steroid and gonadotrophin measurements as 
well as the results of an hCG stimulation test (see p. 422). 
Furthermore, the actual value for the hormone concen-
tration will vary depending on the assay methodology; it 
is therefore essential that age and method-related refer-
ence ranges are available to facilitate appropriate inter-
pretation of results.
Anti-Müllerian hormone
Anti-Müllerian hormone, also known as Müllerian inhib-
iting substance, is strongly expressed in Sertoli cells from 
the time of testicular differentiation to puberty and to a 
much lesser degree in granulosa cells from birth to meno-
pause. Measurement of AMH concentration in the adult 
female is used to assess ovarian reserve. Published infor-
mation on circulating AMH concentrations have to be 
interpreted with caution owing to differences in primary 
antibody, standard calibration and units used for measure-
ment in individual immunoassays. In boys, AMH is de-
tectable at birth at much higher circulating concentrations 
than in girls and these concentrations rise during infancy 
before gradually declining at puberty. Therefore, it may 
be helpful to repeat AMH measurement later in infancy 
if a newborn boy is found to have a low concentration. 
As summarized in Table 21.2, measurement of AMH is 
a powerful tool to assess Sertoli cell activity in children 
with suspected DSD and may also have diagnostic util-
ity in conditions associated with androgen deficiency or 
insensitivity.
Insulin-like factor 3
Insulin-like factor 3 (INSL3) is one of the hormones se-
creted by the Leydig cells in the testis, and plays a piv-
otal role in testicular descent during fetal development. 
In males, circulating INSL3 concentrations display a 
characteristic pattern with a transient perinatal increase, 
low concentrations during childhood, increasing during 
puberty with highest concentrations found in adulthood 
when it is expressed constitutively. Insulin-like factor 3 is 
increasingly being recognized as a more sensitive marker 
of current Leydig cell differentiation and function than 
testosterone and, thus, has potential clinical value when 
used as an adjunct to standard investigations for DSD 
and may avoid reliance on hCG stimulation tests to as-
sess testicular function adequately. In females, INSL3 is 
produced by theca cells and the corpus luteum, therefore 
concentrations are undetectable until puberty, when active 
ovarian cycling occurs. Circulating INSL3 concentrations 
are significantly lower in females than males. Lack of age-
appropriate reference values, robust, sensitive commercial 
immunoassays and larger-scale studies are major barriers 
to the use of INSL3 in routine practice.
	
21  Disorders of puberty and sex development	
421
Inhibins
Inhibins, produced by granulosa and theca cells of the 
ovary and Sertoli cells of the testes, play an important 
role in the negative feedback control of pituitary gonad-
otrophin secretion. The two major isoforms present in 
­circulation are inhibin A and B. In human males, inhibin B, 
a marker of Sertoli cell function, is the only biologically 
active form present. After an initial rise in concentration 
shortly after birth, inhibin B remains low until the on-
set of puberty, when increasing concentrations denote 
Sertoli cell maturation and accurately reflect spermato-
genesis. In females, both inhibin A and B are produced. 
Inhibin B concentrations show a biphasic pattern with a 
Cholesterol
outer
mitochondrial membrane
inner
StAR
Pregnenolone
HSD3B2
Dehydroepi-
androsterone
HSD3B2
Cholesterol
Pregnenediol
CYP11A1
ADR/Adx
11-deoxycorticosterone
CYP11B2
ADR/Adx
Progesterone
CYP21A2
17OH-Pregnenolone
HSD3B2
Pregnenetriol
DHEA, 16αOH-DHEA 
Androsterone, Etiocholanolone
Androstenedione
HSD17B
Oestrone
OESTRADIOL
HSD17B
Androsterone,
Etiocholanolone
Testosterone
DIHYDROTESTOSTERONE
SRD5A2
Androsterone,
Etiocholanolone
Oestriol
Androsterone
Pregnanediol
THDOC, 
5αTHDOC
11-deoxycortisol
*
CYP11B1
ADR/Adx
THS
Pregnanetriolone
Cortisol
THF, 5αTHF
Corticosterone
CYP11B2
ADR/Adx
THA THB
5αTHA, 5αTHB
18OH-corticosterone
CYP11B2
ADR/Adx
180H-THA
ALDOSTERONE
THALDO
POR
17OH-Progesterone
CYP21A2
POR
CYP17A1
POR
SULT2A1
DHEA-S
PAPSS2
CYP17A1
POR
b5
CYP17A1
Oestrogens
Androgens
Glucocorticoids
Mineralocorticoids
Preliminary steps in
glucocorticoid synthesis
POR
b5
CYP19A1
POR
CYP19A1
POR
21-deoxycortisol
CYP17A1
POR
Pregnanetriol 
17OH-pregnanolone
HSD11B1
H6PDH
HSD11B2
Cortisone
THE
FIGURE 21.5  ■  Synthesis and metabolism of hormonal steroids. This figure illustrates the formation of the major hormone classes from 
cholesterol. Steroid names in conventional script are steroid hormones and precursors; those in italics are urinary metabolites of the 
aforementioned. The major transformative enzymes are in rectangular boxes, the cofactor (‘facilitator’) enzymes in ovals. Mitochondrial 
CYP type I enzymes requiring electron transfer via adrenodoxin reductase (ADR) and adrenodoxin (Adx) CYP11A1, CYP11B1, CYP11B2, 
are marked with a labelled box ADR/Adx. Microsomal CYP type II enzymes receive electrons from P450 oxidoreductase (POR), 
CYP17A1, CYP21A2, CYP19A1, are marked by circled POR. The 17,20-lyase reaction catalyzed by CYP17A1 requires in addition to 
POR also cytochrome b5 indicated by a circled b5. Similarly, hexose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase (H6PDH) is the ­cofactor-generating 
enzyme for 11β-HSD1. The asterisk (*) indicates the 11-hydroxylation of 17OHP to 21-deoxycortisol in 21-­hydroxylase deficiency. 
The conversion of androstenedione to testosterone is catalysed by HSD17B3 in the gonad and AKR1C3 (HSD17B5) in the adrenal. 
StAR, steroidogenic acute regulatory protein; CYP11A1, P450 side-chain cleavage enzyme; HSD3B2, 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydro-
genase type 2; CYP17A1, 17α-hydroxylase; CYP21A2, 21-hydroxylase; CYP11B1, 11β-hydroxylase; CYP11B2, aldosterone synthase; 
HSD17B, 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase; CYP19A1, P450 aromatase; SRD5A2, 5α-reductase type 2; SULT2A1, sulfotransferase 
2A1; PAPPS2, 3′-phosphoadenosine 5′-phosphosulfate synthase 2; TH, tetrahydro. With permission: Krone et al. J Steroid Biochem Mol 
Biol 2010; 121:496–504.
422	
Clinical biochemistry
peak at around three months, a pre-pubertal quiescent 
phase and a gradual rise several years prior to the onset 
of puberty, suggesting pre-pubertal increase in follicular 
activity. Inhibin A becomes detectable only in the latter 
stages of puberty. During the menstrual cycle, inhibin B 
predominates during the follicular phase reflecting re-
cruitment of pre-antral follicles, whereas inhibin A is the 
major isoform produced during the luteal phase, being 
secreted by dominant follicles and the corpus luteum.
Original radioimmunoassays for inhibins were not 
able to distinguish between non-biologically active free 
alpha inhibin and biologically active inhibin A or B. 
Therefore, it was not until the development of sensitive 
and specific immunoassays for inhibin A and B that their 
potential diagnostic utility in various fields of reproduc-
tive endocrinology was truly recognized. When used in 
combination with standard baseline investigations of re-
productive function, inhibin B has considerable potential 
in aiding diagnoses of disorders of pubertal development, 
(delay and precocity) and premature ovarian and testicu-
lar failure.
The human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) 
stimulation test
Stimulation with hCG allows the identification of func-
tioning testicular tissue, as well as biosynthetic defects in 
testosterone synthesis (see Fig. 21.6). However, it is an 
invasive test which should only be performed as a second-
line investigation after discussion with the paediatric en-
docrinologist in the regional DSD team. Most protocols 
for hCG stimulation in the UK use intramuscular hCG 
1000–1500 units on three consecutive days. This can be 
followed by further hCG stimulation with 1500 units on 
two days a week for the following two weeks. In young 
infants and older children, three days of hCG stimulation 
may be sufficient. In the very young infant with an intrin-
sically active gonadal axis, an hCG stimulation test may 
not be necessary if serial blood samples show raised se-
rum testosterone concentrations. A testosterone response 
to hCG may be labelled as normal if absolute testosterone 
concentrations reach a level that is above the upper limit 
of the normal prepubertal range, or rise by more than 
twice the baseline value. As a minimum, other andro-
gens that should be assessed include dihydrotestosterone 
(DHT) and androstenedione. For these two metabolites, 
the post-hCG, day four sample is more important than 
the pre-hCG sample. Following prolonged hCG stimula-
tion there is no additional benefit of analysing a sample 
for these two metabolites on day 22. However, a day 22 
sample collected for testosterone measurement can be 
stored and used to measure DHT or androstenedione if 
analysis was not achieved on day four. In the presence of 
a poor testosterone response following hCG stimulation, 
assessment of adrenal function by a standard short tetra-
cosactide stimulation test should be considered. There is 
currently insufficient evidence to recommend that every 
child with XY DSD should have a tetracosactide stimula-
tion test, but clinicians should be aware of the clear asso-
ciation between some forms of DSD and primary adrenal 
insufficiency. They should consider thorough assessment 
of adrenal function in children with diagnoses where an 
association has already been described and in children 
with any clinical suspicion of adrenal insufficiency, espe-
cially those with low steroid precursors on USP.
The role of the clinical geneticist
Establishing a specific molecular diagnosis is helpful in the 
clinical management of patients and in offering accurate 
genetic counselling for the family. However, the num-
ber of diagnostic gene tests that are available in clinically 
­accredited DNA laboratories in the UK, or internationally, 
is limited and testing is costly. As developments in DNA 
and chromosomal analysis accelerate biomedical research, 
many techniques such as multiplex ligation-dependent 
probe amplification (MLPA) and comparative genomic 
hybridization (CGH) have the potential to become rou-
tine in clinical practice. Next generation DNA sequenc-
ing platforms will allow whole genome sequencing for rare 
diseases to become a reality at a realistic price. The clinical 
geneticist at the specialist DSD centre is correctly placed 
TABLE 21.2  Interpretation of serum Anti-Müllerian hormone concentrations in DSD
Serum AMH
Testicular tissue
Interpretation
Undetectable
Absent
46XX,CAH
Complete gonadal dysgenesis
PMDS due to AMH gene defect
Within female age-related reference range
Usually absent
46XX, CAH
Dysgenetic testes or ovotestes
Below male/above female age-related 
reference range
Present
Dysgenetic testes
Ovotestes
Within male age-related reference range
Usually normal
Non-specific XY DSD
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
PMDS due to AMH-R defect
46XX testicular DSD
Ovotestes
Above male age-related reference range
Present
AIS especially complete androgen insensitivity syndrome
5α-reductase deficiency
Testosterone biosynthetic defect
Leydig cell hypoplasia
PMDS, Persistent Müllerian duct syndrome; AIS, androgen insensitivity syndrome; CAH, congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
	
21  Disorders of puberty and sex development	
423
to judge which technique is appropriate and cost-effective 
for each clinical situation. DNA can be stored indefinitely 
with consent, so when further diagnostic testing oppor-
tunities arise, aliquots of DNA can be accessed, avoiding 
repeated venepuncture. If a molecular diagnosis is reached 
in a research laboratory, then confirmation by a clinically 
accredited laboratory should be sought where possible, 
before disclosing results to the family. Close involvement 
of the clinical genetics service can ensure that the multi-
disciplinary team covers all aspects of genetic counselling, 
including provision of information to the family, the mode 
of inheritance of the disorder and the choices or options 
available for dealing with this risk. Established links with 
the clinical genetics service are also essential when consid-
ering any prenatal investigations or interventions.
Classification of disorders of sex 
development
XX DSD
46XX DSD can be classified into disorders of ovarian 
development, conditions with androgen excess and other 
syndromes, which are often associated with other devel-
opmental abnormalities (Table 21.3).
Disorders of androgen excess
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia is the commonest 
cause of 46XX DSD with ambiguous genitalia in the 
­neonatal period or early infancy; it is characterized by 
­androgen excess, a variable alteration in glucocorticoid 
and mineralocorticoid function and a specific profile 
of steroid hormones. A urinary steroid profile can 
identify the enzyme defects, including deficiency of 
21α-hydroxylase (90–95% of cases), 11β-hydroxylase 
(4–8% of cases), 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
type 2 (rare) and P450 oxidoreductase (unknown 
prevalence). In its most severe form, 21α-hydroxylase 
deficiency presents as an acute salt-wasting crisis dur-
ing the second or third week of life. Early biochemi-
cal features are hyperkalaemic acidosis, and increased 
urinary sodium excretion before plasma sodium starts 
to fall. P450 oxidoreductase deficiency (ORD) mani-
fests biochemically as apparent combined CYP17A1 
and CYP21A2 deficiency, sometimes also resembling 
CYP19A1 (aromatase) deficiency. Unlike other forms 
of CAH, ORD is characterized by increased androgen 
concentrations only during the prenatal and early neo-
natal period, after which sex hormone deficiency de-
velops rapidly. Further details of these enzyme defects 
are outlined in Table 21.4.
46XX DSD also includes disorders of gonadal devel-
opment including 46XX ovotesticular DSD and 46XX 
testicular DSD. 46XX ovotesticular DSD refers to the 
presence of both ovarian tissue containing follicles and 
testicular tissue, previously termed ‘true hermaphro-
ditism’. It commonly presents at birth with ambiguous 
genitalia and progressive virilization during puberty and 
the majority of such patients are raised as boys. The in-
ternal genitalia usually comprise a uterus and genital 
ducts, which have developed according to the nature of 
Low
Low T and
low precursors
Prolonged HCG
stimulation1
CYP17A1 def
POR def
HSD3B2 def
HSD17B3 def
Low T and
low precursors
Low T and
high precursors
High T, low DHT
High Ur 5b:5a
Standard HCG stimulation
High/normal/low T
normal DHT
normal/high AMH
Poor functional response to T
Normal
Tetracosactide stimulated cortisol response2
LHR
Gon dysg
SF-1
StAR
P450scc
SF-1
HSD17B3
CYP17A1
POR
HSD3B2
SRD5A2
AR
Low
Normal
FIGURE 21.6  ■  Interpretation of the results of the human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) stimulation test when investigating XY DSD 
and pointers for consideration of prolonged hCG and adrenocorticotropin hormone stimulation. 
1Prolonged hCG stimulation test 
should be considered in those cases where there is a poor testosterone (T) response to a standard hCG stimulation test. 
2A tetraco-
sactide stimulation test should be considered in those patients who show a poor testosterone response to hCG stimulation. 46XY 
children with lipoid congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to a steroidogenic acute regulatory defect or P450scc deficiency due to a 
CYP11A1 defect will have female genitalia and present in a salt-losing state in the first days or weeks of life before a tetracosactide 
test is performed. Gon dysg, gonadal dysgenesis; for other abbreviations, see text and  Table 21.5.
424	
Clinical biochemistry
TABLE 21.3  A classification system for DSD
Sex chromosome DSD
46XY DSD
46XX DSD
A: 45XO (Turner syndrome 
and variants)
A: Disorders of gonadal (testicular) development
1.	 Complete gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer 
syndrome)
2.	Partial gonadal dysgenesis
A: Disorders of gonadal (ovarian) 
development
1.	 Ovotesticular DSD
2.	Testicular DSD (e.g. SRY+, dup SOX9)
B: 47XXY (Klinefelter 
syndrome and variants)
B: Disorders in androgen synthesis or action
1.	 Androgen biosynthesis defect (e.g. 
17-­hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency, 
­5α-reductase deficiency, StAR mutations)
2.	Defect in androgen action (e.g. CAIS, PAIS)
B: Androgen excess
1.	 Fetal (e.g. 21-hydroxylase deficiency, 
11-hydroxylase deficiency)
2.	Fetoplacental (aromatase deficiency, POR 
deficiency)
C: 45XO/46XY (mixed 
gonadal dysgenesis, 
ovotesticular DSD)
C: Other (e.g. severe hypospadias, cloacal 
exstrophy)
C: Other (e.g. cloacal exstrophy, vaginal 
atresia, MURCS, other syndromes)
D: 46XX/46XY (chimeric, 
ovotesticular DSD)
 
 
CAIS, complete androgen insensitivity syndrome; MURCS, Müllerian duct aplasia, renal aplasia, cervicothoracic somite dysplasia; PAIS, 
partial androgen insensitivity syndrome; POR, P450-oxidoreductase deficiency; StAR, steroidogenic acute regulatory protein.
TABLE 21.4  Characteristics of 46XX disorders of sex development due to androgen excess
 
Inheritance 
and gene
Genitalia
Wolffian 
duct 
deriv.
Müllerian 
duct 
deriv.
Gonads
Typical signs and 
symptoms
Hormone profile
21-hydroxylase  
deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive, 
CYP21A2
Ambiguous
Absent
Normal
Ovary
Severe adrenal 
insufficiency in 
infancy ± salt 
loss; moderate 
to severe 
androgenization 
at birth; ± 
pigmentation
Decreased cortisol and/or 
mineralocorticoids
Increased 
17-hydroxyprogesterone, 
21-deoxycortisol, 
androstenedione, 
testosterone, and/or 
plasma renin (activity/
concentration)
11β-hydroxylase 
deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive, 
CYP11B1
Ambiguous
Absent
Normal
Ovary
Adrenal insufficiency 
in infancy; 
moderate 
to severe 
androgenization 
at birth; arterial 
hypertension 
often developing 
at different ages
Decreased cortisol, 
corticosterone, 
aldosterone, and/or 
plasma renin (activity/
concentration)
Increased 11-deoxycortisol, 
11-deoxycorticosterone, 
androstenedione, 
testosterone
3β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase 
II deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive, 
HSD3B2
Commonly 
clitoromegaly 
or mild 
virilization, 
also normal
Absent
Normal
Ovary
Severe adrenal 
insufficiency in 
infancy ± salt loss, 
androgenization 
during childhood 
and puberty, 
premature 
pubarche
Increased concentrations of 
Δ
5 C21- and C19- steroids, 
17- hydroxypregnenolone 
and DHEA suppressible 
by dexamethasone
P450 
oxidoreductase 
deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive, 
POR
Ambiguous or 
normal  
female
Absent
Normal
Ovary
Variable 
androgenization at 
birth and puberty, 
glucocorticoid 
deficiency, 
features of skeletal 
malformations.
Maternal 
androgenization 
during pregnancy 
onset second 
trimester possible
Combined P450c17 and 
P450c21 insufficient, 
normal or low 
cortisol with poor 
response to ACTH 
stimulation, elevated 
17-hydroxyprogesterone, 
testosterone, 
progesterone and 
corticosterone; low 
oestradiol
P450 aromatase 
deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive, 
CYP19A1
Ambiguous
Absent
Normal
Ovary
Delayed bone age, 
development 
of ovarian cysts 
during infancy, 
childhood and 
puberty.
Maternal 
androgenization 
during pregnancy
High androgens in cord 
blood, androgens 
may stay elevated or 
normalize soon after birth
Adapted from DSD Guidelines Clinical Endocrinology 2011; 75:12–26.
	
21  Disorders of puberty and sex development	
425
the ipsilateral gonad. The minority of infants raised as 
girls have breast development at puberty and may also 
menstruate. Fertility has been reported in some cases. 
In contrast, individuals with 46XX testicular DSD usu-
ally have a normal male phenotype and absent Müllerian 
structures and are often diagnosed after karyotype analy-
sis during investigation for infertility. In 46XX testicular 
DSD, about 80–90% of patients will have Y chromo-
somal material including a translocated SRY gene, which 
is only rarely detected in 46XX ovotesticular DSD. In 
other patients with 46XX testicular DSD, duplications of 
the SOX9 gene and mutations of the RSOP1 gene have 
been described. In patients with the suspicion of 46XX 
ovotesticular DSD, there is a need to assess the functional 
potential of testicular and ovarian tissue by a combination 
of biochemical testing, imaging and surgical exploration.
Disorders of Müllerian development are another 
group of 46XX DSD and in these patients ovarian func-
tion is usually normal but often associated with cloa-
cal anomalies and other characteristic malformations. 
Although most cases of Müllerian development disorders 
are not associated with androgen excess, the presence of 
the latter, particularly in the adolescent, should alert the 
clinician to a possible abnormality of the WNT4 gene.
XY DSD with low testosterone and low  
precursor concentrations
The differential diagnosis of 46XY DSD associated with 
low testosterone and precursor concentrations includes: 
defects occurring early in steroid synthesis (steroido-
genic acute regulatory (StAR) protein, P450 side-chain 
cleavage (scc) enzyme/CYP11A1, sometimes Smith–
Lemli–Optiz/DHCR7); LH receptor defects (LHCGR), 
and partial and complete forms of gonadal (testicular) 
­dysgenesis (Table 21.5).
Of note, complete or partial combined 17α-
hydroxylase/17,20-lyase deficiency (CYP17A1) may also 
present with ‘low testosterone and precursor’ concentra-
tions if DHEAS and androstenedione are the only inter-
mediates measured. The actual diagnosis can be reached 
by assessment of adrenal function by measuring ACTH, 
tetracosactide-stimulated cortisol, plasma renin activ-
ity (PRA), 11-deoxycorticosterone (DOC), aldosterone, 
Δ5-(pregnenolone, 17OHPreg) and Δ4-(progesterone, 
17OHP) precursors or by urine steroid analysis. Isolated 
17,20-lyase deficiency and ORD might also be diagnosed 
by this approach. Proximal blocks (StAR, P450scc) in the 
pathway affect steroidogenesis in the adrenal gland as 
well as the developing gonad.
LH receptor defects (‘Leydig cell hypoplasia’) typi-
cally result in elevated basal LH concentrations, hyper-
responsive LH to GnRH stimulation, low testosterone 
and precursor concentrations and impaired androgen re-
sponse to hCG stimulation. No Müllerian structures will 
be present and adrenal function is normal. A spectrum 
of phenotypes has been reported including ambiguous 
genitalia and micropenis. In some patients, basal LH may 
not be elevated when the hypothalamo–pituitary–gonadal 
axis is quiescent (six months to late childhood).
In complete gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer syndrome), 
children will usually have a female phenotype with 
intra-abdominal streak gonads. In some situations, ovo-
testes or even ovaries may be found. Müllerian structures 
are usually present owing to impaired AMH secretion in 
early fetal life. Androgens and their precursor concentra-
tions will be low, LH elevated, depending on age, and a 
poor or absent testosterone response to hCG stimulation 
is seen. Anti-Müllerian hormone concentrations will be 
low or undetectable. Adrenal function is usually normal, 
unless the underlying defect is in steroidogenic factor-1 
(SF-1) or related adrenal or gonadal factors.
Partial gonadal (testicular) dysgenesis can present with 
a spectrum of phenotypes ranging from clitoromegaly, 
to ambiguous genitalia or severe hypospadias. Müllerian 
structures may or may not be present and testes of vari-
able size and architecture are present along the path of 
descent. The biochemical profile is similar to complete 
gonadal dysgenesis, but generally less severe. If mild de-
grees of clitoromegaly in infancy are overlooked, a 46XY 
child with partial gonadal dysgenesis may first present at 
puberty with progressive androgenization. Genetic anal-
ysis and associated features may be useful in defining the 
molecular aetiology of some forms of gonadal dysgenesis.
Frasier syndrome is a rare form of gonadal dysgenesis 
in which there is also chronic kidney disease and a risk of 
gonadoblastoma arising in the streak gonads. The syn-
drome is caused by mutation in the WT1 gene, located on 
chromosome 11p13, which encodes a zinc finger protein 
that functions as a transcription factor.
XY DSD with low testosterone and high steroid 
precursor concentrations
46XY DSD with low testosterone and increased precur-
sor concentrations can be caused by several variants of 
CAH, namely 17α-hydroxylase (CYP17A1) deficiency, 
ORD and 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 
(3βHSD2) deficiency, caused by inactivating mutations in 
the corresponding genes CYP17A1, POR and HSD3B2. 
In addition, 46XY DSD with low testosterone and in-
creased precursor concentrations, can typically be found 
in individuals affected by 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydroge-
nase type 3 (17βHSD3) deficiency, caused by HSD17B3 
mutations (see Table 21.5).
About 1% of patients with 46XY DSD have deficiency 
of CYP17A1. Characteristically, affected individuals pres-
ent with female genitalia and low DHEA, androstenedi-
one and testosterone concentrations. In ORD, sex steroid 
concentrations are characteristically low, sometimes low 
normal, while pregnenolone and progesterone and their 
metabolites accumulate, because of the combined block of 
CYP21A2 and CYP17A1 activities. There is often a rela-
tive preponderance of mineralocorticoid over glucocor-
ticoid metabolites in affected patients but hypertension 
manifests only in adolescence, or later. Although baseline 
glucocorticoid secretion is usually sufficient, in the ma-
jority of patients, the stress response to ACTH is signifi-
cantly impaired, requiring hydrocortisone cover at least in 
times of stress or permanent glucocorticoid replacement. 
3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 2 deficiency (also 
termed Δ4–Δ5 isomerase deficiency) invariably leads to 
glucocorticoid deficiency, as well as a variable degree of 
mineralocorticoid deficiency; its characteristic features are 
426	
Clinical biochemistry
TABLE 21.5  Characteristics of 46XY disorders of sex development due to androgen deficiency or resistance
 
Inheritance and 
gene
Genitalia
Wolffian duct 
derivatives
Müllerian 
duct 
derivatives
Gonads
Typical features
Hormone profile
Leydig cell 
hypoplasia
Autosomal 
recessive, 
LH/HCGR
Female, 
hypospadias 
or micropenis
Hypo­plastic
Absent
Testes
Under andro­
genization with 
variable failure 
of sex hormone 
production at 
puberty
Low T and DHT, elevated LH 
and FSH, exaggerated LH 
response to LHRH, poor T 
and DHT response to hCG 
stimulation
Lipoid CAH
Autosomal 
recessive, 
StAR
Female, rarely 
ambiguous or 
male
Hypo­plastic or 
normal
Absent
Testes
Severe adrenal 
insufficiency 
in infancy with 
salt loss, failure 
of pubertal 
development, 
rare cases 
associated 
with isolated 
glucocorticoid 
deficiency
Usually deficient of 
glucocorticoids, 
mineralocorticoids and 
sex steroids
P450SCC 
deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive, 
CYP11A1
Female, rarely 
ambiguous or 
hypospadias
Hypo­plastic or 
normal
Absent
Testes
Severe adrenal 
insufficiency in 
infancy with salt 
loss ranging to 
milder adrenal 
insufficiency 
with onset in 
childhood
Usually deficient of 
glucocorticoids, 
mineralocorticoids and 
sex steroids
3β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase 
II deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive, 
HSD3B2
Ambiguous, 
hypospadias
Normal
Absent
Testes
Severe adrenal 
insufficiency 
in infancy ± 
salt loss, poor 
androgenization 
at puberty with 
gynaecomastia
Increased concentrations of 
Δ
5 C21- and C19-steroids,  
17- hydroxypregnenolone 
and DHEA suppressible  
by dexamethasone
Combined 17α-
hydroxylase/ 
17,20-lyase 
deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive, 
CYP17A1
Female, 
ambiguous, 
hypospadias 
or micropenis
Absent or 
hypo­plastic
Absent
Testes
Absent or poor 
virilization 
at puberty, 
gynaecomastia, 
hypertension
Decreased T, increased 
LH and FSH, 
increased plasma 
deoxycorticosterone, 
corticosterone and 
progesterone, decreased 
plasma renin activity/
concentration, low 
renin hypertension with 
hypokalaemic alkalosis
Isolated 
17,20-lyase 
deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive, 
CYP17A1, 
usually 
affecting 
key redox 
domains, 
alternatively 
caused by 
cytochrome 
b5 mutations 
(CYB5)
Female, 
ambiguous or 
hypospadias
Absent or 
hypo­plastic
Absent
Testes
Absent or poor 
androgenization 
at puberty, 
gynaecomastia
Decreased T, DHEA, 
androstenedione and 
oestradiol, abnormal 
increase in plasma 
17-hydroxyprogesterone 
and 
17-hydroxypregnenolone, 
increased LH and FSH, 
increased ratio of 
C21-deoxysteroids to 
C19-steroids after hCG 
stimulation
True isolated 
17, 20-lyase 
deficiency 
(Cytochrome 
b5 deficiency)
Autosomal 
Recessive, 
CYP17A1, 
caused by 
missense 
mutations in 
cytochrome 
b5 (CYB5)
Female, 
ambiguous or 
hypospadias
Normal
Absent
Testes
Absent or poor 
androgenization 
at puberty
Decreased T, DHEA, normal 
cortisol response to ACTH 
stim, increased 17-OHP 
metabolites to androgen 
metabolites excretion, 
normal mineralocorticoid 
and glucocorticoid 
meta­bolites 
excretion. Increased 
methaemoglobin
P450 
oxidoreductase 
deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive, 
POR
Ambiguous, 
hypospadias 
or normal 
male
Absent or 
hypoplastic
Absent
Testes
Variable 
androgenization 
at birth and 
puberty, 
glucocorticoid 
deficiency, 
features 
of skeletal 
malformations.
Maternal 
androgenization 
during 
pregnancy onset 
second trimester 
possible
Combined P450c17 and 
P450c21 insufficient, 
normal or low cortisol 
with poor response to 
ACTH stim, elevated 
17-hydroxyprogesterone, 
T low
	
21  Disorders of puberty and sex development	
427
outlined in Table 21.5. 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase 
type 3 is responsible for the conversion of androstenedione 
to testosterone in the gonad and deficiency has no effect on 
adrenal steroidogenesis. Characteristically, androstenedione 
concentration is increased while that of testosterone is low, 
particularly after hCG stimulation. However, a low testos-
terone to androstenedione ratio may also occur in patients 
with gonadal dysgenesis and the reliability of a low ratio in 
identifying 17β-HSD3 deficiency is unclear. In urine, the 
typical finding is an increase in the androgen and andro-
stenedione metabolites, androsterone and etiocholanolone, 
but it is unclear whether this applies across all age groups.
XY DSD with normal testosterone, normal 
­precursor and low DHT concentrations
The 5α-reductase type 2 (SRD5A2) isoenzyme is highly 
expressed in androgen sensitive tissues and converts tes-
tosterone to the more potent androgen, dihydrotestos-
terone (DHT) required for the development of external 
male genitalia. At birth, the external appearance of the 
genitalia of a child with SRD5A2 deficiency can range 
from a completely female phenotype, through hypospa-
dias of varying severity, to isolated micropenis. A positive 
family history is often present in this autosomal recessive 
condition. In serum, the testosterone:DHT ratio fol-
lowing hCG stimulation usually exceeds 30:1. In infants 
over 3–6  months, the defect should be easily identifi-
able on a urine sample which shows a decreased ratio 
of 5α:5β-reduced C21 and C19 steroids and the diagnosis 
can therefore be made in situations where a child has had 
early gonadectomy. Early diagnosis of this condition is 
important as the affected infant may need sex reassign-
ment if initially raised as a girl. In the child raised as a 
boy, application of topical DHT cream may be a way of 
assessing the potential of the genitalia to virilize over the 
longer term.
XY DSD with normal testosterone, normal 
­precursor and normal DHT concentrations
A defect in androgen signalling is most likely to be due to 
dysfunction of the androgen receptor (AR) and mutations 
resulting in a complete lack of function of the AR cause 
complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (CAIS). This 
presents in the newborn infant as a discordance between 
a female phenotype and a prenatal karyotype of 46XY, 
as inguinal swellings in an otherwise normal girl or dur-
ing a postnatal check because of a positive family history. 
Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome usually pres-
ents in adolescence as primary amenorrhoea with normal 
breast development. The presence of pubic hair is often 
reported in CAIS and should not be used to exclude the 
diagnosis. Mutations which result in some residual AR 
 
Inheritance and 
gene
Genitalia
Wolffian duct 
derivatives
Müllerian 
duct 
derivatives
Gonads
Typical features
Hormone profile
17β-
hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase 
type 3 
deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive 
HSD17B3
Female, 
ambiguous, 
blind vaginal 
pouch
Present
Absent
Testes
Androgenization 
at puberty, 
gynaecomastia 
variable
Increased plasma 
estrone, decreased 
ratio of testosterone/
androstenedione and 
oestradiol after hCG 
stimulation, increased 
FSH and LH
5α-reductase-2 
deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive 
SRD5A2
Ambiguous, 
micropenis, 
hypospadias, 
blind vaginal 
pouch
Normal
Absent
Testes
Decreased facial 
and body hair, 
no temporal 
hair recession, 
prostate not 
palpable
Decreased ratio of 5α/5β 
C21- and C19- steroids in 
urine, increased T/DHT 
ratio before and after 
hCG stimulation, modest 
increase in LH, decreased 
conversion of T to DHT 
in vitro
CAIS
X-linked 
recessive AR
Female with 
blind vaginal 
pouch
Often present 
depending 
on mutation 
type
Absent or 
vestigial
Testes
Scant or absent 
pubic and 
axillary 
hair, breast 
development 
and female 
body habitus 
at puberty, 
primary 
amenorrhoea
Increased LH and T, 
increased oestradiol, FSH 
levels normal or slightly 
increased, resistance 
to androgenic and 
metabolic effects of T 
(may be normal in some 
cases)
PAIS
X-linked 
recessive AR
Ambiguous with 
blind vaginal 
pouch, 
isolated 
hypospadias, 
normal male 
with infertility 
(mild)
Often normal
Absent
Testes
Decreased to 
normal axillary 
and pubic hair, 
beard growth 
and body hair, 
gynaecomastia 
common at 
puberty
Increased LH and T, 
increased oestradiol, FSH 
levels may be normal or 
slightly increased, partial 
resistance to androgenic 
and metabolic effects of T
DHT, dihydrotestosterone; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; hCG, human chorionic gonadotrophin; LH, luteinizing hormone; T, testosterone; 
DHEA, dehydroepiandrosterone; ACTH, adrenocorticotropin hormone, 17-OHP, pregnanetriol; AR, androgen receptor; CAIS, complete 
androgen insensitivity syndrome; PAIS, partial androgen insensitivity syndrome.
Adapted from DSD Guidelines Clinical Endocrinology 2011; 75:12–26.
TABLE 21.5  Characteristics of 46XY disorders of sex development due to androgen deficiency or 
resistance­ (Continued)
428	
Clinical biochemistry
function and varying degrees of androgenization cause 
partial androgen insensitivity syndrome (PAIS). Although 
children with PAIS typically have a normal testosterone 
and DHT response to hCG stimulation and a normal uri-
nary steroid profile, some demonstrate a poor response 
to hCG stimulation. The serum AMH concentration is 
normal or may even be elevated. Luteinizing hormone 
concentrations are increased in the face of normal or el-
evated serum testosterone, reflecting a state of androgen 
resistance. A family history of X-linked inheritance is in-
formative, although one-third of cases are the result of 
spontaneous new mutations.
A functional assessment of androgen sensitivity may 
include the clinical effect of a short course of testoster-
one applied to the phallus, or the effect of systemic tes-
tosterone following hCG stimulation. However, there is 
no consensus on the choice of androgen, dosage, method 
of administration, timing or duration of treatment or on 
the definition of a satisfactory response in the growth of 
the phallus. Androgen sensitivity can also be assessed by 
measuring the change in SHBG, an androgen-responsive 
protein which normally decreases in concentration fol-
lowing androgen exposure. This fall in SHBG is absent in 
CAIS, variable in PAIS and difficult to interpret in young 
infants who have highly variable circulating SHBG con-
centrations. Androgen receptor analysis may reveal a mu-
tation in over 80% of patients with a CAIS phenotype 
and 30% of patients with a PAIS phenotype and andro-
gen receptor binding studies are not necessary for routine 
diagnosis of AIS. A number of patients with XY DSD are 
loosely labelled as ‘PAIS’ when no conclusive biochemical 
or genetic abnormalities are identified in gonadal func-
tion, androgen synthesis or androgen action. The term 
PAIS should be reserved for those children who have XY 
DSD and a pathogenetic mutation in AR.
DISORDERS OF PUBERTY
Precocious puberty
Signs of puberty that occur before the ages of eight years 
in girls and nine years in boys are generally considered to 
indicate abnormally early puberty. The problem is more 
common in girls, in whom a cause is not often found. The 
earlier occurrence of puberty in the population has been 
attributed to the effects of xenoestrogenic chemicals in the 
environment and perhaps also to the increasing incidence 
of obesity. Adipocytes are a source of oestrogens through 
peripheral aromatization. Precocious puberty is increas-
ingly seen in girls migrating from deprived environments 
for adoption in the developed world. Previous exposure to 
chemicals such as pesticides coupled with refeeding and 
catch-up growth in the new environment may be the trig-
ger for early puberty. Box 21.1 lists some of the known 
causes of precocious puberty in both sexes. Structural le-
sions in the hypothalamic-pituitary region are increasingly 
recognized through sensitive imaging techniques. Severe 
head trauma may be followed quite abruptly by the onset 
of puberty. It is presumed that premature activation of the 
GnRH pulse generator has occurred. Similar mechanisms 
may operate in hydrocephalus, cerebral palsy, spina bifida 
and intracranial infections.
Gonadotrophin dependent puberty  
(central causes)
Although the cause of precocious puberty in a large ma-
jority of children remains unknown (idiopathic), some 
children may require a thorough endocrine evaluation 
of the pubertal axis as listed in Table  21.6. Important 
causes outlined below should be considered if clinically 
appropriate.
Tumours in the region of the hypothalamus known 
to be associated with precocious puberty include hamar-
toma, astrocytoma, neurofibroma and, occasionally, cranio­
pharyngioma. While the prevalence of such tumours 
causing precocious puberty is the same in boys and girls, 
a tumour is more likely to be the cause of precocious pu-
berty in a boy. Hypothalamic-pituitary damage from irra-
diation to intracranial tumours causes pituitary deficiency 
of growth hormone and thyrotrophin releasing hormone 
(TRH) but, paradoxically, premature reactivation of the 
GnRH pulse generator and precocious puberty.
The McCune–Albright syndrome comprises the triad 
of café-au-lait skin pigmentation, fibrous dysplasia of 
bone (affecting particularly long bones and the base of 
BOX 21.1	
Some causes of precocious puberty
Gonadotrophin dependent (central causes)
•	 Idiopathic (particularly girls)
•	 Intracranial tumours (hypothalamic hamartoma)
•	 Raised intracranial pressure (trauma, hydrocephalus)
•	 Cerebral palsy
•	 Cranial irradiation
Gonadotrophin independent
•	 McCune–Albright syndrome
•	 Increased peripheral sex steroids (CAH)
•	 Gonadal tumours
•	 Male: Leydig cell adenoma, adrenal tumour
•	 Female: juvenile granulosa cell tumour, ovarian cyst
•	 Activating LH receptor mutation (male limited)
Puberty variants
•	 Premature adrenarche
•	 Premature thelarche (female limited)
•	 Exposure to environmental oestrogens
•	 Pubertal gynaecomastia
TABLE 21.6  Basic endocrine investigation  
of disorders of puberty
Precocious puberty
Delayed puberty
Basal LH, FSH, testosterone 
or oestradiol
Basal LH, FSH, testosterone 
or oestradiol
Acute GnRH stimulation 
test
Acute GnRH stimulation test
Thyroid hormone profile 
(TSH & FT4)
Thyroid function tests  
(TSH & FT4)
Prolactin
Peripheral karyotype 
(females)
β-hCG
Possibly hCG stimulation 
test (males)
Skeletal age (bone age)
Skeletal age (bone age)
	
21  Disorders of puberty and sex development	
429
the skull) and precocious puberty. In girls, the latter is 
typically gonadotrophin independent, as shown by a pre-
pubertal LH and FSH response to acute GnRH stimu-
lation. Autonomously functioning multiple ovarian cysts 
occur, as well as evidence of dysfunction in other endo-
crine glands such as the thyroid (thyrotoxicosis), adrenal 
(Cushing syndrome), pituitary (gigantism and hyperpro-
lactinaemia) and parathyroid (hyperparathyroidism). The 
condition may present in early childhood and progress 
to gonadotrophin-dependent ovarian hyperfunction and 
the consequent problems of menses in a young child. The 
McCune–Albright syndrome is less common in boys and 
may manifest with asymmetrical enlargement of the testes 
as well as the development of secondary sexual character-
istics. Somatic activating mutations of the G-protein α 
subunit (GSα) component of the guanine nucleotide bind-
ing protein, alpha stimulating (GNAS) complex that cou-
ples seven transmembrane receptors to the cAMP signal 
transduction pathway, cause the widespread distribution 
of tissue abnormalities in the syndrome. The predominant 
mutation is substitution of an arginine at codon 201 in 
the GSα gene. Heterozygous inactivating GSα mutations 
cause Albright hereditary osteodystrophy, a syndrome 
characterized by short stature, obesity, short metacarpals, 
subcutaneous calcification and behavioural problems.
Autonomously hyperfunctioning testes, independent 
of gonadotrophic stimulation, also cause precocious pu-
berty in males, owing to Leydig cell hyperplasia. Familial 
forms are recognized that present with signs of viriliza-
tion, but with testes inappropriately small for the ad-
vanced stage of puberty. The onset of precocious puberty 
often occurs in early childhood and may even occur in 
infancy. Testosterone concentrations are increased, while 
basal and GnRH-stimulated concentrations of gonado-
trophins are suppressed. Histological examination of the 
testes shows Leydig cell hyperplasia and spermatogenesis. 
This form of familial, male-limited precocious puberty is 
autosomal dominant and is caused by an activating muta-
tion in the G-protein-LH-coupled receptor. Somatic LH 
receptor mutations are also found in males with Leydig 
cell adenomas without a history of precocious puberty, 
but a Leydig cell adenoma rarely occurs in the precocious 
puberty phenotype. This is at variance with the pheno-
type associated with activating mutations in the TSH 
receptor where nodular thyroid hyperplasia is often an 
associated histological feature of this form of hyperthy-
roidism. Treatment for male-limited, familial precocious 
puberty comprises an anti-androgen agent, such as spi-
ronolactone, together with an aromatase enzyme inhibi-
tor such as testolactone or anastrozole, but the long-term 
therapeutic benefits of this approach are unclear. Use of 
a GnRH analogue is not appropriate initially as gonado-
trophin concentrations are already suppressed. However, 
the precocious puberty may become gonadotrophic de-
pendent at a later stage, when a long-acting GnRH ana-
logue can be added to the treatment regimen.
Variants of early puberty
The most frequent variant of early puberty is prema-
ture thelarche, or isolated early breast development. The 
usual age of onset is 1–3  years and occasionally breast 
development may have persisted from the neonatal period. 
The breast enlargement may be unilateral or bilateral and 
typically tends to wax and wane over time. No other signs 
of puberty occur and the rate of linear growth is normal for 
chronological age. Serum oestradiol and gonadotrophin 
concentrations remain prepubertal, although most immuno­
assays are insufficiently sensitive to detect fluctuations in 
oestradiol concentrations in prepubertal girls. It has been 
proposed that breast enlargement is the result of enhanced 
tissue responsiveness to a transient increase in circulating 
oestradiol. Increased concentrations of SHBG have been 
detected in some girls with premature thelarche, thereby 
resulting in an increase in the ratio of free oestradiol to 
testosterone concentrations. This may explain the breast 
development, even though total oestradiol concentration 
is not increased. The source of oestrogen is ovarian, and 
cysts of the ovary are sometimes detected on ultrasound. 
While population studies imply the possibility of exposure 
to chemicals in the environment acting as xenoestrogens, 
it is difficult to prove such exposure in individual patients. 
The natural history of premature thelarche is the onset of 
puberty and menarche at a normal age, as well as normal 
reproductive potential. A form of thelarche variant is also 
recognized that is associated with some increase in growth 
rate and skeletal maturation and a slightly exaggerated LH 
and FSH response to acute GnRH stimulation.
Isolated recurrent vaginal bleeding can sometimes oc-
cur in girls before puberty. It is important to exclude local 
lesions of the genital tract, self-harm by the child or child 
abuse. Generally, it is associated with increased FSH con-
centrations that produce sufficient oestradiol to stimulate 
the endometrium and induce a subsequent withdrawal 
bleed. Sometimes, ovarian cysts are found on ultrasound. 
This form of premature isolated menarche is generally 
self-limiting and has no adverse consequences for subse-
quent puberty and reproductive capacity.
Premature adrenarche is the term applied to the early 
development of pubic hair without any other signs of 
puberty. It is more common in girls, occurring usually 
between six and eight years of age. The cause is an in-
crease in adrenal androgen production associated with el-
evated concentrations of DHEA and its sulphate, as well 
as androstenedione. It is partly explained by a change in 
steroidogenesis regulated by the orphan nuclear receptor, 
NGF1B. Premature adrenarche is generally followed by a 
normal progression through puberty. There is some evi-
dence that girls with premature adrenarche have a higher 
risk of later developing polycystic ovarian syndrome.
Delayed puberty
The wide range for the age of onset of puberty in nor-
mal children has previously been emphasized. Puberty is 
regarded as delayed if physical signs have not started by 
13 years in girls and 14 years in boys. Box 21.2 lists some 
of the causes of delayed puberty in both sexes. The list 
is not an exhaustive one but encompasses the majority 
of important causes. During the clinical assessment it is 
important to exclude a chronic disease that may mani-
fest solely as slow growth and delayed puberty, examples 
include cystic fibrosis, inflammatory bowel disease and 
anorexia nervosa.
430	
Clinical biochemistry
Delayed growth and puberty
Delayed puberty presents as a clinical problem far more 
often in boys than in girls. This may be an ascertainment 
bias, perhaps because of the greater social pressures of 
delayed puberty (and hence short stature) in a boy than 
a girl. Most delayed puberty just represents the extreme 
lower end of the physiological range for pubertal events. 
Since it is inevitably accompanied by short stature due to 
the delayed appearance of the pubertal growth spurt, this 
common cause is called constitutional delay in growth 
and development. There is often a family history of de-
layed puberty. The natural outcome is for puberty to de-
velop spontaneously (according to skeletal maturation as 
assessed by bone age examination rather than chronolog-
ical age) and lead to normal, albeit delayed, final height 
according to genetic potential. Sometimes, low-dose sex 
steroids are given to prime the pubertal growth spurt. 
Final height may be increased in boys with constitutional 
delay by treatment with aromatase inhibitors during ado-
lescence, but there are concerns that such treatment may 
have undesired effects on bone health at this critical pe-
riod of skeletal development.
Delayed puberty is a disturbance in the tempo of 
growth and pubertal maturation associated with a delay 
in activation of the hypothalamic GnRH pulse generator. 
Random and GnRH-stimulated plasma gonadotrophin 
concentrations are low and appropriate for physiological 
development, as are those of gonadal steroids. A similar 
endocrine profile is found in delayed puberty secondary 
to hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism in which spontane-
ous onset of puberty does not occur. It can be difficult 
to distinguish these two variants, even when short-term 
pulsatile GnRH therapy is used in the prepubertal state. 
Spontaneous onset of puberty is the ultimate decider. 
Familial clustering may suggest rare causes such as muta-
tions affecting the GnRH receptor gene or the GPR54 
gene. No mutation has yet been found involving the 
GnRH gene and delayed puberty. Short stature in delayed 
puberty is partly the result of an insufficient production 
of growth hormone (GH) reflected in decreased pulse 
amplitude. This, in turn, results in less generation of 
insulin-like growth factor 1, which may be relevant for 
gonadal function. Puberty is a complex interplay of sex 
hormones, GH and growth factors activated as a result 
of polygenic and environmental factors. While the dis-
covery of GPR54 has provided a molecular explanation 
for a rare form of hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism, no 
GPR54 mutations have been reported in constitutional 
delayed puberty.
Organic causes affecting the hypothalamic-pituitary 
area result in hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism and 
delayed puberty. Numerous examples exist such as cra-
niopharyngioma, optic glioma, germinoma, astrocytoma, 
head trauma (which may also lead to early puberty), 
effects of irradiation, infiltrative diseases and post-­
infectious ­lesions. An organic cause should be considered 
when ­puberty has started, but then becomes arrested in 
progress.
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
Syndromes associated with gonadotrophin deficiency in-
clude Prader–Willi, Lawrence–Moon–Biedl and Kallman 
syndromes. Failure of migration of the GnRH neurons 
from the olfactory placode to the medial basal hypo-
thalamus causes Kallman syndrome and explains the as-
sociation with anosmia. An X-linked form of Kallman 
syndrome is caused by mutations in the KAL1 gene, 
which encodes for the anosmin-1 protein. An autosomal 
dominant form is caused by heterozygous mutations in 
the FGFR1 gene (fibroblast growth factor receptor-1). 
Inactivating mutations in the GPR54 gene cause isolated 
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism.
Isolated gonadotrophin deficiency may occur in as-
sociation with congenital adrenal hypoplasia. Affected in-
dividuals present in infancy with a salt-losing crisis and 
masquerade as if the diagnosis were congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia. However, adrenal steroid concentrations are 
low and unresponsive to ACTH stimulation. The diag-
nosis may be suspected before birth because of low ma-
ternal oestriol excretion resulting from decreased steroid 
substrates from the affected fetal adrenals. The disorder 
is X-linked; affected boys fail to enter puberty spontane-
ously because of an associated gonadotrophin deficiency. 
Adult males have azoospermia and a poor response to 
pulsatile GnRH treatment. Mutations in DAX-1, a gene 
on Xp21.3–21.2 that encodes an orphan nuclear hor-
mone receptor, are described in patients with X-linked 
congenital adrenal hypoplasia and hypogonadotrophic 
hypogonadism. A variant of the syndrome may present 
for the first time in adulthood with mild adrenal insuf-
ficiency and partial hypogonadism. Another orphan 
nuclear receptor involved in both adrenal and hypo-
thalamic development is steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1). 
Rare mutations cause adrenal failure and generally XY 
sex reversal.
BOX 21.2	
Some causes of delayed puberty
•	 Constitutional delay in development
•	 Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
•	 CNS tumours (craniopharyngioma, germinoma)
•	 Kallmann syndrome
•	 Prader–Willi syndrome
•	 GPR54 mutation
•	 Inactivating GnRH receptor mutation
•	 Congenital adrenal hypoplasia (associated with DAX1 
mutation)
•	 Leptin deficiency
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Cushing disease
•	 Hyperprolactinaemia
•	 Primary gonadal failure
•	 Turner syndrome
•	 Gonadal dysgenesis (XX and XY)
•	 Chemotherapy (e.g. cyclophosphamide)
•	 Radiation therapy
•	 Chronic systemic dysfunction
•	 Inflammatory bowel disease
•	 Coeliac disease
•	 Chronic kidney disease
•	 Psychosocial deprivation
•	 Anorexia nervosa
•	 Intense exercise
	
21  Disorders of puberty and sex development	
431
Primary hypogonadism
The other major groups of disorders that manifest with 
delayed puberty are those associated with primary hypo-
gonadism. In these, gonadotrophin concentrations are 
elevated. The chromosome aneuploidies, Klinefelter syn-
drome (47XXY) and Turner syndrome (45XO and vari-
ants), are important causes of delayed puberty. Turner 
syndrome has an incidence of about 1 in 2000 live-born 
girls. It is estimated that 1–2% of conceptuses have the 
syndrome with only 1% of these not aborted spontane-
ously. Two constant clinical features of this syndrome are 
short stature and failure to enter puberty spontaneously 
because of premature ovarian failure. The former feature 
dictates that a peripheral karyotype should be performed 
on any short girl in whom there is no readily apparent 
cause for the growth failure.
The typical physical features of Turner syndrome 
may not always be present. They include a short, broad 
neck which may be webbed, a low hairline, low-set ears, 
high-arched palate, ptosis, hypoplastic nails, short meta-
carpals, cubitus valgus (increased carrying angle), pig-
mented naevi and cardiovascular anomalies. Affected 
girls are often small at birth and have peripheral lymph-
oedema. This usually is an alert to making the diagnosis. 
The results of a pilot study using FSH measurement in 
blood spots for newborn screening were not sufficiently 
specific. Pyrosequencing assays for quantitative geno-
typing of informative single nucleotide polymorphism 
(SNP) markers spanning the X chromosome in a new-
born screening programme reliably detect complete or 
partial X deletions and mosaicisms. Growth failure is in-
variably present by 2–3 years of age. Ovarian failure is a 
progressive process starting in late gestation and appears 
to be an acceleration of the diminution in the number of 
primary oocytes that occurs between fetal and postnatal 
life in the normal female. Generally, streak gonads are 
the only remnants of ovaries, although 5–10% of Turner 
syndrome girls do have spontaneous puberty and men-
struate. A small number are able to become pregnant, 
but this is associated with a high rate of miscarriage, 
stillbirths and congenital malformations. Management 
of Turner patients requires oestrogen replacement at 
the time of expected puberty and the early use of GH 
to enhance adult height. Numerous studies confirm that 
GH can significantly increase final height. Chromosomal 
mosaicism in the form of 45XO/46XY may show some 
features of the Turner phenotype, such as short stature, 
but the presentation may be at birth because of abnormal 
genitalia. Adult patients with Turner syndrome need reg-
ular surveillance of cardiovascular parameters, metabolic 
abnormalities such as insulin resistance, renal disorders 
and sensorineural hearing deficits. Turner syndrome rep-
resents one example of spontaneous premature ovarian 
failure. In addition, there are other causes of acquired as 
well as genetic causes of ovarian failure.
Klinefelter syndrome affects about 1 in 1000 males 
and is characterized by tall stature, small firm testes, 
gynaecomastia and infertility in adults. These men are 
also hypogonadal and, although they enter puberty 
normally, they undergo pubertal arrest and progress 
through puberty does not occur as expected. Serum 
testosterone concentrations increase appropriately ac-
cording to the stages of puberty, while a characteristic 
elevation of gonadotrophin concentrations is displayed 
from the age of 13 years. Fertility may be achievable us-
ing testicular extraction for intracytoplasmic sperm in-
jection. Other causes of primary hypogonadism in the 
male include testosterone biosynthetic defects and the 
effects of chemotherapy in conditions such as leukaemia. 
Anorchia (absence of both testes at birth) is relatively 
common and is sometimes referred to as the vanishing 
testis syndrome. Genital development in affected boys 
is otherwise normal, which implies that testicular func-
tion (including testosterone and AMH production) was 
also normal in early gestation. The cause of testicular 
regression is not known but is postulated to be the re-
sult of intrauterine testicular torsion. The presence or 
absence of testicular tissue after birth can be assessed 
by a prolonged hCG stimulation test to determine any 
response in serum testosterone. Serum AMH is also a 
useful marker that avoids the necessity of undertaking 
an hCG stimulation test. At the expected age of puberty, 
there is an increase in plasma gonadotrophins.
Further reading
Disorders of sex development
Achermann JC, Ozisik G, Meeks JJ et  al. Genetic causes of human 
reproductive disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2002;87:2447–54.
Ahmed SF, Achermann JC, Arlt W et al. UK guidance on the initial 
evaluation of an infant or an adolescent with a suspected disorder of 
sex development. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2011;75:12–26.
Ahmed SF, Hughes IA. The genetics of male undermasculinisation. 
Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2002;56:1–18.
Broekmans FJ, Visser JA, Laven JS et  al. Anti-Müllerian 
hormone and ovarian dysfunction. Trends Endocrinol Metab 
2008;19:340–7.
Cordts EB, Christofolini DM, Dos Santos AA et al. Genetic aspects of 
premature ovarian failure: a literature review. Arch Gynecol Obstet 
2011a;283:635–43.
Eggers S, Sinclair A. Mammalian sex determination – insights from 
humans and mice. Chromosome Res 2012;20:215–38.
Federman DD. The biology of human sex differences. N Engl J Med 
2006;354:1507–14.
Grinspon R, Chemes H, Rey RA. Decline in serum antiMüllerian 
hormone due to androgen action in early puberty in males. Fertil 
Steril 2012;98:e23.
Hughes IA, Houk C, Ahmed SF et  al. LWPES Consensus Group, 
ESPE Consensus Group. Consensus statement on management of 
intersex disorders. Arch Dis Child 2006;91:554–63.
Ogilvy-Stuart AL, Brain CE. Early assessment of ambiguous genitalia. 
Arch Dis Child 2004;89:401–7.
Speiser PW, White PC. Congenital adrenal hyperplasia. N Engl J Med 
2003;349:776–88.
Styne DM, Grumbach MM. Puberty: ontogeny, neuroendocrinology 
physiology and disorders. In: Kronenberg HM, Melmed S, Polonsky 
KS et  al. editors. Williams textbook of endocrinology. 11th ed. 
Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007. pp. 969–1166.
Puberty
Achermann JC, Hughes IA. Disorders of sex development. In: 
Kronenberg HM, Melmed S, Polonsky KS et al. editors. Williams 
textbook of endocrinology. 11th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007. 
pp. 783–848.
Aubert ML, Pralong FP. Puberty: a sensor of genetic and environmental 
interactions throughout development. Mol Cell Endocrinol 
2006;254/255:1–233 [Special Issue].
Cordts EB, Christofolini DM, Dos Santos AA et al. Genetic aspects of 
premature ovarian failure: a literature review. Arch Gynecol Obstet 
2011b;283:635–43.
432	
Clinical biochemistry
Dattani MT, Hindmarsh PC. Normal puberty and abnormal puberty. 
In: Brook CG, Clayton PE, Brown RS, editors. Clinical paediatric 
endocrinology. 5th ed. Oxford: Blackwell; 2005. pp. 90–112.
Parent A-S, Teilmann GT, Juul A et  al. The timing of normal 
puberty and the age limits of sexual precocity: variations around 
the world, secular trends, and changes after migration. Endocr Rev 
2003;24:668–93.
Slyper AH. The pubertal timing controversy in the USA, and a review 
of possible causative factors for the advances in timing of onset of 
puberty. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf) 2006;65:1–8.
433
C H A P T E R  2 2
INTRODUCTION
In both normal males and females, the gonads produce 
­steroid hormones that affect secondary sexual char-
acteristics, the functioning of the reproductive tract 
and sexual behaviour. Production of gametes and hor-
mones by the gonads is under the control of pituitary 
glycoprotein hormones. The hypothalamo–pituitary–
gonadal axis appears to be universal throughout the 
vertebrates: small amounts of releasing factors from 
the hypothalamus elicit the release of larger amounts 
of glycoprotein gonadotrophins and yet larger in-
creases in gonadal steroids. These steroids in turn in-
fluence the rate at which they themselves are produced 
(feedback control).
PHYSIOLOGY
The ovaries
The human ovaries produce female gametes and steroid 
sex hormones. Both functions depend largely on the 
monthly growth and rupture of (usually) a single ovarian 
follicle.
At birth, some 106 immature germ cells are present 
in the ovaries as primary oocytes, arrested between pro-
phase and metaphase of the first meiotic division. Each 
primary oocyte is surrounded by a layer of epithelial cells, 
the whole being known as a primordial follicle (Fig. 22.1). 
Primary oocytes do not complete meiosis during child-
hood: in fact the majority of them degenerate.
Reproductive function in the female
Leslie D. Ross
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  433
PHYSIOLOGY  433
The ovaries  433
Plasma concentrations of reproductive 
­hormones  435
Uterine changes  436
Conception  436
HORMONES REGULATING 
­REPRODUCTIVE FUNCTION  436
Follicle stimulating hormone  436
Luteinizing hormone  436
Human chorionic gonadotrophin  436
Inhibin and activin  436
Prolactin  437
Anti-Müllerian hormone  437
REPRODUCTIVE STEROID 
HORMONES  437
Structure  437
Biosynthetic enzymes  437
Steroid secretion through the menstrual  
cycle  438
Steroid hormone transport and 
metabolism  438
Actions of gonadal steroid  
hormones  439
OLIGO- AND AMENORRHOEA  439
INFERTILITY  440
HIRSUTISM AND VIRILISM  441
PREGNANCY  442
Introduction  442
Biochemical diagnosis of pregnancy  442
Diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy  442
Biochemical monitoring of  
pregnancy  443
Screening for fetal malformation  443
Fetal tissue sampling techniques  444
Chorionic villus sampling  444
Monitoring of maternal and fetal 
well-being  445
Intrapartum fetal monitoring  445
Biochemical changes during  
pregnancy  445
Labour  446
ORAL CONTRACEPTION AND  
HORMONE ­REPLACEMENT  
THERAPY  447
Introduction  447
Metabolic effects of oestrogens  448
Metabolic effects of progestogens  448
Metabolic effects of contraceptives  448
Hormone replacement therapy  449
APPENDIX  450
434	
Clinical biochemistry
During childhood, the ovaries remain inactive, but at 
puberty, a monthly ovarian cycle is established through 
the interaction of the hypothalamus and pituitary with 
ovarian follicles and manifests itself by the onset of 
menstruation.
At puberty, the pulsatile release of gonadotrophin re-
leasing hormone (GnRH) from the hypothalamus stimu-
lates the pituitary production of gonadotrophins. Growth 
hormone (GH) pulses released by the pituitary also in-
crease in amplitude. This amplification of GH secretion 
may be regulated by the pubertal increase in the produc-
tion of androgenic and oestrogenic hormones. These sex 
steroids stimulate skeletal growth and sexual maturation, 
augmenting the role of GH in promoting somatic growth 
and development.
The human menstrual cycle is 23–39  days long. By 
definition, day 1 of the cycle is the first day of menstrual 
bleeding. The cycle is divided into follicular (or prolif-
erative) and luteal (or secretory) phases by the event of 
ovulation. In cycles of different length, it is the duration 
of the follicular phase that varies; the length of the luteal 
phase is remarkably constant at 13–15 days.
On day one of the cycle, several antral follicles, which 
are 2–9 mm in diameter, are present in both ovaries. 
These consist largely of a fluid-filled antrum and can 
be visualized by ultrasonography (Fig. 22.2A). Each an-
tral follicle has developed from a primordial follicle by 
proliferation of the epithelial granulosa cells and by the 
appearance and coalescence of fluid-filled spaces among 
them (see Fig. 22.1). The earlier stages of follicle devel-
opment do not require gonadotrophin stimulation, but 
the ‘recruitment’ of antral follicles from the preantral 
pool appears to be follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) 
and anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) dependent.
Anti-Müllerian hormone is now considered to be the 
main regulator of early follicular recruitment from the 
primordial pool. It is produced by small enlarging follicles 
rather than the primordial follicles themselves. Plasma 
Zona pellucida
Zona
pellucida
Cytoplasm of
primary oocyte
Nucleus of
primary oocyte
Ovarian
stromal cells
Primary
oocyte
Basement
membrane
Epithelial/
granulosa cells
Theca externa
Theca interna
Follicular
antrum
B Preantral follicle
C Antral follicle
D Preovulatory follicle
A Primordial follicle
FIGURE 22.1  ■  Maturation of ovarian follicles.
	
22  Reproductive function in the female	
435
concentrations of AMH do, however, appear to reflect 
primordial follicle numbers in humans and rodents.
Through a poorly understood process of selection, 
one of the apparently identical antral follicles present on 
day 1 becomes dominant, while the others degenerate. 
The dominant follicle grows rapidly in the late follicular 
phase, reaching a maximum diameter of approximately 
20 mm (Fig. 22.2B). Outside the basement membrane of 
the granulosa cell layer, the wall of the dominant follicle 
consists of the theca interna and theca externa, which have 
developed from ovarian stromal cells. At ovulation, the fol-
licle collapses, releasing its fluid and the oocyte, which by 
now has completed the first meiotic division. The follicle 
subsequently refills with fluid, and blood vessels penetrate 
the basement membrane and vascularize the granulosa 
cells for the first time; further proliferation of the granu-
losa cells transforms what was the follicle into the corpus 
luteum (Fig. 22.2C). The corpus luteum has a limited life 
span: in the absence of conception it involutes, another 
dominant follicle develops and the cycle repeats itself.
Insulin-like growth factor-1 has actions that regulate 
sex steroids through the control of the plasma concentra-
tion of sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG). Although 
the precise mechanism is unclear, increasing concentra-
tions of GH are believed to exert some effects on circu-
lating insulin concentrations. Growth hormone induces 
peripheral insulin resistance which leads to compensa-
tory increases in insulin secretion and protein anabolism. 
Insulin regulates hepatic insulin-like growth factor 1 
(IGF-1) through its effects on insulin-like binding pro-
tein 1 (IGFBP-1).
Obesity is associated with increased plasma concentra-
tions of insulin. Therefore, if excessive nutrition intake 
persists during childhood, it is possible that hyperinsu-
linaemia may lead to lower concentrations of IGFBP-1 
and reduced plasma SHBG concentrations, enhancing 
IGF-1 and sex steroid bioavailability.
Plasma concentrations of reproductive 
hormones
Figure  22.3 illustrates the fluctuations in plasma con-
centrations of reproductive hormones through a typical 
menstrual cycle. Changes in the pulsatile release of gonad-
otrophins in the late luteal phase and early follicular phase 
appear to bring about the growth of a group of antral fol-
licles, one of which (the dominant follicle) enlarges greatly 
and secretes increasing amounts of oestrogens (mainly 
17β-oestradiol). Although oestrogens generally exert a 
negative feedback effect on gonadotrophin concentrations, 
high, rising oestrogen concentrations in the late follicu-
lar phase feed back positively on the hypothalamic–pituitary 
axis, causing a massive release of luteinizing hormone (LH) 
(the LH ‘surge’) and a smaller release of FSH. The LH 
surge triggers the resumption of meiosis and follicle rup-
ture with oocyte release. Oestrogen concentrations fall 
transiently prior to ovulation. The corpus luteum secretes 
Plasma gonadotrophin concentrations
Menses
Menses
Plasma steroid concentrations
Oestrogens
FIGURE  22.3  ■  Hormone fluctuations during the human men-
strual cycle.
A
B
C
FIGURE 22.2  ■ Vaginal ultrasonographic images of the ovary. (A) Polycystic ovary showing multiple antral type peripheral follicles; 
(B) Pre-ovulatory follicle 20 mm; (C) Corpus luteum with Doppler showing surrounding neovascularity. Vessels show as prominent 
echoes below the darker collapsed follicle.
436	
Clinical biochemistry
both oestrogens and progesterone; plasma concentrations 
of both hormones peak in the mid-luteal phase falling in 
the late luteal phase as, in the absence of conception, the 
corpus luteum involutes. It is likely that ovarian proteins 
such as inhibin and activin also play a role in regulating 
follicle development and steroid synthesis. These proteins 
and other structurally similar ‘growth factors’ may exert 
important paracrine effects within the ovary.
Uterine changes
Rising oestrogen concentrations in the follicular phase 
induce proliferative changes in the endometrium, caus-
ing it to thicken. Oestrogens and progesterone (from the 
corpus luteum) induce secretory changes in the endome-
trium, preparing it for pregnancy. Once deprived of hor-
monal support from the corpus luteum, the endometrium 
is shed and another cycle begins.
Conception
Fertilization usually takes place in the ampullary part of 
the Fallopian tube, close to the ovary. Implantation occurs 
6–7 days after fertilization. Human chorionic gonadotro-
phin (hCG) production from the conceptus acts to prolong 
the life of the corpus luteum so that it continues to produce 
progesterone, thus maintaining the endometrium.
HORMONES REGULATING REPRODUCTIVE 
FUNCTION
Gonadotrophin releasing hormone is a decapeptide se-
creted by neurons in the median eminence of the hypo-
thalamus. It is carried in the portal hypophysial vessels 
from the hypothalamus to the pituitary, where it stim-
ulates the release of LH and FSH. Concentrations of 
GnRH in the general circulation are very low but are as-
sumed to be reflected by LH concentrations. The release 
of LH and FSH are pulsatile: the inter-pulse interval de-
creases from 90 to 60 min during the follicular phase until 
ovulation, then lengthens to once or twice a day in the 
late-luteal phase.
Pulsatile secretion of GnRH is essential to maintain 
normal function, as continuous infusion causes downreg-
ulation of receptors and amenorrhoea. Administration of 
GnRH, modified to prolong its action, is used to induce 
therapeutic hypogonadism.
Follicle stimulating hormone, LH and hCG are struc-
turally similar glycoproteins. Each consists of an α- and a 
β-subunit, which are associated by non-covalent interac-
tions. The α-subunits of FSH, LH and hCG (and of thy-
roid stimulating hormone, TSH) are identical, while the 
β-subunits differ, conferring hormonal specificity. The 
α-subunit consists of 92 amino acids. Gonadotrophins 
are largely metabolized in the liver; 10–15% is excreted 
unchanged in the urine.
Follicle stimulating hormone
The β-subunit of FSH contains 118 amino acids. 
Carbohydrate constitutes 22–25% of the dry weight of 
FSH and there are four branched, mannose-rich oligosac-
charide side chains covalently bound to asparagine resi-
dues, two on the α-subunit and two on the β-subunit. The 
biological role of the carbohydrate is partly to protect the 
hormone against degradation. Follicle stimulating hor-
mone is synthesized and secreted by gonadotrophic cells 
of the anterior pituitary, which also synthesize LH.
The primary target of FSH is the granulosa cell of the 
ovarian follicle. Follicle stimulating hormone stimulates 
differentiation of immature granulosa cells, induces cyto-
chrome P450-dependent aromatase, induces LH recep-
tors on granulosa cells and increases the binding of FSH 
by granulosa cells. The circulating half-life of FSH is ~4 h. 
Oestradiol amplifies the actions of FSH on granulosa cells.
Luteinizing hormone
The β-subunit of LH consists of 92 amino acids. 
Luteinizing hormone has three carbohydrate side chains, 
carbohydrate accounting for approximately 15% of the 
dry weight of the hormone. The circulatory half-life of 
LH is short (20 min), contributing to the pronounced 
pulsatility of plasma LH concentrations.
Ovarian LH receptors are found on theca cells and on 
mature granulosa cells. Luteinizing hormone stimulates 
production of androgens by the theca cells, and of oes-
tradiol and progesterone by mature granulosa cells and 
corpus luteal cells. Luteinizing hormone regulates steroid 
biosynthesis by influencing uptake and side chain cleav-
age of cholesterol.
Human chorionic gonadotrophin
The β-subunit of hCG consists of 145 amino acids. The hor-
mone is synthesized by the syncytiotrophoblastic cells of the 
placenta. It has a relatively long plasma half-life (24–36 h).
Human chorionic gonadotrophin interacts with the 
same receptors on luteal cells as does LH. It acts in the 
first trimester of pregnancy to maintain the corpus luteum 
and its ability to secrete progesterone, which supports the 
endometrium. After the first trimester, the placenta takes 
over the synthesis of progesterone from the corpus lu-
teum. Human chorionic gonadotrophin is detectable in 
plasma eight days after conception and its concentration 
peaks around the tenth week of pregnancy.
Human chorionic gonadotrophin also stimulates tes-
tosterone synthesis in the testes of male fetuses, provid-
ing stimulation for male sexual differentiation.
Inhibin and activin
Inhibin is a glycoprotein that has been isolated from 
follicular fluid in two forms comprising a common α-
subunit and one of two β-subunits, βA (in inhibin A) and 
βB (in inhibin B). Follicular fluid also contains two dimers 
of the inhibin β-subunit, which are called activin: activin 
A is the homodimer of the βA-subunit, activin A-B is the 
βAβB heterodimer.
Inhibin A and inhibin B have different patterns of cir-
culation during the two phases of the ovarian cycle and 
play different physiological roles during follicular re-
cruitment, maturation and ovulation. In the luteal phase, 
	
22  Reproductive function in the female	
437
inhibin A suppresses FSH secretion. The concentration 
of inhibin A then decreases significantly as the corpus lu-
teum involutes.
Development of the dominant follicle is characterized 
by secretion of increasingly large amounts of oestradiol 
and inhibin A into the circulation. There is evidence that 
the maintenance of the follicle is affected by intraovarian 
signalling, with inhibins and activins acting as important 
paracrine messengers.
During the menstrual cycle, plasma activin A concen-
trations vary in a biphasic manner, with the highest values 
occurring at mid-cycle during the luteo-follicular transi-
tion and nadirs occurring in the mid-follicular and mid-
luteal phases.
Prolactin
Prolactin is a single chain polypeptide comprising 199 
amino acids. It shares a high degree of homology with 
growth hormone and placental lactogen. Its most po-
tent biological form (80–90%) is monomeric; 8–20% 
is dimeric and 1–5% is macroprolactin. The latter is a 
complex of monomeric prolactin and IgG and is immu-
noreactive (i.e. detected in most assay systems) but bio-
logically relatively inactive.
Prolactin is synthesized by lactotroph cells of the 
anterior pituitary. Dopamine is the principal negative 
modulator of prolactin secretion; oestrogens and thy-
roid hormone releasing hormone increase prolactin 
release.
Prolactin has a variety of actions in vertebrates, play-
ing roles in processes as diverse as osmoregulation and 
metamorphosis. It also has a direct but variable effect 
on follicular development and function. Prolactin is lu-
teotrophic in some mammals but not in man. The only 
definite role of prolactin in women is the postpartum ini-
tiation and maintenance of milk production.
Macroprolactinaemia is a relatively common phenom-
enon in patients with hyperprolactinaemia in clinical 
practice; to ensure appropriate detection and manage-
ment, all patients found to have significant hyperprolacti-
naemia should be screened for macroprolactinaemia (see 
Chapter 18).
Anti-Müllerian hormone
Anti-Müllerian hormone is a glycoprotein also known 
as Müllerian inhibitory factor (MIF) (see Chapter 21 for 
its role in normal and disordered sex development). It 
belongs to the transforming growth factor b family and 
is encoded on the short arm of chromosome 19. It acts 
through two receptors (AMHR1 and 2), which are present 
on the target organs in the gonads and Müllerian ducts.
Measurement of AMH is used clinically for assessment 
of ‘ovarian reserve’ and likely response to ovarian stimu-
lation for subfertility. It has largely superseded measure-
ment of basal FSH and inhibin B as a marker of follicular 
potential, particularly as the concentrations do not change 
with the menstrual cycle. It can also be used as a tumour 
marker for granulosa cell malignancies and appears to be 
an excellent marker for polycystic ovarian syndrome as 
these patients have significantly elevated concentrations.
REPRODUCTIVE STEROID HORMONES
Structure
Ovarian steroid hormones are derivatives of cholesterol 
and contain the cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene nu-
cleus (Fig. 22.4). Oestrogens (C-18 steroids), androgens 
(C-19 steroids) and progestogens (C-21 steroids) contain 
18, 19 and 21 carbon atoms, respectively. These com-
pounds and the pathways involved in their biosynthesis 
are illustrated in Figure 22.5.
Biosynthetic enzymes
The numbers below refer to the enzymes and pathways 
labelled in Figure 22.5.
1.	 Cholesterol side chain cleavage. Three separate reactions 
are involved: 20α-hydroxylation, 22-hydroxylation 
and splitting of the C20–22 carbon bond. This is 
the point where LH primarily regulates ovarian 
steroidogenesis. The product of the process, which 
occurs in a mitochondrial complex containing the 
cytochrome P450 system, is pregnenolone.
2.	 3β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase Δ4,5 isomerase. This 
catalyses both the 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydroge-
nation and isomerization of the double bond from 
ring B to ring A. Pregnenolone is thereby converted 
to progesterone.
	3/4.	 17α-Hydroxylase/17,20-desmolase. This ­catalyses the 
17α-hydroxylation of pregnenolone and progester-
one. The desmolase reaction involves the forma-
tion of a peroxide at C-20, epoxidation of the C-17 
and C-20 carbons and side chain cleavage to form 
the C-17 oxosteroids ­dehydroepiandrosterone (from 
­pregnenolone) and androstenedione (from progester-
one). Both reactions are catalysed by the same enzyme. 
The cyclopentanoperhydrophenanthrene nucleus
Cholesterol
A
B
C
D
4
6
7
HO
19
2
3
1
5
10
18
11
12
14
13
20
22
24
23
21
17
15
16
9
8
26
27
25
FIGURE 22.4  ■  Structural basis of steroid hormones.
438	
Clinical biochemistry
The intermediates are 17α-hydroxypregnenolone 
and 17α-hydroxyprogesterone, respectively.
5.	 17-Oxosteroid reductase. This catalyses the conver-
sion of a 17-oxosteroid to a 17β-hydroxysteroid and 
vice versa. Androstenedione and oestrone are con-
verted to testosterone and oestradiol, respectively.
6.	 Aromatase. This converts C-19Δ4,3 oxosteroids to 
oestrogens by hydroxylation of the C-19 angular 
methyl group, oxidation and cleavage of the C-19 
methyl group as formaldehyde, dehydrogenation 
of the A ring, and finally conversion of the 3-oxo 
group to a 3β-hydroxy group. The activity of this 
enzyme in granulosa cells is regulated by FSH.
Oestrogens are synthesized from androstenedione, the 
major pathway being through oestrone. Pregnenolone is 
converted to androstenedione either by the Δ4 pathway 
(through progesterone) or by the Δ5 pathway (through 
dehydroepiandrosterone).
The Δ4 pathway is favoured in granulosa/corpus luteal 
cells, while the Δ5 is favoured in theca cells.
The major secreted oestrogen is 17β-oestradiol; it is 
in equilibrium with oestrone in the circulation. Oestrone 
is further metabolized to oestriol, probably mostly in the 
liver. Oestradiol is the most potent oestrogen of the three 
and oestriol the least.
Steroid secretion through the  
menstrual cycle
Before ovulation the granulosa cells are not vascularized. 
The theca cells produce large quantities of androgens, 
which diffuse into the granulosa cells and are converted 
to oestrogens. This concept of cooperation between cell 
types is called the two-cell theory. Vascularization of the 
granulosa cells leads to increased progesterone secre-
tion in the luteal phase. The stromal cells of the ovaries 
secrete small amounts of androgens. This secretion be-
comes more significant after the menopause when it adds 
to oestrogen concentrations through peripheral conver-
sion in adipose tissue.
Steroid hormone transport and metabolism
Most of the circulating oestrogens and progesterone is 
protein bound, loosely to albumin and strongly to globu-
lins: oestrogens are carried by SHBG and progesterone 
HO
1
Cholesterol
20
22
HO
C
O
CH3
HO
C
O
OH
OH
CH3
HO
O
O
O
C
O
CH3
O
C
O
CH3
O
OH
OH
O
O
HO
HO
3
4
3
4
5
5
2
Pregnenolone
2
17α- Hydroxypregnenolone
2
Dehydroepiandrosterone
6
Androstenedione
6
Testosterone
Oestrone
Oestradiol
17α-Hydroxyprogesterone
Progesterone
FIGURE 22.5  ■  Ovarian steroid biosynthetic pathways. The numbered arrows correspond to the description of biosynthetic enzymes 
in the text.
	
22  Reproductive function in the female	
439
by cortisol-binding globulin. Degradation of both C-18 
and C-21 steroids occurs in the liver and involves hydrox-
ylation and water solubilization by conversion to glucuro-
nide and sulphate conjugates. Water-soluble metabolites 
are excreted in urine and in bile. Quantitative urinary 
tests were used in the past to assess concentrations of 
oestrogens and progestogens, but have been superseded 
by rapid, sensitive and specific serum immunoassays. The 
major excreted oestrogen and progestogen are oestradiol 
and pregnanediol, respectively.
Actions of gonadal steroid hormones
Oestrogens
Oestrogens broadly maintain the functions of the repro-
ductive tract, are responsible for the development of sec-
ondary sexual characteristics and affect sexual behaviour. 
Oestrogens cause myometrial hypertrophy, cause the 
endometrium to thicken in the follicular phase, promote 
­secretion of large amounts of watery cervical mucus around 
the time of ovulation and maintain vaginal function; after 
bilateral oophorectomy or the menopause, the uterus and 
vagina shrink in size.
Oestrogens produce duct growth in the breasts 
and are responsible for breast enlargement at puberty. 
Oestrogens, like androgens, increase libido in humans, 
apparently by a direct action on hypothalamic neurons. 
In general, oestrogens reduce secretion of LH and FSH 
(negative feedback) but, in mid-cycle, oestrogens increase 
LH secretion (positive feedback). In addition to their re-
productive role, oestrogens have important systemic ef-
fects: they maintain bone density and skin thickness and 
protect against atheromatous arterial disease in premeno-
pausal females.
Synthetic oestrogen derivatives with agonist actions are 
used in contraceptive and hormone replacement prepara-
tions. Ethinyloestradiol is the most commonly used, par-
ticularly in contraceptives; it is potent and, unlike naturally 
occurring oestrogens, is active when given by mouth.
Anti-oestrogen preparations are also available: clomifene 
citrate and tamoxifen are non-steroidal triphenylethylene 
derivatives with mixed oestrogen agonist and antagonist 
actions. Clomifene citrate is used to induce ovulation, and 
tamoxifen to treat oestrogen-dependent breast cancers.
Progestogens
Progesterone causes secretory changes in endometrium 
already primed by oestrogen. It promotes the secretion of 
smaller amounts of thicker cervical mucus. It is essential 
for the maintenance of early pregnancy.
Synthetic steroids with progesterone agonist properties 
are used in contraception and hormone replacement ther-
apy. Those commonly used tend to be derivatives either 
of 17α-hydroxyprogesterone or of 19-nortestosterone. 
Both types of derivative are used in combined oral con-
traceptive preparations: along with ethinyloestradiol, they 
prevent follicle growth, promote an endometrial reaction 
unfavourable to implantation and render cervical mucus 
thick and impenetrable to sperm.
Mifepristone is a derivative of norethisterone that 
blocks the actions of progesterone peripherally. It induces 
menstruation when given in the late luteal phase and in-
duces abortion when given in pregnancy.
Androgens
The two main androgens in the female are testosterone 
and androstenedione. Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) 
and its sulphate (DHEAS) are less important andro-
gens. During the reproductive years, 90% of DHEA and 
DHEAS is synthesized by the adrenals and 10% by the 
ovaries. Androstenedione is derived equally from the ova-
ries and adrenals. Only 50% of testosterone production is 
glandular (roughly equal contributions from adrenals and 
ovaries), the remainder resulting from peripheral me-
tabolism of weaker androgens, mostly in adipose tissue. 
A total of 99% of testosterone is bound and 1% is free: 
the great majority (78%) is bound to SHBG. This is a 
glycoprotein synthesized in the liver, with a carbohydrate 
content of 34%. It is a high-affinity, low-capacity binding 
protein. Plasma SHBG concentrations are raised when 
oestrogen concentrations are high (as in pregnancy) and 
in hyperthyroidism; concentrations are low in women 
treated with testosterone. Because SHBG-bound testos-
terone is relatively inert biologically, it may be useful for 
laboratories to measure both testosterone and SHBG, to 
give an indication of how much testosterone is not bound 
to SHBG (‘free androgen index’).
OLIGO- AND AMENORRHOEA
Oligomenorrhoea is defined as a menstrual cycle length 
of greater than six weeks but less than six months. 
Amenorrhoea is complete absence of menstruation or 
cycle length greater than six months. In these conditions, 
ovulation does not occur or is very infrequent. Women 
with oligo- or amenorrhoea may seek medical assistance 
because their bleeding pattern is abnormal, because of in-
fertility, because of hirsutism/virilism or with a combina-
tion of these complaints.
The majority of patients with oligomenorrhoea have 
the polycystic ovary syndrome. The classic ‘polycystic 
ovary syndrome’ (PCOS) was described by Stein and 
Leventhal in 1935; they described an association be-
tween polycystic ovaries and oligo- and amenorrhoea in 
a small series of patients, most of whom were infertile or 
hirsute. It later became apparent that plasma concentra-
tions of LH and/or androgens are elevated in many, but 
not all, women with polycystic ovaries; FSH concen-
trations are normal. However, it should be noted that 
around a quarter of women who have no gynaecologi-
cal symptoms have also been found to have polycystic 
ovaries.
Polycystic ovary syndrome is a syndrome of ovarian 
dysfunction. It seems most likely that changes in the pat-
tern of gonadotrophin secretion are responsible for the 
failure of antral follicles to grow and for a dominant fol-
licle to emerge and ovulate (Fig. 22.2A). It is possible to 
induce follicular growth in patients with PCOS by thera-
peutic administration of FSH. It is important to recog-
nize that polycystic ovaries and PCOS can occasionally 
occur as a secondary phenomenon in patients with other 
endocrine disorders. These include conditions such as 
440	
Clinical biochemistry
congenital adrenal hyperplasia and Cushing syndrome, 
hyperprolactinaemia and acromegaly.
The revised diagnostic criteria of PCOS require any 
two of the following to be present:
•	 oligo- or anovulation
•	 clinical 
and/or 
biochemical 
evidence 
of 
hyperandrogenism
•	 polycystic ovaries
and exclusion of other aetiologies (e.g. congenital adre-
nal hyperplasia, androgen-secreting tumours, Cushing 
syndrome).
The primary clinical indicator of androgen excess is 
the presence of hirsutism or acne. The sole presence of 
androgenic alopecia as an indicator of hyperandrogenism 
has been less well studied.
Few data are available on the value of routinely mea-
suring androstenedione in hyperandrogenic patients, 
although it may be somewhat more elevated in patients 
with non-classic 21-hydroxylase deficiency congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia than in PCOS. Nonetheless, at pres-
ent, the paucity of clinical data with androstenedione pre-
cludes its recommendation for the routine assessment of 
hyperandrogenism.
Weight loss can help to regularize menstrual periods 
with resumption of natural ovulation. If weight loss fails, 
clomifene, tamoxifen or gonadotrophins may be used to 
induce ovulation. Metformin may also improve ovulation 
rates when used with clomifene in patients resistant to 
clomifene alone.
Cyproterone acetate (an anti-androgenic progestogen) 
reduces hirsutism and is usually given as part of a com-
bined oral contraceptive pill. The oestrogen component 
increases the plasma concentration of SHBG, which is 
often low in women with PCOS. The result is a decrease 
in the concentration of free testosterone, which also 
contributes to the reduction in hirsutism and acne. The 
treatment adopted depends on the desired outcome, for 
example whether this is to control acne, regularize men-
struation or to achieve pregnancy.
Polycystic ovary syndrome is frequently associated 
with the metabolic syndrome of insulin resistance, hyper-
insulinaemia and dyslipidaemia. This topic is discussed in 
detail in Chapter 15.
Hyperprolactinaemia is another important cause of 
oligo/amenorrhoea and acts by suppressing LH secre-
tion and inhibiting ovulation. The normal range for 
plasma prolactin concentration in women is approxi-
mately 300–700 mIU/L, although this is dependent on 
the assay used. It is difficult to define a precise upper 
limit, but significant disease is unlikely unless the pro-
lactin concentration is >1000 mIU/L. The possibility 
that hyperprolactinaemia is secondary to drugs (e.g. opi-
ates, methyldopa, antipsychotics, oestrogens and meto-
clopramide) must be excluded. Thyrotropin-releasing 
hormone (TRH) stimulates prolactin secretion, and 
therefore primary hypothyroidism can cause oligomen-
orrhoea. Patients found to have unexplained significant 
hyperprolactinaemia should have pituitary imaging to 
exclude a macroprolactinoma (a prolactin-secreting ade-
noma) or a non-functioning tumour (interfering with the 
normal dopamine suppression of prolactin secretion); 
the most frequent diagnoses resulting are idiopathic 
disease (no scan abnormality) or a microadenoma. (See 
Chapter 18 for further details.)
The medical management of hyperprolactinaemia is 
with a dopamine agonist. Bromocriptine has been used 
widely, but cabergoline, a longer acting preparation, is 
now usually preferred. It is better tolerated and more effi-
cacious than bromocriptine but is associated with psychi-
atric adverse effects. Quinagolide is another longer acting 
preparation, and an alternative to cabergoline. This topic 
is discussed further in Chapter 18. Trans-sphenoidal sur-
gery is an option for some patients.
Primary ovarian failure also causes amenorrhoea. It is 
diagnosed by the finding of a raised plasma FSH con-
centration (>40 IU/L) and is irreversible. Other causes 
of oligomenorrhoea include androgen-secreting tumours 
and late onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia: these con-
ditions are discussed later in this chapter, in the account 
of hirsutism and virilism.
INFERTILITY
Infertility is defined as failure to conceive after 12 months 
of regular sexual intercourse without contraception. The 
partner’s semen should be analysed to exclude male sub-
fertility, but the results are often inconclusive; insemina-
tion of mature oocytes in vitro establishes the fertilizing 
capacity of semen more reliably.
Imaging techniques are of considerable importance 
in the investigation of infertility. Laparoscopy with hy-
drotubation, hysterosalpingography and hysterocontrast 
sonography all assess patency of the fallopian tubes, using 
direct vision, radiography and sonography respectively; 
intraperitoneal spillage of fluid injected through the cer-
vix excludes tubal blockage. Transvaginal ultrasonogra-
phy is used to assess ovarian morphology and to monitor 
ovulation.
Tests to predict ovulation are required in women who 
have long cycles (>35 days). The LH surge that precedes 
follicle rupture can be detected by qualitative urine tests 
based on monoclonal antibodies. Commercially available 
point-of-care tests are very sensitive and are increasingly 
being used. Measuring serum progesterone concentra-
tion in the mid-luteal phase (i.e. seven days after time of 
expected ovulation) is a well-established method for as-
sessing ovulation. Values in conception cycles have been 
found to range between 28 and 53 nmol/L; 30 nmol/L 
is generally taken as the lower limit of normal for mid-
luteal phase progesterone. Blood sampling before or ­after 
the mid-luteal peak can give misleadingly low values. 
Sampling can be timed correctly by taking serial speci-
mens and identifying the mid-luteal phase specimen ret-
rospectively. It is the specimen taken seven days before 
the first day of the next menstrual period. (The classic day 
21 sample will only be the mid-luteal phase if the woman 
has a regular 28-day cycle.) Progesterone is secreted in a 
pulsatile fashion during the luteal phase, concentrations 
varying by as much as a factor of three; when sampling 
coincides with a trough, the plasma progesterone con-
centration may appear abnormally low.
Basal plasma concentrations of FSH and LH are mea-
sured routinely in infertile women. A single specimen is 
	
22  Reproductive function in the female	
441
usually taken during the early follicular phase on day 1–3 
of the cycle. Interpretation of apparently abnormal early 
follicular phase gonadotrophin concentrations must take 
into account the pulsatile nature of release of both hor-
mones. For LH, the pulse interval in the early follicular 
phase is 65–90 min, with peak and trough concentrations 
varying by as much as a factor of five. Plasma FSH con-
centrations do not fluctuate so widely – by a factor of 
two at the most. Elevated FSH concentrations in women 
with normal-length menstrual cycles indicate dimin-
ished fertility and possibly incipient ovarian failure. In 
patients undergoing assisted conception, early follicular 
phase plasma FSH concentrations are inversely related to 
the number of oocytes obtained and to the probability 
of conception. Measurement of AMH, however, is now 
preferred, as it gives a more accurate reflection of ovar-
ian reserve and likely response to ovarian stimulation, and 
is not dependent on the day of the cycle. Measurement 
of early follicular phase LH is of less certain diagnostic 
value; concentrations tend to be abnormally high in pa-
tients with PCOS. Misleadingly high values are obtained 
when sampling coincides with a pulse peak. Basal concen-
trations of prolactin and thyroid hormones are unlikely to 
be of diagnostic value unless the length of the menstrual 
cycle is abnormal.
Increasingly, subfertility, whatever its cause, is treated 
using assisted conception techniques. Modern superovu-
lation regimens promote the development of more than 
one follicle and include the use of gonadotrophin releas-
ing hormone analogues, follicle stimulating hormone and 
human chorionic gonadotrophins.
Oocytes are collected by ultrasound-directed follicle 
aspiration. They are then either incubated with sperm 
(in vitro fertilization, IVF) or directly injected (intracy-
toplasmic sperm injection, ICSI). The resulting embryos 
are then transferred to the uterine cavity.
The major risk of superovulation regimens is ovarian 
hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS). This generally oc-
curs in the luteal phase or during early pregnancy and 
is triggered by either exogenous or endogenous hCG. 
Patients with polycystic ovaries, more than 20–25 fol-
licles in both ovaries or with a high (>6000 pmol/L) or 
rapidly rising oestradiol (doubling on consecutive days) 
prior to hCG administration are most at risk. Mild OHSS 
is common (20–30% of stimulated cycles) and leads to 
abdominal distension, enlarged ovaries, nausea and vom-
iting and is treated conservatively. Severe OHSS (<2%), 
caused by increased vascular permeability and fluid shift 
out of the intravascular space, presents with ascites, in-
creased blood viscosity, oliguria, thromboembolism and 
respiratory problems and can result in multi-organ fail-
ure. Biochemical changes include hyponatraemia from 
hypersecretion of antidiuretic hormone, hyperkalaemia, 
hypoalbuminaemia, abnormal liver enzymes and high 
plasma creatinine.
HIRSUTISM AND VIRILISM
Hirsutism means excessive hair growth in sites usually as-
sociated with male sexual maturity, that is, the face, lower 
abdomen (giving the appearance of a male escutcheon), 
anterior thigh, mid-chest and periareolar region. It can 
be associated with acne and oily skin. Virilism refers to 
more extreme manifestations of androgen exposure, in-
cluding temporal hair recession, clitoromegaly, increased 
muscle mass, breast atrophy and deepening of the voice.
Dihydrotestosterone derived from testosterone acts on 
hair follicles to stimulate growth of terminal hair (long, 
coarse and pigmented) rather than vellus hair (short, fine 
and poorly pigmented). Once stimulated, the hair follicle 
remains responsive to low-dose weak androgen exposure 
because it has attained the ability to convert weak andro-
gens to testosterone.
Polycystic ovary syndrome is responsible for hirsutism 
in a substantial proportion of patients. Rarer causes are 
discussed below. In many cases, however, no cause can be 
diagnosed; such hirsutism is termed idiopathic.
In idiopathic hirsutism, total plasma testosterone con-
centrations are normal, but subtle androgen disorders can 
generally be identified. Plasma androstenedione concen-
trations may be elevated and SHBG reduced; free tes-
tosterone concentration may be raised even though total 
testosterone is within normal limits.
The investigation of hirsutism should determine 
whether androgen concentrations are indeed elevated and 
to what degree, and rule out serious disease (particularly 
malignancy) of the ovaries or adrenals. Grossly elevated 
testosterone concentrations (>5 nmol/L) and hirsutism of 
sudden onset (especially if accompanied by virilism) sug-
gest malignancy.
Computed axial tomography (CT) or magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) is used to visualize adrenal 
tumours. Laboratory investigations used to evaluate 
hirsutism include measurements of serum cortisol and 
17α-hydroxyprogesterone, in addition to testosterone, 
androstenedione and SHBG; steroid hormone concen-
trations following overnight dexamethasone suppression 
or ACTH stimulation may also be useful. Congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia is a recognized cause of hirsutism. 
The most frequent type is 21-hydroxylase deficiency, 
which results in elevated plasma concentrations of 17α-
hydroxyprogesterone and increased synthesis of adrenal 
androgens. Testosterone concentrations are significantly 
elevated and ACTH stimulation is followed by an excessive 
increase in 17α-hydroxyprogesterone (see Appendix 22.1, 
below, for protocol). In Cushing syndrome, there is typi-
cally loss of the normal diurnal rhythm in plasma cortisol 
concentrations and failure of suppression in the overnight 
dexamethasone suppression test.
Although 90% of DHEAS is normally of adrenal ori-
gin, elevated DHEAS concentrations in hirsutism do not 
confirm an adrenal source of the excess: elevated DHEAS 
concentrations may also be found in polycystic ovary syn-
drome. However, a DHEAS concentration of more than 
twice the upper limit of normal does suggest the possibil-
ity of an adrenal tumour. Suppression of elevated andro-
gen concentrations in hirsutism by dexamethasone might 
be expected to confirm an adrenal source; however, se-
lective venous catheterization studies have demonstrated 
that elevated ovarian androgens can also be suppressed by 
dexamethasone in patients with hirsutism.
Once the rarer causes of hirsutism (Box 22.1) have been 
excluded, treatment consists of medication to suppress 
442	
Clinical biochemistry
androgen secretion or counter its effects. Combined oral 
contraceptives and the anti-androgen cyproterone acet­
ate are widely used. Medical treatment can be supple-
mented by cosmetic techniques such as shaving, waxing 
and electrolysis.
PREGNANCY
Introduction
Pregnancy is associated with marked hormonal changes 
in the maternal circulation that facilitate the metabolic, 
vascular and immunological adjustments necessary for 
the fetus to thrive. Abnormal concentrations of these 
hormones, or of other plasma constituents of fetoplacen-
tal origin, may indicate gestational pathology. The met-
abolic changes associated with pregnancy are relatively 
short lived and thus are rarely harmful to the healthy 
mother.
Prior to the widespread availability of high-­
resolution ultrasound scanning, the diagnosis of early 
pregnancy failure (such as spontaneous abortion and 
ectopic pregnancy), fetal malformation and fetal 
growth disturbances relied solely on clinical evaluation 
backed by tests on maternal blood. Although these in-
direct and often inaccurate methods have largely been 
replaced by ultrasound technology, biochemical assays 
still form an important part of the screening of many 
pregnancies.
Biochemical diagnosis of pregnancy
Human chorionic gonadotrophin
Human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) can be detected in 
maternal blood 7–9 days after conception (i.e. 22–24 days 
after the last menstrual period in women with regular 
­28-day cycles) and in urine 1–2 days later. The biochemical 
diagnosis of pregnancy is routinely made by a monoclonal 
antibody enzyme immunoassay that detects urinary hCG 
concentrations as low as 25 IU/L. The plasma concentra-
tion of hCG in normal pregnancy rises steeply to a peak at 
ten weeks of gestation and then falls and remains at a lower 
concentration for the remainder of pregnancy. This fall at 
the end of the first trimester is peculiar to hCG, as concen-
trations of the other chemical products of the fetoplacental 
unit rise with increasing length of gestation.
High sensitivity assays have shown that hCG is pres-
ent in the plasma at low concentrations (<5 IU/L) prior 
to conception. The biochemical diagnosis of pregnancy 
should only be made when plasma hCG concentration ex-
ceeds 25 IU/L or if a lower concentration doubles within 
two days. In cases where exogenous hCG has been given 
to induce ovulation, hCG estimations should be delayed by 
up to 14 days to allow clearance of the administered hCG.
The use of quantitative serum hCG estimations in the 
diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy is discussed below.
Apart from its place in the diagnosis of pregnancy, 
other well-established roles for hCG estimation are in 
the diagnosis and monitoring of gestational tropho-
blastic disease and as a marker for some tumours (see 
Chapter 42). The diagnosis of gestational trophoblastic 
disease is usually made ultrasonographically or histo-
logically after an episode of vaginal bleeding in early 
pregnancy, though the condition may present after 
a term pregnancy when persistently high concentra-
tions of hCG may help in making the diagnosis. After 
the uterus has been surgically evacuated, persistence 
or recurrence of the condition is monitored by serial 
quantitative hCG assays. The response of gestational 
trophoblastic disease to chemotherapy can be moni-
tored in a similar fashion.
Human chorionic gonadotrophin measurement also 
plays a part in screening for Down syndrome. This topic 
is discussed on p. 443.
Diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy
Ectopic pregnancy poses a considerable hazard to the 
mother (95% are tubal: a ruptured tubal pregnancy can 
cause severe intra-abdominal bleeding), so that accurate 
diagnosis of this condition is essential. The symptoms and 
signs are notoriously variable and definitive diagnosis fre-
quently depends on laparoscopy. However, use of ­additional 
investigations, such as measurement of hCG concentra-
tion, may help to reduce the number of ‘unnecessary’ lap-
aroscopies and allow medical or conservative treatment.
Transvaginal ultrasound enables the diagnosis of in-
trauterine pregnancy at a time when the plasma hCG 
concentration is around 1000 IU/L. The absence of a 
visible embryonic sac within the uterus in these circum-
stances makes an ectopic pregnancy the likely diagnosis. 
The rate of increase in plasma hCG concentrations may 
provide useful additional information. Early in a normal 
pregnancy, these usually double every two days, while the 
rise in ectopic pregnancy is, in general, less. Progesterone 
measurements have also been used in the investigation 
of possible ectopic pregnancy. A plasma progesterone 
concentration of >25 nmol/L is suggestive of a viable 
intrauterine pregnancy; however, recent guidelines from 
the National Institute for Health and Care Excellence 
(NICE) in the UK suggest that progesterone measure-
ment should no longer be used in this context. Low or 
falling concentrations of progesterone and hCG may al-
low expectant management if symptoms are minimal, as 
this suggests that the pregnancy is failing and will resolve 
spontaneously. Surgery can also be avoided in patients 
with hCG <5000 IU/L and minimal symptoms, as they 
can be treated with the folate antagonist, methotrexate, as 
long as hCG monitoring is available. Pain and haemody-
namic instability are indications for laparoscopy.
In clinical practice, the diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy 
depends on a high index of suspicion, measurement of 
serum hCG concentration, pelvic ultrasound and, when 
indicated, laparoscopy.
BOX 22.1	
Some rare causes of hirsutism
•	 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (adult onset)
•	 Cushing syndrome
•	 Ovarian tumours
•	 Adrenal tumours
•	 Self-administration of androgens
	
22  Reproductive function in the female	
443
Biochemical monitoring of pregnancy
Spontaneous abortion
Many studies have reported low concentrations of ­various 
hormones and placental proteins in patients with early 
spontaneous abortion. However, these studies have ­often 
been performed after the onset of bleeding and their 
findings may have been the result, rather than the cause, 
of the pregnancy failure. Plasma progesterone concentra-
tions have, for example, been reported to be low in these 
circumstances, but administration of progestogens to 
women with threatened abortions has not been shown to 
prevent pregnancy loss.
Screening for fetal malformation
Prior to the widespread availability of high-resolution 
ultrasound scanners, the antenatal detection of fetal mal-
formation was based on maternal biochemical screening. 
To some extent, ultrasound has made this screening less 
important, but these tests may focus attention on the 
high-risk pregnancy so that an appropriate diagnostic 
procedure can be performed.
Biochemical screening. Screening for Down syndrome 
(trisomy 21) in the past has depended entirely on mater-
nal age and past history of chromosomal abnormalities 
in offspring and has resulted in some form of invasive 
tissue sampling (chorionic villus sampling or amniocen-
tesis) being offered to essentially all pregnant women 
over a locally agreed age, usually 35 years. (The risk of 
a Down syndrome pregnancy is 1:1528 at maternal age 
20, 1:1351 at 25, 1:909 at 30, 1:384 at 35 and 1:112 at age 
40.) This approach was unsatisfactory because, although 
the risk of trisomy 21 increases with maternal age, 70% 
of Down ­infants are born to women below the age of 35. 
In ­addition, many women over 35 decline the offer of in-
vasive tissue sampling because of the risk of miscarriage.
The observation in 1984 that maternal plasma α-
fetoprotein (AFP) concentrations were lower in the 
presence of fetal Down syndrome than in unaffected 
pregnancies, led to its use in screening for this condition. 
Subsequently, maternal plasma concentrations of hCG 
were found to be elevated and concentrations of uncon-
jugated oestriol decreased when the fetus had Down syn-
drome. The assay of these substances in maternal plasma 
at around 16  weeks of gestation has become known as 
the ‘triple test’ and, in combination with maternal age 
and weight, gives a risk score of the fetus having Down 
syndrome.
The chosen cut-off for a ‘positive’ screen will govern 
the detection and false positive rates. A commonly chosen 
cut-off is a triple test result representing a risk of 1 in 250 
or higher, corresponding approximately with the risk for 
a maternal age of 35 years alone. At this cut-off, there is 
a detection rate of 61% and a false positive rate of 5%.
Maternal biochemical screening for Down syndrome 
is not diagnostic of the condition, but allows a better se-
lection of a high-risk group (to whom diagnostic amnio-
centesis may be offered) than use of maternal age alone. 
However, screening does not detect other, more serious 
trisomies, for which older women are also at increased 
risk. The detection and analysis of free fetal DNA in the 
maternal plasma may, in future, obviate the need for inva-
sive testing and reduce the risk of fetal loss.
α-Fetoprotein is one of the two major proteins in the 
fetal circulation. The AFP concentration in fetal plasma 
greatly exceeds that in amniotic fluid and maternal plasma. 
Thus, even minor leakages from the conceptus result in 
readily detectable rises in maternal plasma AFP concentra-
tions. This formed the basis of maternal screening in the 
second trimester for a range of fetal malformations, e.g. 
neural tube defects, but these are now reliably diagnosed 
by ultrasound. Several situations can give rise to false posi-
tive results, the most important of which is an incorrect 
estimation of gestational age, as maternal plasma AFP 
rises steeply at 16–20 weeks (Fig. 22.6). Multiple pregnan-
cies are also associated with higher concentrations.
Ultrasound. While ultrasound examination allows the 
diagnosis of the majority of significant structural fetal 
anomalies, most genetic disorders cannot be diagnosed by 
this means and require tissue sampling techniques to iden-
tify an affected fetus. The majority of these procedures 
are performed for fetal karyotyping, but despite the in-
creasing use of tissue sampling techniques such as amnio-
centesis and chorionic villus sampling (CVS) over the last 
20–30 years, there has not been a significant reduction in 
the birth incidence of infants with abnormal karyotypes.
Current screening practice. An important advance in 
the antenatal diagnosis of Down syndrome was the rec-
ognition of the nuchal translucency (NT) sign. This is the 
appearance on ultrasound of increased fluid at the back of 
the fetal neck in affected fetuses and can be detected late 
in the first trimester. Its specificity and sensitivity are en-
hanced if it is combined with other investigations such as 
measurement of hCG and pregnancy-associated plasma 
protein A (PAPP-A; the ‘combined test’). Pregnancy-
associated plasma protein A is a zinc metalloproteinase 
that acts on insulin-like growth factor binding protein 4, 
decreasing its affinity for IGF-1 and IGF-2, and thus reg-
ulating IGF activity in certain tissues. The combined test 
FIGURE 22.6  ■  Changes in α-fetoprotein (AFP) concentration with 
gestation in maternal and fetal plasma and amniotic fluid liquor.
444	
Clinical biochemistry
detects 90% of affected pregnancies with a screen posi-
tive rate of 2%, if a cut-off risk of 1:150 is chosen.
For women presenting only in the second trimester, 
the recommended screening tests are either the ‘triple 
test’, involving measurement of hCG, AFP and oestriol 
or the ‘quadruple test’ – the triple test with the addition 
of inhibin A. Other available tests are: the ‘integrated test’ 
(NT and serum measurements) or, if NT is not available, 
measurements on maternal serum alone (‘the serum inte-
grated test’) (see Box 22.2). The integrated test (if good 
quality NT measurement is available) performs better 
than the combined test but is more difficult to administer. 
The serum integrated test performs less well.
Women undergoing screening should appreciate that 
positive tests require confirmation (diagnosis) by an in-
vasive procedure: before 12 weeks of gestation, this is by 
chorionic villus sampling, thereafter by amniocentesis.
Fetal tissue sampling techniques
The prenatal diagnosis of many chromosomal and 
­genetic abnormalities requires tissue sampling. Various 
techniques are available (see Table  22.1 and Fig.  22.7) 
but, with few exceptions, if a diagnostic test is available 
for the condition under investigation, any of the methods 
of sampling may be employed. The differences between 
the techniques are primarily the gestation at which the 
test may be performed and the delay between sampling 
and the result. The list of inherited disorders that can be 
diagnosed by DNA studies is growing rapidly. However, 
in many cases, these conditions are not due to single gene 
abnormalities, or disease-specific gene probes are not 
available, and family studies may be necessary to evalu-
ate individual cases to assess their suitability for prenatal 
diagnosis. In  vitro fertilization has also opened up the 
possibility of preimplantation genetic diagnosis from one 
or two cell biopsy of the embryo, using comparative ge-
nomic hybridization or single nucleotide polymorphism 
arrays. It is beyond the scope of this book to discuss fetal 
tissue sampling techniques in detail, and this section only 
summarizes the essential features.
Chorionic villus sampling
As the fetus and the placenta both develop from the 
same early blastocyst, their genetic make-up is identical 
in the vast majority of cases. Thus, chromosomal and 
DNA analysis of the placenta (chorionic villi) will pro-
vide information about the fetus. The post-procedure 
spontaneous miscarriage rates for transabdominal and 
transcervical CVS are comparable at approximately 2.5%, 
not significantly different from the background rate of 
loss. Potential sources of diagnostic inaccuracy from CVS 
are maternal cell contamination and placental mosaicism.
Amniocentesis
Traditionally, amniocentesis was usually performed at 
15–16 weeks of gestation, but it can be performed ear-
lier. Results of cell culture become available 2–4 weeks 
later (though a preliminary result may be available within 
hours from direct examination); the associated fetal loss 
rate is approximately 1%. Amniocentesis can be used for 
biochemical assessment of the liquor for fetal lung matu-
rity (now rarely used in the UK). The production of the 
TABLE 22.1  Techniques for assessment  
of the fetus
Procedure
Gestation
Delay in result
PCR
Culture
Preimplantation 
diagnosis
3 day embryo
See text
–
Chorionic villus 
sampling
10+ weeks
2 days
2 weeks
Amniocentesis
15+ weeks
3 days
3 weeks
Cordocentesis
19+ weeks
–
1 week
Fetoscopy 
(anatomy/
sample)
15–20 weeks
–
1 week
Scanner
Amniocentesis
Cordocentesis
Chorionic villus sampling
Anterior abdominal wall
FIGURE 22.7  ■  Ultrasound-guided tissue sampling sites used dur-
ing pregnancy.
BOX 22.2	
Screening for Down syndrome
•	 From 11 to 14 weeks:
•	 Nuchal translucency (NT)
•	 The combined test (NT, hCG and PAPP-A)
•	 From 14 to 20 weeks:
•	 The triple test (hCG, AFP, OE3 (oestriol))
•	 The quadruple test (HCG, AFP, OE3 and inhibin A)
•	 From 11 to 14 and 14 to 20 weeks:
•	 The integrated test (NT, PAPP-A + hCG, AFP, OE3, 
inhibin A)
•	 The serum integrated test (PAPP-A + hCG, AFP, OE3, 
inhibin A)
Abbreviations are explained in the text.
	
22  Reproductive function in the female	
445
surfactants lecithin and sphingomyelin by the fetal lung 
are almost equal until ~32 weeks of gestation, after which 
the lecithin concentration increases more rapidly than 
that of sphingomyelin. A lecithin–sphingomyelin ratio of 
>2 indicates a low risk of the baby developing respiratory 
distress syndrome after birth. Amniocentesis can also be 
used for the monitoring of haemolytic disease of the fetus 
by determining the Rhesus genotype on uncultured am-
niocytes and measuring the optical density of the liquor 
at 450 nm as an indication of bilirubin concentration.
Cordocentesis
Fetal blood can be obtained from 19 weeks of gestation 
by cordocentesis, an outpatient procedure that does not 
require maternal sedation or the use of fetal paralysis. 
After visualization of the insertion of the umbilical cord 
into the placenta by real-time ultrasound, a needle is 
passed into the umbilical cord through the (locally an-
aesthetized) maternal abdomen. The fetal loss rate after 
cordocentesis is approximately 1%.
Monitoring of maternal and fetal well-being
The increased accuracy and availability of ultrasound-
based biophysical tests of fetal well-being has resulted 
in a marked decline in the use of biochemical tests, ex-
cept for a few clinical situations, for example serum uric 
acid measurements in a patient with pre-eclampsia, and 
‘liver function’ tests and serum bile acid measurements in 
women with obstetric cholestasis.
Pre-eclampsia is the occurrence of proteinuria and 
hypertension in pregnancy; peripheral oedema is often 
present. Untreated, it may progress to life-threatening 
severe hypertension, renal failure and convulsions (ec-
lampsia) or be complicated by the haemolysis, elevated 
liver enzymes and low platelets (HELLP) syndrome. An 
early biochemical feature of pre-eclampsia is an increase 
in plasma urate concentrations, as a result of increased re-
nal tubular reabsorption of urate secondary to decreased 
renal perfusion. However, this is an unreliable indicator, 
as urate concentrations rise in the last trimester of normal 
pregnancies.
Cholestasis of pregnancy is discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 14. The term includes acute fatty liver of preg-
nancy (of which hyperuricaemia is also a feature) and 
HELLP syndrome.
Intrapartum fetal monitoring
The widespread use of fetal heart rate (FHR) monitoring 
in labour resulted in an increase in the number of op-
erative deliveries, frequently delivering a neonate without 
any sign of asphyxia. As a result, fetal scalp blood sampling 
was introduced in order to improve the specificity of FHR 
monitoring alone. A variety of studies have demonstrated 
that, when interpreting FHR patterns, variability and ac-
celerations are the features that correlate most closely 
with fetal scalp pH or lactate concentration. The pres-
ence of normal variability or accelerations is indicative 
of normal oxygenation, whereas the presence of reduced 
variability or decelerations makes poor oxygenation and 
hence acidosis, more likely. Although there is good evi-
dence that continuous FHR monitoring can detect a low 
fetal pH, acidosis, especially in well-grown term fetuses, 
does not correlate well with fetal death or cerebral injury. 
Indeed, a number of studies suggest that only 8–15% 
of cases of cerebral palsy are associated with events oc-
curring during labour and, even in these, the link is not 
proven as causal.
Biochemical changes during pregnancy
Pregnancy is a major endocrine event in the female 
lifespan, involving wide-ranging and often consider-
able changes in the metabolism of various hormones. 
Concentrations of oestrogens, progesterone, testoster-
one and prolactin all increase steadily through gestation, 
while those of LH and FSH decrease. Sharp increases in 
the concentrations of hormone-binding globulins such 
as SHBG are seen, reaching a plateau by the end of the 
first trimester. In addition, placental hormones such as 
hCG and human placental lactogen (hPL) appear in the 
maternal circulation within the first few weeks follow-
ing conception. Pregnancy does not usually alter thyroid 
function to a significant extent, but changes in individual 
indices of thyroid function are often seen, such as in-
creases in plasma concentrations of total thyroxine (T4) 
secondary to an increase in thyroxine binding globulin. 
Free T4 and free tri-iodothyronine (fT3) concentrations 
may rise slightly in early pregnancy (as a result of the 
thyrotrophic action of hCG), but later fall to within, or 
just below, the non-pregnant reference ranges. Thyroid 
stimulating hormone concentrations tend to fall in early 
pregnancy (sometimes to undetectable concentrations), 
but later return to normal.
Associated with the changes in gonadotrophins and 
steroid hormones, pregnancy affects several metabolic 
processes in various tissues and organs, in turn altering 
the concentrations of many maternal plasma constitu-
ents. In some instances, these changes are apparently un-
related to the needs of mother or fetus. Because the use 
of standard reference ranges is often inappropriate dur-
ing pregnancy, an appreciation of the metabolic effects of 
pregnancy is desirable.
An important consideration when interpreting the 
effects of pregnancy on blood components is the asso-
ciated change in plasma volume. Total body water in-
creases by about 7 L during pregnancy, with an increase 
in extracellular fluid being responsible for at least half 
of this increase. Marked alterations in renal haemody-
namics accompany this increase in extracellular fluid. 
Both glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and renal plasma 
flow increase by up to 50% above pre-pregnancy values, 
changes that are compensated for by changes in tubular 
reabsorption. Plasma creatinine and urea concentrations 
decrease during pregnancy, and increases in creatinine 
clearance (paralleling the increase in GFR) become ap-
parent four weeks after conception, peaking 9–11 weeks 
later. Renal function may deteriorate markedly during 
pregnancy in women with pre-existing renal disease or 
a history of pre-eclampsia in a previous pregnancy, and 
monitoring of plasma urate and creatinine concentra-
tions is advisable.
446	
Clinical biochemistry
Plasma proteins
Pregnancy induces widespread changes in plasma protein 
concentrations, owing both to the effect of changes in 
plasma volume and to specific hormone-induced changes 
in protein synthesis and degradation. In general, total 
protein concentrations are slightly reduced, with those 
of albumin falling by approximately 15% and those of 
globulins (especially acute phase proteins) often increas-
ing. Two to three-fold increases in the concentrations of 
α1-antitrypsin, fibrinogen and caeruloplasmin are often 
seen during the later stages of gestation. Prealbumin is 
a notable exception as plasma concentrations fall during 
pregnancy. Plasma immunoglobulin concentrations are 
rarely affected by pregnancy.
Pregnancy may induce slight increases in the plasma 
activity of aminotransferases such as aspartate amino-
transferase. Substantial increases in alkaline phosphatase 
activities occur, reaching a peak of 2–3 times normal adult 
values during the third trimester. This increase is largely 
due to the presence of the placental isoenzyme in mater-
nal plasma. Although changes in the fetal isoenzyme have 
been related to problems of fetal development, this has 
proved of little diagnostic use owing to the wide range of 
isoenzyme activities seen in normal pregnancy.
Plasma lipids and lipoproteins
The hyperlipidaemia of pregnancy is well recognized. By 
the third trimester, fasting plasma triglyceride concentra-
tions are increased 2–3 times, with lesser increases being 
seen in total cholesterol, phospholipids and non-­esterified 
fatty acids. These increases result from a complicated se-
quence of changes in the major plasma lipoprotein classes, 
low density lipoproteins (LDL) and high density lipopro-
teins (HDL). LDL concentrations rise steadily, but level 
off during the last ten weeks of pregnancy, whereas those 
of HDL initially increase, but level off (and may even fall) 
approximately half way through pregnancy; this may be a 
result of the onset of the insulin resistance that is typical 
of pregnancy. Serial measurement of hormones during 
gestation indicates that the hyperlipidaemia of pregnancy 
is influenced not only by oestradiol and progesterone, but 
also by insulin and hPL.
Glucose tolerance
Fasting plasma glucose concentrations usually fall slightly 
during pregnancy, whereas postprandial concentrations 
increase. Pregnancy may lead to a deterioration in glu-
cose tolerance, which is subtle in the majority of women, 
probably due to insulin resistance induced by elevated 
concentrations of sex hormones. In patients with pre-
existing type 1 diabetes mellitus, this may result in an in-
creased requirement for exogenous insulin. The insulin 
requirement should thus be monitored closely (by regular 
measurements of blood glucose and glycated haemoglo-
bin) in order to reduce the incidence of fetal malforma-
tion, macrosomia and intrauterine death, conditions that 
are all associated with poor glycaemic control.
The precise nature of the defect in gestational glucose 
intolerance remains controversial. Patients who are initially 
free from diabetes but develop gestational diabetes may 
either revert to normal glucose tolerance after pregnancy 
(in which case they remain at risk of developing diabetes in 
the future) or remain frankly diabetic. Although screening 
for gestational diabetes has been advocated (based on fac-
tors such as obesity, strong family history of diabetes mel-
litus or previous delivery of a baby weighing 4 kg or more), 
most ‘at-risk’ patients do not develop glucose intolerance 
and those that do often have low risk factor scores. The 
presence of glycosuria is similarly of little use, as the major-
ity of pregnant women will have glycosuria at some stage 
of their pregnancy owing to their lowered renal threshold, 
rather than glucose intolerance per se.
Consequently, routine measurement of blood glucose 
has been advocated in all pregnancies. While this will indeed 
detect patients with gestational glucose intolerance, con-
troversy exists concerning the indications for subsequent 
formal glucose tolerance testing, as well as the stage of ges-
tation at which such testing should take place. In addition, 
there is no agreement as to what constitutes an abnormal 
tolerance test profile, as the World Health Organization 
(WHO) criteria are based on non-­pregnant individuals and 
other criteria are purely statistical (e.g. values more than 
two standard deviations above the mean), rather than relat-
ing to the outcome of pregnancy. In the UK, the National 
Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE) has pro-
duced guidelines, including for the selection of patients for 
formal glucose tolerance testing. Gestational diabetes, and 
the management of maternal diabetes during pregnancy are 
discussed in Chapters 15 and 16.
Other changes
Mild proteinuria may accompany the changes in plasma 
protein concentrations seen during pregnancy. However, 
this may be an early warning of a threat to mother and 
fetus if it develops into pre-eclampsia or eclampsia, where 
increasing proteinuria is associated with maternal hyper-
tension. In the past, serial quantitative assessments of pro-
teinuria using dipsticks were used. Detection of significant 
proteinuria is now more usually carried out by measuring 
a protein to creatinine ratio in a random urine sample. A 
value of <30 g/mol helps to rule out significant protein-
uria in hypertensive pregnant women. However, severity 
of the disease is not always related to absolute values.
Labour
The factors that lead to the onset of labour in humans 
appear to be complex, with a combination of biochemical 
and physical changes such as uterine stretch. In the first 
trimester, progesterone from the corpus luteum maintains 
uterine quiescence until the placenta takes over. In many 
species, it is falling concentrations of progesterone that 
initiate labour. This is not the case in humans, although 
inhibiting progesterone action does increase uterine ac-
tivity and ripens the cervix. The uterus is primed for ac-
tivity by a gradual rise in plasma oestrogen concentration 
and corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) over a pe-
riod of many weeks. The uterus then becomes sensitive to 
stimulants including oxytocics, prostaglandins and CRH. 
These appear to create a biochemical inflammatory-like 
reaction in the uterus.
	
22  Reproductive function in the female	
447
TABLE 22.2  Hormonal methods of contraception
Type
Components
Principle mode of action
Comments
Combined oral contraceptive pill
Oestrogen and 
progestogen
Inhibition of ovulation; also 
effects on cervical mucus and 
changes to endometrium
Typically taken for 21 days, 
followed by 7-day pill-free 
break
Combined contraceptive patch
Oestrogen and 
progestogen
As above
One patch worn for a week for 
three weeks, followed by one 
week with no patch
Combined contraceptive vaginal 
ring
Oestrogen and 
progestogen
As above
Worn for three weeks, followed 
by one week with no ring
Combined injectable 
contraceptive
Oestrogen and 
progestogen
As above
Monthly injections; not available 
in UK
Progestogen-only contraceptive 
pill
Progestogen
Multiple effects, including 
alteration of cervical mucus, 
suppression of ovulation and 
changes to endometrium
Taken daily with no breaks
Progestogen-only injectable 
contraceptive
Progestogen
As above
Injections at 2–3 monthly 
intervals according to product
Other progestogen-only devices
Progestogen
As above
Implants and intrauterine 
systems
Emergency contraception
Progestogen 
(levonorgestrel)
Probably prevents or delays 
ovulation
High dose of progestogen (50× 
that used in pill) but single dose 
and no metabolic sequelae
Prostaglandins and oxytocin play central roles in hu-
man labour by stimulating myometrial contractility. 
Arachidonic acid is found in amniotic fluid and fetal 
membranes. This is converted by cyclooxygenase to pros-
taglandins. Clinical use of this process is seen with digital 
‘sweeping of the membranes’ to enhance enzyme activity 
prior to therapeutic induction of labour, for which slow-
release prostaglandin formulations are commonly used.
Oxytocin is a nonapeptide secreted by the posterior 
pituitary. Administration of oxytocin in pregnancy pro-
vokes uterine contractions and is used in the induction 
and acceleration of labour. Its exact role in the initiation 
and maintenance of normal human labour is not fully 
understood, particularly since normal parturition has oc-
curred in women with oxytocin deficiency secondary to 
pituitary disease.
Corticotrophin-releasing hormone is a 41 amino acid 
peptide produced in the hypothalamus but in pregnancy 
it is also synthesized in the placenta and membranes. 
The concentration of free CRH rises markedly in the 
last three weeks of pregnancy. It promotes fetal corti-
sol production and prostaglandin production in the fetal 
membranes.
Pre-term labour (onset prior to 37 completed weeks 
of pregnancy) is the commonest cause of later disabil-
ity and perinatal death. A major contributor to neonatal 
morbidity is lung dysfunction owing to lack of alveolar 
surfactant. Corticosteroid administration to the mother 
at least 24 h before delivery substantially improves out-
come. Diagnosis of the onset of pre-term labour can be 
difficult but important, as tocolytics may delay delivery 
long enough for steroids to have an effect. An adjunct to 
assessing the likelihood of the onset of labour is the use 
of fetal fibronectin measurement. Fibronectins are large 
(450 kD) glycoproteins found in the cervical tissue, mem-
branes and amniotic fluid. They act as an adhesive be-
tween the cells of the membranes and uterine lining and 
‘leak’ out into the vagina if this is disrupted, as happens 
in pre-term labour. A bedside monoclonal antibody swab 
test for fibronectin is now available, which is poor at pre-
dicting the onset of labour but has a negative predictive 
value of 99% that delivery will not occur within 14 days. 
Its use substantially reduces the need and cost for treat-
ment or transfer of patients.
ORAL CONTRACEPTION AND HORMONE 
REPLACEMENT THERAPY
Introduction
Worldwide, many women are taking gonadal steroids (oes-
trogens and progestogens) as oral contraceptives (OCs) or 
sex hormone replacement therapy (HRT). Gonadal ste-
roids have the potential to influence many metabolic sys-
tems and hence biochemical variables in the blood.
Methods for contraception can be divided into hor-
monal and non-hormonal methods. The latter include 
sterilization, barrier methods, the use of spermicides and 
natural methods. These do not have metabolic effects (al-
though development of antisperm antibodies can affect 
the success of vasectomy reversal). Hormonal methods 
involve treatment of the woman (usually) with hormones 
to prevent conception, and have the potential to cause 
secondary metabolic disturbances.
Hormonal methods of contraception are summarized 
in Table 22.2. The most widely used are combined oral 
preparations of oestrogen and progestogen. Both com-
ponents can have metabolic effects, in particular affecting 
lipid and glucose metabolism. Older combined oral con-
traceptives used relatively high doses of oestrogen, which 
could increase the concentration of thyroxine binding 
globulin, and hence increase total T4 (but not free T4) 
concentrations, but this is not a significant problem with 
modern combined oral contraceptives, in which lower 
doses of oestrogens are used.
There is an important difference between the oestro-
gen used in OCs and that used in HRT. If suppression 
448	
Clinical biochemistry
of ovulation is required, a synthetic oestrogen (almost 
always ethinyloestradiol) is necessary. In contrast, HRT 
requires lower doses of oestrogen, as the objective is to 
reverse the adverse effects of oestrogen deficiency. For 
this purpose, ‘natural’ (non-alkylated) oestrogens such as 
17β-oestradiol, oestradiol valerate and conjugated equine 
oestrogens have proved adequate, despite their ineffec-
tiveness as contraceptive agents.
Contraceptive progestogens are used in order to in-
crease contraceptive efficacy in combined regimens, on 
their own in the ‘mini-pill’ or to control menstrual bleed-
ing. In contrast, HRT progestogens are used to prevent 
endometrial proliferation, hyperplasia and neoplasia. 
Again, the net dose of progestogen used in HRT is lower 
than that required for OC. Because natural progesterone 
is poorly absorbed when given orally, various synthetic 
progestogens have been developed. In the UK, the pro-
gestogens most commonly used in OC are levonorgestrel, 
norethisterone, gestodene and desogestrel, the latter two 
being novel derivatives chosen for their relatively low 
androgenicity. For postmenopausal HRT, levonorgestrel 
and norethisterone are most commonly used.
The majority of oral gonadal steroid therapies in 
current use combine an oestrogen with a progestogen. 
Progestogen-only oral contraceptives use very low doses 
of steroids and have comparatively little effect on plasma 
components.
Metabolic effects of oestrogens
Oestrogens suppress the secretion of FSH by the pi-
tuitary and hence suppress follicular maturation. The 
oestrogen in most combined oral contraceptives is ethi-
nyloestradiol, at a daily dose between 15 and 50 μg, but 
typically 30–35 μg. Oestrogens tend to increase plasma 
triglyceride concentrations, reduce LDL-cholesterol and 
increase HDL-cholesterol concentrations. Oestrogens 
are prothrombotic, but their net effects on lipid metabo-
lism tend to be anti-atherogenic. They have a negligible 
effect on glucose tolerance.
Metabolic effects of progestogens
The contraceptive effect of progestogens is related to 
suppression of LH secretion (tending to suppress ovu-
lation) and to effects on cervical mucus that make it 
hostile to sperm, and on the endometrium that reduces 
the likelihood of successful implantation. Several differ-
ent progestogens are used in combined oral contracep-
tives; they all lack the 19-methyl group that is present 
in progesterone and differ mainly (but not exclusively) 
in their C-17 substituents, whether or not they have a 
C-21 carbon and in the presence or absence of a methyl 
or ethyl group in the C-18 position. They include nor-
ethindrone, one of the first to become available for this 
purpose; norgestrel and levonorgestrel (‘second-generation’ 
progestogens), and the ‘third generation’ progestogens, 
desogestrel, ­gestodene and norgestimate. The meta-
bolic effects of progestogens are largely dependent on 
their androgenicity. Levonorgestrel, gestodene, norg-
estimate and desogestrel (all 19-nor compounds, that 
is, lacking a 19-methyl group) have androgenic as well 
as progestogenic activity, and tend to increase plasma 
LDL-cholesterol and reduce HDL-cholesterol con-
centrations. The effects of progestogens on glucose 
­tolerance are considered below.
Metabolic effects of contraceptives
Effects of hormonal contraceptives on lipid 
­metabolism and risk of vascular disease
The overall effect of combined oral contraceptives on 
lipid metabolism depends on the type and dose of oestro-
gen and progestogen and on the presence of any genetic 
tendency to hyperlipidaemia. In general, the effects of 
the oestrogen and progestogen tend to cancel each other 
out, though most modern agents tend slightly to reduce 
plasma LDL-cholesterol and increase HDL-cholesterol 
concentrations. They may also slightly increase triglycer-
ide concentrations. Although it is not necessary to moni-
tor plasma lipid concentrations in most women, this may 
be appropriate if there is known hyperlipidaemia, espe-
cially hypertriglyceridaemia.
It is noteworthy that in women who do not smoke cig-
arettes and who are normotensive, there is no evidence of 
an increase in the relative risk of cardiovascular disease 
associated with long-term use of combined oral contra-
ceptives. Even in women who smoke or are hypertensive, 
the absolute risk, though higher, remains very low. The 
relative risk of ischaemic stroke is slightly increased, but 
the absolute risk remains very low. The risk of haemor-
rhagic stroke is unaffected in women below the age of 35, 
but slightly increased in older women.
The relative risk of venous thromboembolic disease 
is increased in users of combined oral contraceptives, 
­although the absolute risk remains very low, and is cer-
tainly lower than that associated with pregnancy. The 
mechanisms involved are complex, but appear primarily 
to be the result of prothrombotic effects on the coagula-
tion mechanism.
Contraindications to the use of the combined oral 
contraceptives include a personal history of stroke, myo-
cardial infarction or venous thromboembolism, severe 
hypertension and heavy cigarette smoking.
There is no evidence of increased risk of venous 
thrombosis, cardiovascular or cerebrovascular disease in 
women using progestogen-only contraceptives.
Effects of oral contraceptives on glucose 
­homoeostasis and diabetes
Any adverse effect of oral contraceptives on glucose 
­tolerance appears to be related to the progestogen 
component. Progestogens antagonize the effects of in-
sulin and increase the area under the curve of insulin 
response to oral glucose tolerance tests, but the effects 
on glucose tolerance, though statistically significant, 
are not clinically so.
There is no need to avoid combined preparations 
in patients with uncomplicated diabetes. Progestogen-
only oral contraceptives are safe in patients with type 1 
diabetes and can be recommended in many patients for 
whom combined products are contraindicated (e.g. heavy 
	
22  Reproductive function in the female	
449
smokers, severe hypertension). However, longer-acting 
progestogens, such as levonorgestrel, should be avoided 
in patients with type 2 diabetes.
Other metabolic effects of oral contraceptives
Hypertension may be exacerbated in OC users owing to 
an increase in the synthesis of angiotensinogen. However, 
most oral contraceptive users adapt their vasoactive con-
trols and aldosterone production to compensate for the 
increase in blood pressure, and there is a poor correla-
tion between the metabolic changes and actual changes 
in blood pressure.
Metabolic effects of injectable contraceptives
The metabolic effects of combined oral contraceptives in 
which the hormones are delivered other than orally are 
broadly similar to those seen with oral agents.
The metabolic effects of injectable progestogen contra-
ceptives are minimal, with the exception that there is con-
cern that depot medroxyprogesterone acetate may have an 
adverse effect on bone mineral density, probably related 
to a reduction in plasma oestradiol concentrations. The 
decrease in density appears reversible but whether there 
is still a later increased risk of osteoporosis is unknown 
and thus prolonged use, or use in women with other risk 
factors for osteoporosis, should be avoided. There is no 
evidence of significant adverse metabolic effects with pro-
gestogen-only implants or intrauterine delivery devices.
Although emergency contraceptives contain high doses 
of progestogens, exposure to the agent (levonorgestrel) is 
short-lived and has no adverse metabolic consequences.
Hormone replacement therapy
The primary aim of hormone replacement therapy in 
postmenopausal women is usually to reduce the clini-
cal features of oestrogen deficiency, which include hot 
flushes, depression, vaginal dryness and consequent dys-
pareunia. Particularly in women who undergo a prema-
ture menopause, a secondary aim may be to reduce the 
risk of long-term consequences of oestrogen deficiency, 
particularly osteoporosis. In seeking to achieve these 
aims, it is clearly also important to avoid potentially 
harmful consequences.
Although menopausal symptoms are caused by oes-
trogen deficiency, oestrogen replacement should be 
accompanied by cyclical or continuous progestogen re-
placement in order to prevent endometrial hyperplasia: 
there is a clear association between the use of unopposed 
oestrogen treatment and the development of endometrial 
carcinoma. Women who have undergone hysterectomy 
can safely be treated with oestrogen alone.
Metabolic effects of the menopause
The onset of the menopause is accompanied by an in-
crease in the plasma concentrations of LDL-cholesterol 
and triglycerides; HDL concentrations fall slightly, but 
with a rise in the HDL3 fraction and a fall in the anti-
atherogenic HDL2 fraction. These changes are all 
pro-atherogenic and are thought to be important factors 
in the increase in the prevalence of cardiovascular disease 
that occurs following the menopause.
Pancreatic insulin secretion tends to decline and, al-
though there may be an increase in the half-life of insulin 
in the plasma, insulin sensitivity, and hence glucose toler-
ance, tend to decline. The distribution of body fat tends 
towards android rather than gynoid. Increases occur in 
the plasma concentrations of proteins involved in blood 
coagulation, including fibrinogen and antithrombin III, 
and there is a reduction in fibrinolytic activity. All these 
factors are likely to contribute to the increased risk of car-
diovascular disease against a background of the increasing 
risk associated with advancing age.
Metabolic effects of HRT
The metabolic effects of HRT depend upon the steroids 
used, their doses and the route of administration, but in 
summary, oestrogen replacement tends to reduce LDL-
cholesterol concentrations. Oestrogens also increase the 
clearance of remnant particles and reduce the concentra-
tion of lipoprotein(a). Although, when used alone, oestro-
gen replacement may increase HDL concentration, the 
effects of progestogens may counter this, depending on the 
androgenicity of the progestogen used. Non-androgenic 
agents may have little effect or even contribute to an in-
crease in HDL-cholesterol. Conjugated equine oestro-
gens tend to increase plasma triglyceride concentrations, 
but oral oestradiol has a lesser effect and transdermal oes-
tradiol reduces triglycerides.
Adverse consequences of hormone  
replacement therapy
Cyclical, combined oestrogen and progestogen re-
placement restores cyclical bleeding in the majority of 
women and is a common cause for them to abandon 
HRT. However, there are also possible long-term con-
sequences. The most important of these include a small 
but significant increased in the risk of venous thrombo-
embolism. There is no increase in the risk of endome-
trial cancer or ovarian cancer. The risk of breast cancer 
does increase in women who use combined HRT for 
more than five years, although only very slightly, but 
the ­effect declines after cessation of HRT and almost 
disappears after a further five years.
Hormone replacement therapy and  
heart disease
The increase in the risk of coronary heart disease 
­following the menopause, together with the metabolic 
effects of HRT described above, suggested that HRT 
might be beneficial in the prevention of coronary disease. 
A major problem in adducing evidence to support this 
notion is the relatively small number of women who de-
velop coronary disease in the years immediately follow-
ing the menopause, necessitating the recruitment of large 
numbers of women into trials to provide the necessary 
statistical power. Although early epidemiological studies 
suggested that HRT reduces the risk of coronary disease, 
450	
Clinical biochemistry
meta-analyses of primary prevention trials suggest that 
HRT confers either no, or only a very small, degree 
of protection against cardiovascular death in younger 
women, and none in older women. The results of a large 
secondary prevention study showed no benefit. Indeed, 
one trial has indicated that HRT may cause an increase 
in cardiovascular events in older women in the first few 
years after starting treatment. The results of clinical trials 
thus appear to conflict with those of observational stud-
ies, and the reason for this remains uncertain. Thus HRT 
is not recommended for use solely for the primary or sec-
ondary prevention of coronary heart disease.
Hormone replacement therapy  
and osteoporosis
The increased rate of bone loss associated with oestro-
gen deficiency is a major cause of morbidity and mor-
tality in older women (see Chapter 31); this is mainly 
due to the increased risk of hip fracture. Evidence 
from numerous trials is that HRT, whether with oes-
trogen alone or combined oestrogen and progestogen, 
increases bone mineral density and reduces the risk of 
hip fracture. However, although significant, the ­effect 
is small, and, except in women who sustain a premature 
menopause, HRT is not recommended solely for the 
prevention of fractures. Tibolone, a synthetic steroid 
with androgenic, oestrogenic and progestogenic prop-
erties, has also been shown to increase bone mineral 
density in postmenopausal women with osteoporosis.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I would like to thank Irfana Koita-Kazi, John 
Waterstone, John H. Parsons, Mike Savvas and William 
J. Marshall who wrote this chapter for previous editions 
of the book.
Further reading
Almog B, Shehata F, Suissa S et al. Age-related normograms of serum 
antimüllerian hormone levels in a population of infertile women: a 
multicenter study. Fertil Steril 2011;95(7):2359–63. 
Paper on the use of anti-Müllerian hormone for evaluation of ovarian 
reserve and fertility.
Balen AH, Franks S, Homburg R et  al. Current management of 
polycystic ovary syndrome. London: RCOG Press; 2010. 
Excellent synopsis of polycystic ovary syndrome.
Balen AN, editor. Reproductive endocrinology for the MRCOG and 
beyond. London: RCOG Press; 2007. 
This succinct text includes chapters on the endocrine changes that occur 
during puberty, the normal menstrual cycle, disorders of menstruation and 
hyperprolactinaemia.
Bhattacharya S, Hamilton M, editors. Management of infertility for the 
MRCOG and beyond. London: RCOG Press; 2006. 
A concise account of the management of infertility.
Crook D, Godsland I. Safety evaluation of modern oral contraceptives. 
Effects on lipoprotein and carbohydrate metabolism. Contraception 
1998;57:189–201. 
A detailed analysis of the effects of a range of different formulations of 
oral contraceptives on lipid and glucose metabolism and their consequences.
Johnson MH. Essential reproduction. 7th ed. Oxford: Blackwell; 2013. 
A prizewinning text integrating biology, physiology and biochemistry of 
reproduction.
Lumsden MA, Rees M. Menopause and menopause transition. Best 
Pract Res Clin Obstet Gynaecol 2009;23:1–6. 
Excellent volume. Includes cardiovascular and bone health in the menopause.
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE). Antenatal 
care: routine care for the healthy pregnant woman. NICE Clinical 
Guideline 62; 2008. http://publications.nice.org.uk/antenatal-care-cg62  
[Accessed October 2013]. 
Homepage providing access to extensive information on antenatal care. 
(As of April 2013, NICE was re-named the National Institute for Health 
and Care Excellence.)
NHS Fetal anomaly screening program, http://fetalanomaly.screening.
nhs.uk/onlineresources; [Accessed October 2013].
Online modules and training resources for screening for fetal anomalies 
and Down syndrome.
Stein IF, Leventhal ML. Amenorrhoea associated with bilateral 
polycystic ovaries. Am J Obstet Gynecol 1935;29:181–92. 
The original description of the polycystic ovary syndrome: a classic text.
Vloeberghs V, Peeraer K, Pexsters A et al. Ovarian hyperstimulation 
syndrome and complications of ART. Best Pract Res Clin Obstet 
Gynaecol 2009;23(5):691–709.
Writing Group for the Women’s Health Initiative Investigators. Risks 
and benefits of estrogen plus progestin in healthy post-menopausal 
women: the Women’s Health Initiative randomized controlled trial. J 
Am Med Assoc 2004;291:1701–12. 
A study that suggested that HRT slightly increases the risk of coronary 
disease.
Langer RD, Manson JE, Allison MA. Have we come full circle – or 
moved forward? The Women’s Health Initiative 10  years on. 
Climacteric 2012;15(3):206–12. 
Answers many controversial aspects of the publication above.
APPENDIX 22.1 ACTH STIMULATION TEST 
FOR THE DIAGNOSIS OF CONGENITAL 
­ADRENAL HYPERPLASIA
Perinatal diagnosis of congenital adrenal hyperplasia can 
be confirmed by a single assay of 17α-hydroxyprogesterone 
(17-OHP) in a capillary blood sample. In less clear-cut 
cases, it may be necessary to measure concentrations of 
17-OHP before and following stimulation. Consequently, 
17-OHP concentrations are measured before and 60 min 
after an intravenous injection of 0.25 mg ACTH. The ex-
pected values 1 h after ACTH are as follows:
•	 unaffected adults
3–30 nmol/L
•	 heterozygotes for 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency
6–44 nmol/L
•	 patients with mild 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency
63–470 nmol/L
For further details of the diagnosis of heterozygotes 
and the late onset form of 21-hydroxylase deficiency, see 
New et al. (1983, below). A test assessing the ACTH and 
17-OHP responses to corticotrophin releasing hormone 
(CRH) has been described that appears to distinguish 
classic from late onset congenital adrenal hyperplasia.
References
Moreira AC, Elias LL. Pituitary-adrenal responses to corticotrophin-
releasing hormone in different degrees of adrenal 21-hydroxylase 
deficiency. Journal of Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 
1992;74:198–203.
New MI, Lorenzen F, Lerner AJ et  al. Genotyping steroid 
21-hydroxylase deficiency: hormonal reference data. Journal of 
Clinical Endocrinology and Metabolism 1983;57:320–6.
451
C H A P T E R  2 3
Reproductive function 
in the male
John Miell  •  Zoe Davies
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  451
THE TESTES  451
Production and actions of  
testosterone  451
Hypothalamo–pituitary control of testicular 
function  452
Testicular malignancy  453
Endocrine disrupting chemicals  453
EVALUATION OF TESTICULAR 
FUNCTION  454
Semen analysis  454
Endocrine evaluation: hypothalamo–­
pituitary–gonadal axis  454
MALE HYPOGONADISM  455
Clinical features  455
Primary hypogonadism  455
Secondary hypogonadism  455
Defective hormone synthesis and hormone 
receptor defects  456
Treatment of hypogonadism  456
GYNAECOMASTIA  457
Causes of gynaecomastia  457
Investigation  458
IMPOTENCE  458
Investigation  458
Treatment of erectile impotence  459
APPENDIX  460
INTRODUCTION
Normal male reproductive function – the manufacturing 
of semen, the ability to create and sustain penile erec-
tion and to ejaculate – is dependent on the physiological 
integration of the hypothalamo–pituitary–testicular axis. 
Production of androgens, normal responses in the tis-
sues on which these hormones act and intact neurologi-
cal pathways required for ejaculation are crucial for full 
operation of this system, to make human reproduction 
possible.
THE TESTES
The testes have two distinct roles: androgen production 
and spermatogenesis. These are achieved by two main 
units – the interstitial cells and the seminiferous tubules – 
under the control of the hypothalamo–pituitary axis.
Production and actions of testosterone
Testosterone is the major androgen produced in the in-
terstitial cells of the testes. Also known as Leydig cells, 
these are found in clumps between the seminiferous 
tubules, and their mass correlates positively with an-
drogen production. Sertoli cells, along with germ cells, 
form the seminiferous tubules (Fig.  23.1) and secrete 
hormones that control embryological sexual differentia-
tion. In addition, they support spermatogenesis by regu-
lating the composition of the seminiferous tubular fluid, 
thereby providing an environment for meiotic germ cell 
development.
At week eight of gestation, a human fetus has both 
Müllerian and Wolffian ducts, with the potential to de-
velop into female and male genital tracts, respectively, and 
differing only by its sex chromosomes. The Y chromo-
some is a powerful sex determinant – it confers maleness 
to the extent that even XXXXY fetuses are phenotypi-
cally male at birth. (This topic is covered in more detail 
in Chapter 21.)
Normal male sexual differentiation in utero depends 
on the presence of testosterone and other hormones pro-
duced by these embryological gonads. Leydig cells are 
stimulated by placental human chorionic gonadotrophin 
(hCG) to secrete testosterone from the ninth week of 
gestation, leading to development of the Wolffian ducts. 
Sertoli cells secrete anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH), 
which causes regression of the Müllerian ducts and oo-
gonia (the precursors of primary oocytes). In the absence 
of AMH and testosterone, the Müllerian ducts differenti-
ate into female internal genitalia. Lower concentrations of 
testosterone are maintained during late gestation by secre-
tion of luteinizing hormone (LH) from the fetal pituitary. 
The presence of 5α-reductase, and the subsequent pro-
duction of dihydrotestosterone (DHT) from testosterone, 
452	
clinical biochemistry
is required for development of the urogenital sinus. 
Testosterone secretion may continue for many months 
post partum before declining until the ­onset of puberty, 
when it will again be essential for sexual development.
Testosterone secretion from Leydig cells follows 
­stimulation by LH, which binds to specific membrane re-
ceptors. Luteinizing hormone activates adenylyl cyclase, 
resulting in formation of cAMP, which binds to protein 
kinase and in turn activates the enzyme 20,22-­desmolase, 
which is responsible for conversion of cholesterol to 
pregnenolone (see Fig.  22.5, p. 438). The synthe-
sis of testosterone is completed by four other enzymes 
(3β-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase, 
17α-hydroxylase, 
17,20-desmolase and 17β-hydroxysteroid dehydroge-
nase). At the target organ, testosterone is transported to 
the nucleus, and gene activation results in the formation 
of specific messenger RNAs and proteins. Testosterone 
is usually converted to the active metabolite DHT by 
the enzyme 5α-reductase. In the adult, there is circa-
dian variation in testosterone secretion with a peak in 
the early morning and a trough at about 18.00 h, and 
therefore blood samples for testosterone measurement 
should ideally be taken at 09.00 h. The biological actions 
of ­testosterone and DHT are summarized in Table 23.1.
Hypothalamo–pituitary control of testicular 
function
Gonadotrophin releasing hormone (GnRH) is secreted 
from the hypothalamus in a pulsatile fashion, with peaks 
occurring approximately every 90 min. It regulates the 
release of LH, which is crucial for the regulation of 
Leydig cell number and function, and hence production 
of testosterone, and follicle stimulating hormone (FSH), 
which stimulates Sertoli cell division and growth and is 
therefore responsible for testicular enlargement at pu-
berty. Faster pulse frequencies favour LH release and 
slower ones, FSH. The pulsatility of GnRH secretion 
is important in the regulation of gonadotrophin secre-
tion, as continuous exposure results in down-regulation 
of the GnRH receptor. Luteinizing hormone secretion 
is also highly pulsatile, which is reflected in measured 
Spermatogonia
and spermocytes
Spermatogonium
Capillary
Fibroblast
Interstitial
blood vessels
Spermatids
and spermatozoa
Sertoli
cell
Tubular lumen
Leydig
(interstitial cell)
Interstitial
cell
Basement
membrane
Mitosis
Spermatogenesis
Late spermatids
Early
spermatids
Myoid cell
Cytoplasmic
bridges
Secondary
spermatocyte
Primary spermatocyte
Tubule
FIGURE 23.1  ■ The seminiferous tubules.
TABLE 23.1  Biological actions of testosterone 
and dihydrotestosterone
 
Testosterone
Dihydrotestosterone
Fetus
Wolffian 
stimulation
Differentiation of 
external genitalia
Growth of phallus
Puberty
Musculoskeletal 
development
Full secondary sexual 
hair
Temporal recession of 
head hair
Cessation of 
growth in long 
bones
Prostate growth
Sebum secretion
Seminal vesicle growth
Adult
Spermatogenesis
Prostatic hypertrophy
Libido
Male pattern baldness
	
23  Reproductive function in the male	
453
plasma concentrations. Plasma concentrations of FSH 
are less variable, presumably as a result of slower meta-
bolic clearance.
The gonadotrophins are, in turn, regulated by a series 
of feedback mechanisms (Fig. 23.2). Testosterone inhibits 
LH and, to a lesser extent, FSH secretion from the an-
terior pituitary. Oestradiol, which is formed in the male 
through metabolism of androgens by aromatase found 
in adipose tissue, skin, kidneys and brain, in addition to 
Leydig cells, also inhibits gonadotrophin secretion by the 
pituitary. Opioids and prolactin reduce the pulsatile activ-
ity of GnRH and thus decrease FSH and LH secretion; 
prolactin also inhibits the direct action of gonadotrophins 
on the testes.
Follicle stimulating hormone is also regulated by 
inhibin B, which is produced by Sertoli cells and in-
hibits FSH production to regulate spermatogenesis. 
Conversely, activin works to enhance FSH action in the 
gonads, increasing spermatogenesis. Both are secreted in 
the seminal fluid and are thought to work locally in ad-
dition to centrally on the pituitary. Inhibin B can be used 
as a marker for male factor infertility as concentrations 
directly reflect the function of the Sertoli cells: plasma 
inhibin B concentrations are significantly higher in fertile 
men than in infertile men.
Gonadotrophin secretion is affected by a diverse 
range of regulators, including stress and nutritional sta-
tus. Recent studies have shown that low concentrations 
of leptin, an adipose-derived hormone, or decreased 
sensitivity to leptin, such as occurs in obese individu-
als, are associated with decreased gonadotrophin con-
centrations and decreased fertility. This is mediated via 
hypothalamic kisspeptin neurons rather than directly via 
GnRH neurons. Kisspeptin is a neurohormone thought 
to have a key role in puberty, although this is yet to be 
clearly defined. Patients with mutations in the kisspeptin 
gene fail to go through puberty owing to hypogonado-
tropic hypogonadism. In animal models, treatment with 
kisspeptin can restore GnRH pulsatility and gonadotro-
phin secretion.
Testicular malignancy
Testicular cancer is the commonest malignancy of men 
aged 20–39. Histologically, it is commonly a germ cell 
malignancy – either a seminoma or, more often, a tera-
toma. Patients are likely to present with a testicular mass, 
and as this cancer is relatively easily detectable with regu-
lar self-inspection/examination, and has a high cure rate 
if detected prior to metastatic spread, there have been 
several public campaigns to raise awareness amongst 
young men.
Approximately 80% of testicular teratomas produce 
hCG or α-fetoprotein (AFP) (see Chapter 42). Human 
chorionic gonadotrophin is very similar to LH in struc-
ture. It stimulates the LH receptor in the testis eventu-
ally resulting in increased secretion of oestradiol, and 
hence gynaecomastia. Some rarer testicular malignancies, 
such as Sertoli cell tumours, can also secrete oestradiol 
directly. Human chorionic gonadotrophin can inter-
act with the thyroid hormone axis as an agonist of the 
thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor, to cause 
hyperthyroidism.
Endocrine disrupting chemicals
Endocrine disruptors are environmental substances 
that interfere with normal hormonal systems. They are 
very diverse and can be plastics, chemicals, pesticides 
and fungicides. They are often able to interact with 
steroid hormone receptors and can act as androgens 
and anti-­androgens. Exposure may be occupational, 
but also through water supply, soil and food. There 
may be a lag between exposure and clinical presen-
tation and there may be trans-generational effects if 
mutations or modifications of gene expression occur. 
The developmental stage at which a person is ex-
posed may be crucial. The observations of a declining 
sperm count, and increasing rates of testicular cancer 
throughout the last century prompted researchers to 
ask if these epidemiological trends could be explained 
by endocrine disruptors. In animal models, exposure 
to phthalates is significantly related to oligospermia, 
and epidemiological evidence suggests this may be the 
case for humans. Endocrine disruptors have also been 
linked to cryptorchidism, hypospadias, early or delayed 
puberty and prostatic hyperplasia. More detail on this 
topic is beyond the scope of this chapter, but the in-
terested reader will find more ­material in the further 
reading section, below.
Virilization
Hypothalamus
Anterior
pituitary
Dopamine
GnRH
Testis
+ve
+ve
-ve
-ve
-ve
-ve
Prolactin
-ve
-ve
Inhibin
Testosterone
5α-reductase
Spermatogenesis
DHT
-ve
-ve
FSH
LH
FIGURE  23.2  ■  Hypothalamo–pituitary 
control 
of 
testicular 
function.
454	
clinical biochemistry
EVALUATION OF TESTICULAR FUNCTION
The laboratory evaluation of testicular function may be 
conveniently divided into assessment of spermatogenesis 
and assessment of endocrine gonadal function.
Semen analysis
Semen analysis is used both in the evaluation of male 
­fertility and the follow-up of treatment regimens for 
male subfertility. It must be noted that there is wide 
inter-­laboratory variation in the results, although this has 
been reduced in recent years by automated systems using 
­electro-optics or computer-assisted analysis. Furthermore, 
there is marked variation in sperm output on a day-to-day 
basis. It is often more useful in clinical practice to assess 
the actual fertilization capacity of sperm in vitro.
A semen sample is collected by masturbation and 
should ideally be analysed within 1 h. Basic semen analy-
sis measures the number of spermatozoa (per unit vol-
ume and per ejaculate), motility and morphology. These 
are assessed according to World Health Organization 
(WHO) criteria, updated in 2010, although it should be 
noted that individual laboratories will also have devel-
oped their own reference ranges. The WHO reference 
ranges were determined by the analysis of semen from 
fertile men whose partners became pregnant within one 
year of trying to conceive. Average sperm count is >60 
million/mL and a count of <15 million/mL is consid-
ered subfertile. There should be >39 million sperm in a 
given ejaculate and semen volume should be 1.5 mL or 
greater.
Motility is defined as the percentage of moving sperm 
and is subdivided into the following categories:
•	 progressive motility (PR): spermatozoa moving ac-
tively, either linearly or in a large circle, regardless 
of speed
•	 non-progressive motility (NP): all other patterns of 
motility with an absence of progression
•	 immotility (IM): no movement.
The WHO reference values state that ≥40% of the 
sperm should exhibit either PR or NP motility and ≥32% 
should exhibit PR motility. At least 58% of sperm should 
be alive – this is especially important for samples with a 
PR motility of <40% and must be assessed within 1 h of 
ejaculation.
Morphology, describing defects in the appearance of 
spermatozoa, is most commonly assessed according to 
the WHO morphology standards. The WHO lower ref-
erence limit for normal morphology is 4%. Few samples 
exhibit >25% normal spermatozoa.
Other parameters measured include volume, pH, white 
blood cell count, antisperm antibodies, colour, viscos-
ity, agglutination, aggregation and time until liquefaction. 
Reference ranges for semen analysis are shown in Table 23.2.
Endocrine evaluation: hypothalamo–­
pituitary–gonadal axis
Determination of basal plasma LH and FSH con-
centrations is a routine part of the assessment of the 
­hypothalamo–pituitary–gonadal axis. As LH and, to a 
lesser extent, FSH are secreted in a pulsatile fashion, more 
accurate interpretation may be possible if serial samples 
are taken over a period of time. However, in routine clini-
cal practice, the measurement of basal plasma concentra-
tions of LH and FSH with testosterone provides most of 
the information required.
Elevated LH and FSH in the presence of low 
­testosterone concentrations suggest primary testicular 
failure; low or normal LH and FSH associated with low 
testosterone concentrations suggest a hypothalamo–­
pituitary disorder. It is important to recognize that 
the latter may be caused by any acute illness. Rarely, 
LH alone may be elevated with a low testosterone (the 
Sertoli-only syndrome) and, in patients with abnormal 
spermatogenesis, FSH may be raised with a normal 
testosterone. It should be remembered that pituitary 
and gonadal dysfunction may coexist, as in haemochro-
matosis. In this situation, LH, FSH and testosterone 
­concentrations are low.
The GnRH test (Appendix  23.1i) has been used 
to assess pituitary reserve of LH and FSH and over-
all ­hypothalamo–pituitary function. This test is now 
used relatively infrequently, as it rarely provides ex-
tra information beyond that from basal LH and FSH 
concentrations.
The clomifene stimulation test (Appendix 23.1ii) can 
be used to assess the hypothalamo–pituitary axis with 
respect to gonadotrophin secretion. Clomifene competi-
tively inhibits hypothalamo–pituitary androgen binding. 
The normal response is a doubling of LH and FSH by 
day 10 after administration. A low response, however, 
does not distinguish between abnormalities at the pitu-
itary or hypothalamic level.
Plasma testosterone concentrations exhibit diurnal 
variation throughout the day – some studies suggesting 
a variation of as much as 30% between a sample taken at 
08.00 h and one at 16.00 h. Consequently, and by conven-
tion, testosterone is usually determined on a sample taken 
before 09.00 h. Analysis of ­serum testosterone concentra-
tions must take into ­account sex ­hormone-binding globu-
lin (SHBG), as 50% of circulating testosterone is bound 
to SHBG. Low ­testosterone ­concentrations are seen 
both in primary testicular disease, indicating poor Leydig 
cell function, and ­hypothalamo–pituitary disorders with 
TABLE 23.2  Reference ranges for semen 
variables
a
Variable
Reference range
Volume
>1.5 mL
pH
>7.2
Sperm concentration
>15 × 10
6 sperm/mL
Total count
>39 × 10
6 sperm/ejaculate
Motility
40% or more with total motility 
(PR + NP)
 
32% or more with PR motility
Vitality
58% or more alive
White blood cells
<1 × 10
6 cells/ejaculate
Fructose
>13 μmol/ejaculate
a WHO classification described in text. PR, progressive motility;  
NP, non-progressive motility.
	
23  Reproductive function in the male	
455
depressed gonadotrophin secretion. Elevated concen-
trations are seen in patients with gonadotrophin- or 
­androgen-secreting tumours (e.g. Leydig cell tumours), 
in whom gonadotrophin concentrations will be low.
The hCG stimulation test (Appendix 23.1iii) can be 
helpful in differentiating primary testicular failure from 
gonadotrophin deficiency. Failure of testosterone to rise 
after administration of hCG suggests inadequate Leydig 
cell function. An exaggerated response suggests second-
ary hypogonadism. The test is also useful in confirm-
ing the presence of testicular tissue in cryptorchidism 
and in conditions in which there may be combined pi-
tuitary and testicular dysfunction, for example as a re-
sult of iron deposition in haemochromatosis or treated 
thalassaemia.
MALE HYPOGONADISM
Male hypogonadism may result from either primary tes-
ticular failure, in which the testes fail to develop prop-
erly or are injured by disease or medical manipulation, 
or secondary testicular failure owing to hypothalamic or 
pituitary lesions (hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism). 
The latter may result from developmental or acquired 
pituitary disease or a failure of hypothalamic GnRH se-
cretion. Other syndromes resulting in hypogonadism 
include ­enzyme ­defects in which hormonal synthesis is 
interrupted despite an intact hypothalamo–pituitary–­
testicular axis.
Clinical features
The physiological effects of testosterone are listed in 
Table 23.1. Prepubertal testicular failure results in lack 
of sexual maturation with persistent infantile genitalia 
and absence of pubic and axillary hair growth. Delayed 
epiphyseal closure leads to the development of a eunuch-
oid habitus with increased arm span (>5 cm greater than 
height) and increased lower body height (sole-to-pubic 
symphysis length >5 cm greater than pubic symphysis-to-
head length). The reduction in testosterone is also associ-
ated with diminished anabolism and a decrease in normal 
male muscular development.
Postpubertal onset of androgen deficiency is less obvi-
ous and usually presents with decreased libido, impotence 
and infertility. There may be an associated decrease in 
growth of facial, pubic and axillary hair and a diminution 
in skeletal musculature. Gynaecomastia may occur as a 
result of an increase in the oestradiol:testosterone ratio 
(see below). Despite some reduction in testicular volume, 
the penis and prostate do not shrink and erections and 
orgasms may continue. Nevertheless, spermatogenesis 
requires testosterone and, even when able to ejaculate, 
severely hypogonadal males are azoospermic.
Primary hypogonadism
This implies primary testicular failure and is characterized 
by low plasma testosterone and elevated LH and FSH 
concentrations. The chief causes can be divided into ge-
netic abnormalities and cryptorchidism. Other causes are 
orchitis, chronic illness, drugs (including excess alcohol), 
chemo- and radiotherapy and, rarely, testicular trauma.
Genetic causes
In the male, the most common of these is Klinefelter syn-
drome, thought to occur in 1 in 500 live births. This was 
described in 1942 by Klinefelter, Reifenstein and Albright, 
and comprises eunuchoid stature, gynaecomastia, small 
testes and infertility. It is caused by non-disjunction of the 
sex chromosomes during meiosis, the most common re-
sulting abnormality being 46XXY but occasionally other 
X states or mosaicism (e.g. 48XXXY/46XY) are seen. All 
these cause Leydig cell abnormalities, resulting in im-
paired testosterone secretion and seminiferous ­tubular 
function, and decreased inhibin secretion. Other ­genetic 
causes of primary hypogonadism include XX males, 
Noonan syndrome, XY/XO gonadal dysgenesis and dele-
tion of the Y chromosome in part or entirety.
Cryptorchidism
In 1–2% of male neonates, the testes fail to descend 
bilaterally from the abdominal cavity and do not pro-
duce ­adequate concentrations of testosterone. In addi-
tion, there is an increased risk of testicular malignancy. 
Surgery to position the testes in the scrotum, particularly 
if carried out in early childhood, reduces the risk of later 
malignancy, and facilitates surveillance. For this reason, it 
is important to distinguish this condition from anorchia, 
complete absence of testes in a 46XY male. The presence 
or absence of gonadal tissue can be assessed using ultra-
sound or magnetic resonance imaging scanning. If func-
tional testicular tissue is present, there will be an increase 
in testosterone during an hCG stimulation test.
Secondary hypogonadism
This is hypogonadism caused by hypothalamic or pitu-
itary dysfunction, resulting in deficient gonadotrophin 
secretion and leading to a low testosterone concentra-
tion. The causes may be divided into congenital and ac-
quired disorders.
Congenital causes
The most common of these is Kallmann syndrome. 
Mutations or deletions of the KAL1 gene, which en-
codes anosmin-1, result in the X-linked form, leading to 
an abnormal migration of GnRH-producing neurons to 
the hypothalamus and failure of episodic GnRH secre-
tion. The syndrome manifests as scant secondary sexual 
development and eunuchoid habitus in association with 
anosmia and, occasionally, other craniofacial abnormali-
ties such as cleft lip and palate.
Congenital adrenal hypoplasia presents with primary 
adrenal failure in association with inadequate GnRH se-
cretion. It is caused by a mutation of the DAX-1 gene 
on the X chromosome. The fertile eunuch syndrome is a 
selective LH deficiency leading to partial virilization with 
normal Sertoli cell function. This can be treated with tes-
tosterone replacement or hCG.
456	
clinical biochemistry
Homozygous mutations of the leptin gene and ­receptor 
have been found to be associated with idiopathic hypogonad-
otrophic hypogonadism (IHH) and severe obesity as a result 
of impaired GnRH release. Idiopathic hypogonadotrophic 
hypogonadism has also been associated with mutations 
of the FSH β-subunit, LH β-subunit, PC1 ­(prohormone 
convertase 1) and GPR54 (part of the ­kisspeptin pathway) 
genes. Other rare congenital causes of hypogonadotro-
phic hypogonadism include ­Prader–Willi syndrome and 
Laurence–Moon–Biedl syndrome. Haemochromatosis is 
another inherited condition sometimes associated with the 
development of secondary hypogonadotrophic hypogonad-
ism, although the presentation of this complication is usu-
ally rather later in life.
Acquired causes
There are a number of acquired conditions leading to re-
duced gonadotrophin secretion (Box 23.1). These include 
excessive exercise or weight loss, physical or psychological 
stress and systemic illness. Direct damage to the hypothal-
amus or pituitary, such as from head trauma, radiotherapy, 
surgery, pituitary tumours and infiltrative disorders (e.g. 
sarcoidosis) can also be a cause, in addition to prescribed 
medications causing hyperprolactinaemia and illicit drugs 
such as cocaine, anabolic steroids and opioids.
Defective hormone synthesis and hormone 
receptor defects
These conditions lead to ambiguous external genitalia 
with a 46XY genotype. There are rudimentary or ab-
sent Wolffian duct derivatives (seminal vesicles and duc-
tus deferens), but because of the presence of AMH, the 
uterus and fallopian tubes do not develop either. In addi-
tion to this there is usually cryptorchidism.
Five enzymes are responsible for the conversion of 
cholesterol to testosterone; defects in each of these en-
zymes have been reported (see Chapter 21). Plasma tes-
tosterone concentrations are low and hCG stimulation 
results in elevated concentrations of precursors proxi-
mal to the enzyme block. Defects in androgen receptor 
proteins can also lead to hypogonadism, but with normal 
testosterone concentrations.
5α-Reductase deficiency
5α-Reductase converts testosterone to dihydrotestos-
terone (DHT). Dihydrotestosterone is responsible for 
masculinization, and normal plasma concentrations are a 
prerequisite for the full development of the phallus, scro-
tum and prostate. In 5α-reductase deficiency, external 
genitalia at birth are ambiguous with a urogenital sinus, 
clitoromegaly, bifid scrotum, blind vaginal pouch and in-
guinal or labial testes. Wolffian duct derivatives are pres-
ent, as they develop under the influence of testosterone 
rather than DHT. The deficiency is caused by a mutation 
in the 5α-reductase type 2 gene, which is inherited in an 
autosomal recessive fashion.
At puberty, patients undergo virilization with some 
phallic enlargement, development of male habitus and 
psychosexual orientation and descent of the testes, oc-
casionally with spermatogenesis. This occurs either as a 
result of a massive increase in testosterone secretion at 
puberty or by conversion of some testosterone to DHT 
if the enzyme deficiency is incomplete. Patients may re-
spond to very high doses of testosterone or to DHT (the 
latter can be applied locally as a 2% cream with some 
beneficial effects on penile length). If peripubertal viril-
ization is minimal, patients may be raised as infertile fe-
males after removal of the cryptorchid testes.
Androgen insensitivity syndromes
These are caused by absence or deficiency of the DHT 
receptor protein. The complete form results in an ap-
parently normal female phenotype with absent pubic and 
axillary hair and is transmitted as an X-linked recessive 
trait. Administration of testosterone has no effect on the 
generation of secondary sexual hair. As patients usually 
have normal female psychosexual orientation, treatment 
involves removal of cryptorchid testes and subsequent 
oestrogen replacement. Normal female sexual activ-
ity is possible, although, of course, the patients remain 
infertile.
In partial androgen insensitivity syndrome, presen-
tation varies according to the degree of DHT receptor 
deficiency. It ranges from apparent clitoromegaly in a 
phenotypically female neonate at birth, to infertility in 
an apparently normal adult male. Diagnosis is confirmed 
by identification of the androgen receptor gene mutation. 
The management of these patients depends on age at di-
agnosis and the response to treatment with exogenous 
testosterone.
Treatment of hypogonadism
Testosterone replacement remains the mainstay of treat-
ment. Traditionally, this has been administered by implan-
tation of subcutaneous pellets or by long-acting mixtures 
of testosterone esters (e.g. Sustanon
®). The latter are given 
by deep intramuscular injection every 2–4 weeks. More 
recently, patches have been used, although there have 
been problems with varying degrees of absorption result-
ing in unpredictable plasma testosterone concentrations, 
BOX 23.1	
Acquired causes of 
­hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
•	 Malnutrition and weight loss
•	 Excessive exercise
•	 Stress
•	 Chronic illness
•	 Suprasellar tumours
•	 Craniopharyngiomas
•	 Pinealomas
•	 Destructive pituitary disease
•	 Pituitary adenomas
•	 Trauma, surgery or radiotherapy
•	 Empty sella syndrome
•	 Sarcoidosis
•	 Prolactinomas
•	 Iron overload
•	 Frequent blood transfusion, haemochromatosis
•	 Oestrogen-secreting adrenal tumours
•	 Drugs
	
23  Reproductive function in the male	
457
and also problems with adhesion and hypersensitivity at 
the site of application. Gel and buccal mucoadhesive prep-
arations are now available and are widely used. These are 
more convenient and result in much more even plasma 
concentrations, although a disadvantage of gel prepara-
tions is inadvertent transfer of gel to women or children. 
Oral preparations have been used but are poorly absorbed. 
As the prostate and seminal vesicles are androgen sensi-
tive, there is a risk of stimulating growth of a prostatic 
carcinoma and therefore plasma prostate specific antigen 
concentrations should be monitored. (Treatment regi-
mens are discussed in more detail in Chapter 21.)
Testosterone replacement will not achieve fertility in 
primary testicular failure. Only in secondary hypogo-
nadism can infertility be treated. Treatment in hypogo-
nadotrophic hypogonadism is with intramuscular hCG 
with the addition of human menopausal gonadotrophin 
to supply FSH activity as necessary. This will usually in-
duce a good quality ejaculate, which is potentially capable 
of resulting in conception despite a relatively low sperm 
count (1–20 million/mL). An alternative treatment is with 
small pulses of GnRH delivered by a programmed pump, 
mimicking physiological GnRH pulsatility. These are 
not long-term treatment options, partly because hCG, 
whether endogenous or exogenous, causes gynaecomas-
tia. When the need for fertility is over, patients should 
resume treatment with testosterone.
Fertility can also be achieved using assisted reproduc-
tion techniques; in male infertility these include intrauter-
ine insemination and intracytoplasmic sperm injection 
(ICSI). In ICSI, spermatozoa are injected directly into an 
oocyte and the fertilized embryo is then inserted into the 
uterus. ICSI can be appropriate where there is a very low 
sperm count, poor morphology or motility of sperm. It is 
also useful where there is an interruption in the pathway 
from testes to urethra such as occurs post-vasectomy or 
with an absent vas deferens in patients with cystic fibrosis. 
Abnormal sperm morphology does not appear to have a 
negative effect on blastocyst formation and birth defect 
rates are not significantly different from those conceived 
using conventional in vitro fertilization. However, as there 
is some evidence of an increased number of chromosomal 
abnormalities in children conceived using ICSI, concerns 
remain regarding health and fertility later in life.
Plasma testosterone concentrations gradually decline 
with age after the third decade, as a result of a number 
of factors including decreased GnRH release, increased 
sensitivity to the negative feedback of testosterone and 
reduced responsiveness of Leydig cells. Symptoms as-
sociated with testosterone deficiency, such as reduced 
exercise tolerance and increased body fat, overlap with 
changes linked to the natural process of ageing and hence 
there is an unavoidable implication that testosterone re-
placement in the elderly will be beneficial. Positive effects 
of replacement include increased bone density, increased 
lean body mass, improvement of lipid profile and stimula-
tion of red blood cell production. There is a concern that 
such replacement may be associated with an increased 
risk of prostatic carcinoma, but this has not been proven.
Although testosterone replacement may be indicated in 
elderly patients with clear testosterone deficiency and no 
contraindications to treatment, the approach to marginally 
low concentrations is controversial. Initiation of treatment 
should always be preceded by evaluation to rule out pre-
existing contraindications, for example prostatic carcinoma 
or polycythaemia, and followed by regular monitoring.
GYNAECOMASTIA
Excessive development of the male mammary glands with 
increases in both stromal and glandular tissue (gynaeco-
mastia) accounts for ~70% of male breast disorders. In the 
male, breast development may vary from a small subareo-
lar button of tissue to florid breast development with fem-
inization of the nipples and associated breast tenderness.
Gynaecomastia may occur in neonatal life, when it is 
usually transient and caused by transplacental transfer of 
maternal oestrogens into the fetal bloodstream. During 
puberty, gynaecomastia of some degree occurs in up to 
60% of adolescent boys: this may reflect normal physi-
ological development and is typically followed by sponta-
neous regression after 12–18 months.
Causes of gynaecomastia
Physiological gynaecomastia during puberty probably 
occurs as a result of the relative changes in oestradiol and 
testosterone concentrations – in normal early puberty, oes-
tradiol concentrations are high in comparison with those 
of testosterone and this increased oestradiol:testosterone 
ratio can induce breast development.
Indeed, pathological causes are invariably related to 
imbalances between testosterone and oestrogen synthesis 
and action, and can be broadly divided into hypogonad-
ism, other endocrine disorders, tumour related, systemic 
disease (Box 23.2) and drugs (Table 23.3).
BOX 23.2	
Causes of gynaecomastia
Hypogonadism
•	 Primary
•	 Castration
•	 Orchitis
•	 Klinefelter syndrome
•	 Cryptorchidism
•	 Secondary
•	 Prolactinoma (effect of tumour expansion or prolactin)
Other endocrine disorders
•	 Thyrotoxicosis
•	 Cushing syndrome
•	 Congenital adrenal hyperplasia
•	 Androgen insensitivity
Tumours
•	 Testicular (Leydig cell, Sertoli cell, choriocarcinoma)
•	 Adrenal (adenoma and carcinoma)
•	 Bronchogenic carcinoma
•	 Hepatocellular carcinoma
•	 Others – gastric, renal, haematological
Systemic disease
•	 Chronic kidney disease
•	 Liver failure
•	 Haemochromatosis
458	
clinical biochemistry
Investigation
A full drug history and a careful physical examination are 
essential, with particular reference to the testes, thyroid, 
liver and lungs.
A suggested schedule for the investigation of symp-
tomatic gynaecomastia is illustrated in Figure 23.3 and 
the interpretation of endocrine tests in Table 23.4.
IMPOTENCE
Erectile impotence is defined as the inability to achieve and 
maintain a penile erection of sufficient quality to permit 
penetrative intercourse. In practice, the commonest physi-
cal cause of impotence is diabetes mellitus – some 50% of 
diabetic males will become impotent after the age of 50. 
Both autonomic neuropathy and vascular insufficiency may 
contribute to this. Other endocrine causes include hypo-
gonadism (primary or secondary), hyperprolactinaemia and 
thyroid disease. Other causes are summarized in Box 23.3.
A psychogenic aetiology is suggested by a history of early 
morning or sleep erections or full erection on masturbation 
or with other partners. Treatment with certain drugs can 
result in impotence – these are summarized in Box 23.4.
Investigation
The initial history and examination is of great impor-
tance. Reduced frequency of shaving, reduced libido, 
small testes and regression or lack of secondary sexual 
characteristics suggests hypogonadism. Testicular tu-
mours may be palpable and visual field assessment and 
imaging of the brain and skull should be carried out if 
there is a possibility of pituitary tumour. A full neuro-
logical and cardiovascular examination is essential. The 
relevant basic biochemical investigations are listed in 
Box 23.5.
TABLE 23.4  Interpretation of endocrine tests in the investigation of gynaecomastia  
(only those changes important in diagnosis are shown)
Condition
Hormone
Testosterone
LH
FSH
SHBG
Oestradiol
TSH
hCG
Primary testicular failure
↓
↑
↑
 
 
 
 
Secondary testicular failure
↓
↓
↓
 
 
 
 
Primary oestrogen-secreting tumour
↓
↓
 
 
↑
 
 
hCG-secreting tumour
 
↑
a
 
 
↑
 
↑
Chronic liver disease
↓
↓
↓
↑
 
 
 
Thyrotoxicosis
↑
↑
↑
↑
 
↓
 
a Depends on the specificity of the LH assay; modern assays show very little cross-reactivity with hCG.
BOX 23.3	
Causes of erectile impotence
•	 Diabetes mellitus
•	 Psychogenic
•	 Depression
•	 Anxiety
•	 Endocrine
•	 Hyperprolactinaemia
•	 Thyroid disease (hyper- and hypothyroidism)
•	 Hypogonadism
•	 Peyronie disease
•	 Alcohol abuse
•	 Spinal cord damage (neurogenic)
•	 Multiple sclerosis
•	 Surgery
•	 Trauma
•	 Vascular disease
•	 Chronic systemic disease
•	 Chronic kidney disease
•	 Disseminated malignancy
•	 Liver disease
•	 Drugs – see Box 23.4
TABLE 23.3  Drugs implicated in the 
­pathogenesis of gynaecomastia
Drug
Mechanism
Oestrogens
Direct stimulation, inhibition of 
androgen production
Androgens
Aromatized to oestrogens
Digitalis
Binding to oestrogen receptors
Tetrahydrocannabinol
Binding to oestrogen receptors
Griseofulvin
Binding to oestrogen receptors
Ketoconazole
Increase in 
oestradiol:testosterone ratio
Spironolactone
Anti-androgen
Cimetidine
Anti-androgen
Cyproterone
Anti-androgen
Methadone
 Mechanism unknown
Phenothiazines
Reserpine
Isoniazid
FIGURE 23.3  ■  Investigation of gynaecomastia. CT, computerized 
tomography; USS, ultrasound scan.
	
23  Reproductive function in the male	
459
Previously, treatment options were invasive and hence 
thorough justification by extensive investigation was nec-
essary. Following a dramatic improvement in the treat-
ment options in the last two decades, owing mainly to 
the availability of phosphodiesterase (PDE)-5 inhibitors, 
more extensive specialist evaluation of vascular and neu-
rological causes (Box 23.5) is now reserved for a limited 
subset of patients.
For example, penile arterial blood pressure may be 
investigated. Penile systolic blood pressure is measured 
with a Doppler stethoscope and recorded as a ratio to that 
of the brachial artery. Low penile:brachial ratios (<0.6) 
suggest an arterial cause for impotence. Continuous ar-
terial blood pressure recordings can be achieved using 
a small cuff around the base of the penis attached via a 
transducer to a recorder. If the arterial supply is impaired, 
the recording will show small amplitude pulses with ab-
normal waveforms.
Normal men experience nocturnal erections during 
rapid eye movement (REM) sleep and their absence sug-
gests an organic cause for impotence. Nocturnal tumes-
cence testing is ideally carried out in a sleep laboratory and 
should be repeated on three or more occasions to maximize 
diagnostic accuracy. Other techniques include pudendal 
arteriography and duplex ultrasonography, but a detailed 
discussion of these is beyond the scope of this book.
Techniques for the investigation of neurological causes 
include biothesiometry, which is a simple test of affer-
ent sensory function. An electromagnetic test probe is 
placed on the penile skin in various sites and the intensity 
of ­vibration increased until it is perceived by the patient. 
The degree of vibration required for perception can be 
compared with other sites on the patient’s body.
Treatment of erectile impotence
Treatment options for erectile impotence include oral 
therapy in the form of PDE-5 inhibitors (sildenafil, var-
denafil, and tadalafil), intraurethral alprostadil, intra-
cavernosal injection of vasodilators, vacuum devices and 
surgery (bypass and implants).
The advent of the PDE-5 inhibitors has greatly simpli-
fied the treatment of impotence. The available agents have 
similar efficacy, with sildenafil and vardenafil possessing 
similar pharmacokinetic profiles and tadalafil exhibiting 
a longer duration of action. Phosphodiesterase-5 inhibi-
tors should be avoided in patients using, or likely to use, 
nitrates because of potentiation of their hypotensive effect.
Intracavernosal injection of vasodilatory agents such as 
alprostadil and papaverine, and intraurethral alprostadil 
are useful second-line treatment options, local penile pain 
being the limiting side-effect of the latter. Self-injection 
can result in successful erections in patients without a 
vascular cause of impotence. The injection method needs 
to be adequately taught and should not be used more than 
once a week to reduce the risk of potential side-effects, 
such as corporeal fibrosis and priapism.
Variable results have been seen with vacuum devices, 
which act by increasing corporeal blood flow and are used 
in conjunction with a penile ring.
Penile prostheses, either semi-rigid or malleable rods 
inserted into the corpora, or self-inflatable prosthetic 
devices have been used with varying degrees of success. 
Mechanical failure, the need for manual inflation from an 
internal fluid reservoir and the length of waiting lists for 
the procedure in the UK have resulted in diminished use 
of this treatment option.
Further reading
Achermann JC, Ozisik G, Meeks JJ et  al. Genetic causes of human 
reproductive disease. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2002;87:2447–54. 
Comprehensive review of genetic disorders that can lead to reproductive 
disease.
American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists. Medical guidelines 
for the evaluation and treatment of male sexual dysfunction: a 
couple’s problem – 2003 update. Endocr Pract 2003;9:77–95. 
https://www.aace.com/pub/pdf/guidelines/sexdysguid.pdf [Accessed 
October 2013]. 
Well-structured approach to male sexual dysfunction.
Bhasin S, Cunningham GR, Hayes FJ et  al. Task Force, Endocrine 
Society. Testosterone therapy in men with androgen deficiency 
syndromes: an endocrine society clinical practice guideline. J Clin 
Endocrinol Metab 2010;95:2536–59. 
A useful evidence-based update on the guidelines for investigation and 
management of androgen deficiency syndromes.
Brinkmann A, Jenster G, Ris-Stalpers C et  al. Molecular basis of 
androgen insensitivity. Steroids 1996;61:172–5. 
Details of molecular physiology relevant to androgen insensitivity.
BOX 23.4	
Substances causing erectile 
impotence
•	 Oestrogens
•	 Cyproterone
•	 Dopamine antagonists
•	 Cimetidine
•	 Spironolactone
•	 Alcohol
•	 Cigarette smoke
•	 Guanethidine
•	 Methyldopa
•	 Clonidine
•	 Thiazide diuretics
•	 β-Blockers
•	 Disopyramide
BOX 23.5	
Investigation of erectile impotence
Biochemical tests
•	 Serum glucose and lipids
•	 Renal function
•	 Testosterone
•	 Thyroid function
•	 LH, FSH
•	 Prolactin
•	 Others as indicated clinically
Tests for vascular causes
•	 Duplex ultrasonography
•	 Papaverine test
•	 Pudendal arteriography
•	 Nocturnal tumescence testing
•	 Penile brachial index
Tests for neurogenic causes
•	 Pudendal nerve-evoked potentials
•	 Biothesiometry
460	
clinical biochemistry
Diamanti-Kandarakis E, Bourguignant JP, Giudice LC et al. Endocrine-
disrupting chemicals: an endocrine society scientific statement. 
Endocr Rev 2009;30:293–342. 
A comprehensive review of endocrine disrupting chemicals and their 
effects on both male and female reproductive function. In terms of the male, 
this is based on animal studies and epidemiological data, and reviews the 
potential detrimental actions of dioxins, phthalates and numerous other 
disruptors on spermatogenesis, fetal urogenital development and testicular 
germ cell cancer.
Fazio L, Brock G. Erectile dysfunction: management update. Can Med 
Assoc J 2004;170:1429–37. 
Explores current knowledge on the assessment and treatment of erectile 
dysfunction.
Kronenberg HM, Melmed S, Polonsky KS et  al. editors. Williams 
textbook of endocrinology. 11th ed. Philadelphia: Saunders; 2007. 
Includes a comprehensive review of male reproductive endocrinology.
Ostrer H. Sexual differentiation. Semin Reprod Med 2000;18:41–9. 
Helps understanding of the factors at play during sexual 
differentiation.
Qaseem A, Snow V, Denberg TD et  al. Hormonal testing and 
pharmacologic treatment of erectile dysfunction: a clinical practice 
guideline from the American College of Physicians. Ann Intern Med 
2009;151:639–49. 
An up-to-date review of the literature around investigation and treatment 
of ED with a sensible evidence-based discussion of the most appropriate 
investigation algorithms and current treatments.
Sultan C, Lumbroso S, Paris FI. Disorders of androgen action. Semin 
Reprod Med 2002;20:217–28. 
This paper helps to further understand how disordered androgen action 
can manifest clinically.
Whitehead S, Miell J. Clinical endocrinology. Banbury: Scion; 2013. 
A useful and easily read text focusing on basic science and clinical 
application. Useful chapter on disorders of gonadal function with a case based 
approach to investigation and management.
World Health Organization. Laboratory manual for the examination 
of human semen and semen-cervical mucus interaction. 
5th ed 2010. http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/
infertility/9789241547789 [Accessed October 2013]. 
A useful volume that attempts to standardize tests and investigation in 
common use throughout the world.
APPENDIX 23.1: PROTOCOLS FOR  
ENDOCRINE INVESTIGATIONS
(i) Gonadotrophin releasing hormone 
­stimulation test
In the investigation of gonadotrophin deficiency, as-
sessment of the responses to exogenous GnRH may 
be useful. There is no need for the patient to fast un-
less the test is being combined with assessment of other 
anterior pituitary hormone responses to insulin-induced 
hypoglycaemia.
Gonadotrophin releasing hormone (100 μg) is given 
intravenously at time 0 and samples taken at 0, 20 and 
60 min. Normally, LH and FSH concentrations both 
rise, though the degree of increase is dependent on the 
method used for measurement. The peak response may 
be seen at either 20 or 60 min.
The interpretation of the GnRH test is largely based 
on the basal values. In a patient with delayed puberty, 
a normal response or a response in which the LH peak 
is greater than that of FSH, suggests that the patient is 
about to go into puberty. The response to GnRH may be 
suppressed by intervening illness.
Reference
Besser GM, Ross RJM. Are hypothalamic releasing hormones useful in 
the diagnosis of endocrine disorders? In: Edwards IR, Lincoln CRW, 
editors. Recent advances in endocrinology and metabolism. Edinburgh: 
Churchill Livingstone; 1989, pp. 135–158.
(ii) Clomifene test
The clomifene test may be helpful in distinguishing go-
nadotrophin deficiency from weight-related hypogonad-
ism and idiopathic delayed puberty. Side-effects include 
visual disturbances, symptoms of oestrogen deficiency 
and depression, which may be severe enough to warrant 
discontinuation of the test.
Clomifene 50 mg is given daily for 5 days. Serum LH 
and FSH are measured on days 0 and 7; in addition, in 
females, progesterone concentration is measured on day 
21 to confirm ovulation. In a normal response, LH and 
FSH concentrations rise to outside the reference ranges 
or to double the basal values. A lack of response suggests 
gonadotrophin deficiency due to pituitary or hypotha-
lamic disease. Patients with anorexia nervosa may show 
no response. Prepubertal children show no response and 
children in early puberty may actually show a reduction 
in gonadotrophin concentrations during the test.
Reference
Andersen DC, Marshall JC, Young JL et  al. Stimulation tests of 
­pituitary–Leydig cell function in normal male subjects and hypogonadal 
men. Clinical Endocrinology 1972; 1:127–40.
(iii) Human chorionic gonadotrophin 
­stimulation test
In the differential diagnosis of male hypogonadism, a 
stimulation test with hCG may be useful. There are no 
specific precautions and the test does not have to be car-
ried out after fasting.
Human chorionic gonadotrophin is injected i.m. in a 
dose of 2000 IU on days 0 and 2 and serum testosterone 
measured on days 0, 2 and 4. A normal response is defined 
as a rise in serum testosterone to within the reference 
range. A failure of any rise in testosterone suggests an ab-
sence of functioning testicular tissue. If the testes are not 
palpable in the scrotum or inguinal canals, a rise in testos-
terone suggests the presence of intra-abdominal testes. In 
gonadotrophin deficiency with normal testes, the low basal 
testosterone concentration should triple after hCG.
Reference
Andersen DC, Marshall JC, Young JL et al. Stimulation tests of pitu-
itary-Leydig cell function in normal male subjects and hypogonadal 
men. Clinical Endocrinology 1972; 1:127–40.
461
 INTRODUCTION
Inherited metabolic diseases (IMDs), also known as in-
born errors of metabolism, are inherited conditions that 
develop as a result of mutations that affect the function 
of proteins. The majority of IMDs are monogenic con-
ditions and the mutant proteins are enzymes, but oth-
ers involve structural proteins, receptors, hormones or 
transport proteins. Although they are inherited, not all 
IMDs present in the newborn period: some present later 
in childhood or not until adult life.
Inherited metabolic diseases are individually rare. Of 
those that present in childhood, the commonest, such as 
phenylketonuria (PKU) and medium chain acyl-CoA de-
hydrogenase deficiency (MCADD), have an incidence of 
1 in 10 000. However, collectively, the IMDs that pres-
ent in childhood are thought to occur with an incidence 
of 1 in 750 live births, although the true incidence is 
­unknown, as no newborn screening programme is com-
prehensive, and many of these conditions go undiag-
nosed. More diagnoses are being secured with advancing 
diagnostic techniques, such as tandem mass spectrom-
etry, and the growing awareness of these disorders by cli-
nicians. Similarly, the therapeutic options are continuing 
to expand, increasing the pressure to detect cases at an 
earlier stage. Importantly, improving treatments leads 
to longer survival that, in turn, may present new clinical 
challenges such as the management of pregnancy in an 
affected mother. Altering the natural history of a con-
dition may also reveal previously unknown long-term 
complications.
If IMDs that present in adult life (e.g. familial hy-
percholesterolaemia, genetic haemochromatosis) are 
included, at least 1 in 100 individuals has one of these 
conditions. If disorders such as the haemoglobinopa-
thies are included (see Chapter  28), the prevalence is 
greater still.
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND 
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Inherited metabolic diseases may present at any age. 
However, there are key times when presentation is more 
common, either owing to the individual having to sur-
vive biochemically without the support of the mother’s 
placenta, or to additional metabolic stresses at that par-
ticular time.
C H A P T E R  2 4
Inherited metabolic disease
Fiona Carragher  •  Mike Champion
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  461
CLINICAL PRESENTATION AND  
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY  461
Neonatal presentation  462
Presentation at weaning  464
Presentation in later infancy  464
Presentation at puberty  464
Presentation during adulthood  465
Presentation during pregnancy  465
Presentation postpartum  466
NEWBORN SCREENING  466
INHERITANCE  466
Autosomal recessive inheritance  466
Autosomal dominant inheritance  467
X-linked inheritance  467
Mitochondrial inheritance  467
DIAGNOSTIC STRATEGIES  468
Essential laboratory investigations  469
Second-line investigations  472
Functional and loading tests  474
Confirmatory investigations  475
PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS  476
MANAGEMENT  476
Strategies to replace a missing  
product  476
Inhibition of product breakdown  478
Enzyme replacement therapy  478
Organ transplantation  479
Gene therapy  481
Other molecular therapies  481
Strategies to reduce the formation of toxic 
metabolites  481
Blockage of site of action of toxic  
metabolites  482
Strategies to remove toxic substances  482
Additional treatments  483
Substrate depletion  483
Substrate deprivation  483
CONCLUSION  483
462	
Clinical biochemistry
Neonatal presentation
Many IMDs present in the neonatal period. They may be 
considered in four broad categories: problems of synthe-
sis and breakdown of complex molecules; intoxications; 
energy deficiency states, and seizure disorders.
Defects in synthesis and breakdown
Many complex molecules are integral to cell-to-cell com-
munication and ordered patterning within the develop-
ing embryo. Failure to make these complex molecules 
can, therefore, result in disordered embryogenesis, pre-
senting as a dysmorphic neonate at birth. An example is 
Zellweger syndrome, the most severe of the peroxisomal 
biogenesis defects. Affected neonates have a typical ap-
pearance, with a large fontanelle, prominent forehead 
and hypertelorism, hypotonia, hepatomegaly and cal-
cific stippling, particularly of the knees and shoulders, 
on X-rays. The principle defect in peroxisomal disor-
ders lies within the PEX genes, which encode the per-
oxin proteins critical for the targeting and importing of 
peroxisomal enzymes and proteins into peroxisomes, 
resulting in multiple enzyme deficiencies. This group of 
disorders is diagnosed by the analysis of very long chain 
fatty acids (VLCFAs), which are elevated in plasma ow-
ing to the block in their oxidation, which is a peroxi-
somal process. Management remains supportive, rather 
than curative.
Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome is another example of 
a synthetic defect. It results from a block in the penul-
timate step in cholesterol synthesis, 3β-hydroxysterol-
Δ7-reductase. The production of cholesterol, an essential 
component of cell membranes, is decreased with marked 
elevation of its precursor 7-dehydrocholesterol (7-DHC) 
in body fluids and tissues. The characteristic dysmor-
phology includes anteverted nares, low-set ears, micro-
gnathia, ptosis and microcephaly. Other features include 
syndactyly of the 2nd and 3rd toes, present in 98% of 
patients, genital and renal anomalies, learning difficul-
ties and severe failure to thrive. Dietary cholesterol 
­replacement and statin treatment have been used with 
the aim of inhibiting cholesterol synthesis and reducing 
accumulation of 7-DHC; no convincing effects have been 
seen with either approach, but this may be because the 
phenotype is determined by the in utero availability of 
cholesterol.
Problems with the breakdown of complex molecules 
result in storage disorders. These tend not to be ap-
parent at birth, but rather become so with time as the 
substance(s) stored in excess begins to affect structure 
and function. For example, affected children with Hurler 
syndrome (mucopolysaccharidosis type I, MPSI) appear 
normal at birth, but the gradual accumulation of glycos-
aminoglycans over time produces the typical coarsening 
of the features, corneal clouding, organomegaly and dys-
ostosis multiplex (distortion of the normal bony architec-
ture secondary to storage material) that are characteristic 
of the condition. However, it is parental concerns about 
delayed development, rather than the coarse features, that 
usually bring these patients to medical attention. Storage 
disorders in which dysmorphology and organomegaly are 
often present in the first month of life include I-cell dis-
ease, infantile sialic acid storage disease and early infan-
tile GM1 gangliosidosis.
Intoxications
Intoxication is the classic presentation of inherited 
metabolic disorders. An unremarkable period imme-
diately ­after birth is followed by increasing clinical 
abnormality as the baby feeds, and toxic metabolites, 
which cannot be broken down because of the metabolic 
block, accumulate. Prior to birth, these toxic metabo-
lites are cleared via the placenta. Typically, clinical fea-
tures ­develop within 48–72 h after birth, but can take 
considerably longer. Phenylketonuria (phenylalanine 
hydroxylase deficiency) is an intoxication, but the first 
signs of the condition do not usually develop until 
6–12  months after birth when motor developmental 
milestones are not met. Phenylketonuria (PKU) also 
illustrates two other features of inherited metabolic 
diseases affecting enzymes: accumulation of the sub-
strate of the defective enzyme may lead to increased 
metabolism via alternative, normally minor, pathways 
by a mass action effect (phenylalanine is transaminated 
to phenylpyruvate and phenylketones), and there may 
be deficiency of the normal product of the enzyme (in 
this case, tyrosine). Both of these may contribute to the 
clinical presentation.
Urea cycle defects typically present with encepha-
lopathy in the first days of life. As milk feeds are estab-
lished, the block in the conversion of waste nitrogen, 
derived from the amine groups of amino acids, to urea 
produces hyperammonaemia and increases glutamine 
formation. Ammonia interferes with neurotransmission 
causing astrocyte swelling, and glutamine increases the 
risk of cerebral oedema, owing to the osmotic load as it 
accumulates in the brain. Ammonia is also a respiratory 
stimulant, acting on the respiratory centre in the brain 
stem to produce a respiratory alkalosis, which is an un-
usual finding in a sick neonate. Diagnosis relies on mea-
suring plasma ammonia concentration in conjunction 
with plasma amino acids and urinary orotic acid to de-
termine the location of the block (Fig. 24.1). Immediate 
management depends on attempting to increase the 
clearance of ammonia and supplementation of arginine, 
usually a non-essential amino acid, synthesized in the 
urea cycle, which becomes an essential amino acid in 
many of the urea cycle defects. Low arginine also con-
tributes to neurotoxicity by reducing nitric oxide and 
creatine synthesis.
Galactosaemia (galactose 1-phosphate uridyltransfer-
ase deficiency) usually presents a little later, at the end 
of the first week of life, with jaundice due to conjugated 
bilirubinaemia, hepatomegaly, coagulopathy and char-
acteristic ‘oil drop’ cataracts. The diagnosis is made by 
measuring the enzyme activity in red cells. The exact 
pathogenesis is not fully elucidated, but restriction of ga-
lactose and lactose (a disaccharide of glucose and galac-
tose) is effective in reversing the liver toxicity. However, 
the diet does not prevent all adverse effects of the disease 
and it is clear that endogenous galactose production is 
significant. As with many IMDs, some infants present 
	
24  Inherited metabolic disease	
463
later than the neonatal period, with the renal effects of 
galactosaemia, namely proximal tubulopathy and rickets, 
rather than the hepatic consequences. A similar differ-
ence in presentation is seen in tyrosinaemia type 1, with 
an early hepatotoxic picture not unlike galactosaemia and 
a later Fanconi-type presentation due to nephrotoxic-
ity. The key diagnostic marker in tyrosinaemia type 1 is 
the detection of succinylacetone on urinary organic acid 
analysis.
Energy deficiency disorders
Energy deficiency disorders are the result of either a 
fundamental block in energy production, as seen in the 
congenital lactic acidoses, or a failure of adequate en-
ergy production in the absence of a regular food supply. 
The congenital lactic acidoses have a number of causes 
(Box 24.1), with a definitive diagnosis being made in only 
approximately half of the patients. Clinical features de-
velop early, but significant problems due to metabolic de-
compensation may take longer to develop, in comparison 
with intoxications.
The key diagnostic marker is a raised plasma lactate 
concentration but, in practice, secondary hyperlactatae-
mia (due, e.g. to hypoxia, hypovolaemia, hypotension 
etc.) is more common. The distinguishing diagnostic 
clue is the absence of ketones in the secondary elevations. 
Spurious elevation may result from squeezing the arm to 
elevate the vein prior to venepuncture. A free-flowing 
sample is required and an arterial stab should be used 
if a free-flowing sample cannot be obtained otherwise. 
Further evidence may be gleaned from measuring lactate 
in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), which reflects brain lac-
tate over days rather than at that specific time. Secondary 
elevations of CSF lactate are seen in primary brain infec-
tions such as encephalitis and meningitis, and following 
seizures.
In certain disorders, energy deficiency only becomes 
apparent when feeding is interrupted. Neonates with 
fatty acid oxidation defects remain asymptomatic while 
fed, but can develop hypoketotic hypoglycaemia during 
prolonged fasting or intercurrent infections. The com-
monest fat oxidation defect, MCADD, usually presents 
much later, at around the age of one year, but a subgroup 
present in the first few days of life, before feeding be-
comes established, most commonly if they are breast fed. 
Neonatal glycogen stores are more rapidly exhausted than 
those in older infants and adults, requiring mobilization 
of fat stores for energy. Fats cannot be directly utilized 
by the brain, requiring conversion in the liver to ketones, 
which can be. Failure to produce ketones results in en-
cephalopathy as a result of a combination of hypoglycae-
mia and the accumulation of acylcarnitines. Clinically 
evident hypoglycaemia is a late feature: treatment, either 
with oral glucose polymer or intravenous 10% dextrose, 
should be started before it occurs.
Seizure disorders
Inherited metabolic diseases are a rare cause of neona-
tal seizures compared with birth asphyxia and infections, 
and are usually a late, non-specific feature of blocks in 
intermediary metabolism. There are, however, a num-
ber of IMDs that typically present with seizures at this 
time that will not be detected on routine investigation 
and so need to be specifically excluded if no other cause 
is apparent (Table 24.1). Seizures may have been pres-
ent in the antenatal period and been interpreted as the 
HCO3
–
NH3
Glutamine
Glutamate
N-acetylglutamate
Carbamoylphosphate
Ornithine
Citrulline
Urea
Arginine
Aspartate
Arginosuccinate
Fumarate
Mitochondrion
Cytosol
1
6
5
4
Enzyme
Disorder
Amino acids
Orotic
acid
1 N-acetylglutamate
   synthetase (NAGS)
2 Carbamylphosphate
   synthetase (CPS)
3 Ornithine
   transcarbamoylase
   (OTC)
4 Argininosuccinate
   synthetase
5 Argininosuccinate
   lyase
6 Arginase
NAGS deficiency
CPS deficiency
OTC deficiency
Citrullinaemia
Argininosuccinic
aciduria
Hyperargininaemia
↑glutamine
↑glutamine
↓arginine
↑glutamine
↓arginine
↑↑citrulline
↓arginine
↑citrulline
↑↑argininosuccinic acid
↓arginine
↑arginine
Normal
Normal
↑↑
↑
↑
↑
3
2
FIGURE 24.1  ■ The urea cycle. The numbers refer to the enzymes 
listed in the table, deficiencies of which cause changes in the 
plasma concentrations of amino acids and increased urinary ex-
cretion of orotic acid as indicated.
BOX 24.1	
Some inherited metabolic ­disorders 
causing lactic acidosis
Primary lactic acidosis
•	 Respiratory chain disorders
•	 Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency
•	 Disorders 
of 
gluconeogenesis 
(e.g. 
fructose 
1,6-­bisphosphatase deficiency)
Secondary lactic acidosis
•	 Organic acidaemias
•	 Urea cycle disorders
•	 Fatty acid oxidation disorders
•	 Glycogen storage disease type I
464	
Clinical biochemistry
baby being particularly active because of increased fetal 
movements. Some mothers do note the rhythmic nature 
of these movements.
Presentation at weaning
Weaning is a time when new dietary components may 
first be encountered, and if any one of their metabolic 
pathways is blocked, clinical features may develop. 
Weaning may also result in greater intake of the par-
ticular substrate whose metabolism is compromised, 
e.g. protein. If the relevant metabolic pathway is unable 
to cope with the increased load, the threshold for the 
development of clinical features may be breached. An 
example of the latter is a partial urea cycle defect. Prior 
to weaning, protein intake may have been within the 
tolerance of the compromised pathway, but with the ad-
dition of solids, greater quantities of protein can be in-
gested. If, as a result, the pathway’s capacity is exceeded, 
hyperammonaemia will ensue. A similar effect is seen 
in children with hyperphenylalaninaemia detected on 
newborn screening. A decision is usually made to moni-
tor concentrations to see if the phenylalanine increases 
with greater food intake, particularly around the time 
of weaning.
Hereditary fructose intolerance (aldolase B defici­
ency) does not present until an infant is exposed to 
fructose, which typically occurs around the time of 
weaning when pureed fruit is introduced; the sucrose 
in fruit is broken down to fructose and glucose. There 
is no fructose or sucrose in breast milk or formula 
milk. In the affected patient, fructose 1-phosphate ac-
cumulates, inhibiting glucose production, promoting 
hypoglycaemia and depleting inorganic phosphate, 
thereby reducing ATP production. Clinically, the first 
features are nausea and vomiting with postprandial 
hypoglycaemia. If the condition is not recognized, 
and fructose ingestion persists, the infant will fail 
to thrive and may develop liver and kidney failure. 
Confirmatory enzymology requires liver biopsy; how-
ever, in some patients a clinical diagnosis can be made 
on the basis of a history of exposure to fructose and 
reversal of symptoms after elimination of sources of 
fructose from the diet. The diagnosis may then be 
confirmed by genotyping.
Presentation in later infancy
Infancy is a time when there is a considerable risk of in-
fections, as the body is exposed to numerous infectious 
agents for the first time and the immune system is still 
developing. Infection causes increased metabolic stress; 
patients with known IMDs may decompensate and oth-
ers may present for the first time. Some IMDs show sea-
sonal variation in presentation: for example, MCADD 
presents more frequently in the autumn and winter 
months, because of the increase in infections at this time 
of year.
Glutaric aciduria type I (GA-I) is an autosomal re-
cessive defect in lysine catabolism. Affected infants may 
have large heads but minimal neurological signs prior to 
catastrophic metabolic decompensation around the end 
of the first year, usually precipitated by an infection. Such 
decompensation causes damage to the basal ganglia, with 
resultant irreversible dystonia and movement disorder. 
In presymptomatic siblings, prospective early aggressive 
management of intercurrent illnesses with antibiotics, 
protein (lysine) restriction, carnitine supplements and 
hyperalimentation with glucose polymer or intravenous 
dextrose, can reduce the incidence of decompensation 
and subsequent neurological sequelae. Measurement 
of urinary organic acids shows elevated glutarate and 
3-­hydroxyglutarate in this condition. Occasional patients 
have been described with classic histories and abnormal 
enzymology in fibroblast studies without the typical urine 
abnormalities; plasma acylcarnitine analysis may show re-
duced free carnitine and a glutarylcarnitine peak, but may 
be normal in such patients.
Infants may present with IMDs towards the end of the 
first year, when growth slows. On average, a baby will put 
on just under 7 kg in weight in the first year of life, com-
pared with 2 kg each subsequent year during childhood. 
This means that for the same protein intake, more will 
need to be catabolized, as less is needed for growth. This 
increased pressure on an affected metabolic pathway may 
result in decompensation.
Presentation at puberty
Puberty is recognized as a difficult time for teenagers 
and rebellion affects all areas of life, including caring for 
their health. Patients with significant IMDs may break 
their diets or fail to take their medication in an attempt 
to be ‘normal’. Both can precipitate decompensation. 
However, new presentations are also seen at this time, 
probably as a result of changes in growth and the hor-
monal milieu. For girls with urea cycle defects, it is well 
recognized that following menarche, symptoms may 
TABLE 24.1  Inherited metabolic disorders 
­presenting with neonatal seizures and their 
diagnostic investigations
Disorder
Investigation
Biotinidase deficiency
Plasma biotinidase
Urine organic acids
Non-ketotic 
hyperglycinaemia (NKH)
CSF:plasma glycine ratio
3-Phosphoglycerate 
dehydrogenase deficiency
CSF serine
Pyridoxine 5′ phosphate 
oxidase deficiency
CSF neurotransmitters
Urine organic acids
Trial of pyridoxal 
phosphate
PNPO genotyping
Pyridoxine-dependent 
seizures
Trial of pyridoxine
Plasma α-aminoadipic 
semialdehyde
Antiquitin genotyping
Purine disorders
Urinary purine studies
Sulfite oxidase/
molybdenum cofactor 
deficiency
Dip-stick test for sulphite 
on fresh urine
Urinary purine studies
Peroxisomal disorders
Plasma very long chain 
fatty acids
	
24  Inherited metabolic disease	
465
fluctuate in time with the menstrual cycle, being worse 
in the few days leading up to, and including, the start 
of the period. The use of hormonal therapy to suppress 
ovulation and menstruation has proven helpful in some 
patients.
Presentation during adulthood
Inherited metabolic diseases are often considered to be 
paediatric conditions, but it must be remembered that 
they can present at any age. This may be owing to the 
defect being less severe so that an individual’s metabolism 
has not previously been sufficiently stressed to provoke 
decompensation. Patients with partial ornithine trans-
carbamoylase (OTC) deficiency, the commonest of the 
urea cycle defects, may remain asymptomatic throughout 
childhood and only present in adult life. Some adults may 
not have been exposed previously to sufficient quantities 
of metabolites they cannot deal with. Some adults with 
hereditary fructose intolerance will have learned at an 
early age that sweet, sugary foods make them feel unwell 
and will subconsciously avoid them. Many patients with 
this condition have perfect dentition owing to their self-
imposed diet.
For some IMDs, presentation differs between adults 
and children. The severe form of X-linked adrenoleu-
kodystrophy (ALD) usually presents at 5–10 years with 
progressive neurological deterioration, ultimately lead-
ing to spastic quadriplegia, seizures, vegetative state and 
death. More than 90% of affected boys have adrenal in-
sufficiency. However, adrenal involvement may precede, 
or follow, neurological symptoms by years. There is wide 
phenotypic variability within families, and another fam-
ily member may not present until adulthood. The cere-
bral form in adults is extremely rare, accounting for <5% 
of all cases. The commoner adult presentation is adreno-
myeloneuropathy (AMN), with a slowly progressive neu-
rological picture mimicking spinal cord syndrome, with 
spastic gait and difficulty voiding urine. Some 10% of 
patients have only adrenal involvement, and 10% remain 
asymptomatic. Adrenoleukodystrophy is the commonest 
peroxisomal disorder. The defective adrenoleukodys-
trophy protein (ALDP) is thought to play a role in the 
uptake of VLCFAs across the peroxisomal membrane, 
but the exact pathophysiology is not completely under-
stood. The use of Lorenzo’s oil (a 4:1 mixture of glyceryl 
trioleate and glyceryl trierucate) reduces the accumula-
tion of the VLCFAs, but fails to prevent neurological 
decline in symptomatic patients. It appears to have a 
role in asymp­tomatic boys reducing the risk of develop-
ing abnormalities apparent on magnetic resonance im-
aging. Bone marrow transplantation can be performed 
to stabilize cerebral ALD in the very early stages of de-
myelination. The varied phenotype is not explained by 
differences in genotype, as family members with differ-
ent manifestations of the condition will usually have the 
same mutation.
Adrenoleukodystrophy also demonstrates another 
variation in adult presentation, that of the manifesting 
heterozygote. This is seen in some X-linked conditions 
where a carrier female develops symptoms. Two-thirds 
of females carrying an ALD gene mutation have some 
degree of neurological involvement, ranging from brisk 
reflexes and mild abnormalities on clinical examination 
to a full-blown AMN-like picture. This may be misdiag-
nosed as multiple sclerosis.
A similar phenomenon is seen in Fabry disease 
­(α-galactosidase deficiency). Deposition of glycosphingo-
lipids in blood vessel walls, heart, kidneys, skin and auto-
nomic ganglia produces cerebrovascular disease, cardiac 
disease, nephropathy, angiokeratoma, corneal dystrophy 
and acroparaesthesia (severe pain in the extremities). It 
was believed that the majority of female carriers were 
entirely asymptomatic throughout life, but it is now 
clear that one-third of female carriers have significant 
symptoms, which may be so severe as to warrant treat-
ment. One explanation for the spectrum of severity is 
the random inactivation of the X chromosome in cells – 
lyonization. If sufficient numbers of the unaffected X 
chromosomes are suppressed, a significant number of 
cells will have a functioning, affected X chromosome. 
The resulting enzyme function may be low enough for 
symptoms to develop.
A significant number of IMDs present for the first 
time in adulthood. The classic mitochondrial syndromes 
that led to the recognition of mitochondrial DNA 
(mtDNA) mutations and their role in pathology are all 
primarily adult presentations: an example is Leber he-
reditary optic neuroretinopathy, presenting most com-
monly in the third decade of life with bilateral, painless 
central vision loss.
The IMDs that typically present only in adult life usu-
ally involve the accumulation of a toxic substance that, 
although it begins at birth, takes many years to become 
manifest. Important examples include heterozygous fa-
milial hypercholesterolaemia (homozygotes usually pres-
ent with xanthomata or coronary disease in the second 
decade), familial combined hyperlipidaemia and primary 
(genetic) haemochromatosis (excepting the rare neonatal 
variant). All these conditions are discussed elsewhere in 
this book.
Presentation during pregnancy
The physiological stresses of pregnancy may precipitate 
crises in women with IMDs so meticulous care is re-
quired to ensure the best outcome for the mother and 
baby. Some women develop symptoms in pregnancy be-
cause they carry an affected child, although they do not 
have the condition themselves. The classic examples of 
this are the long chain fatty acid oxidation defects, long 
chain hydroxyl-acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency 
(LCHADD) and very long chain acyl-CoA dehydroge-
nase deficiency (VLCADD). These conditions are reces-
sively inherited and the mother, therefore, is an obligate 
carrier with 50% enzyme activity, which is compatible 
with normal life and function. Clinical manifestation of 
most IMDs only occurs if activity is <5%. However, the 
mother also has to combat the metabolic stresses of preg-
nancy, which increase the load on the pathway. If the fe-
tus is affected, she will also have to break down the long 
chain acylcarnitines that the fetus is producing owing to 
the block in its metabolism. Such women do not pres-
ent with the typical hypoketotic hypoglycaemia seen in 
466	
Clinical biochemistry
affected infants, but liver function is impaired, precipitat-
ing HELLP (hepatomegaly, elevated liver enzymes and 
low platelets) syndrome or the rarer, more severe acute 
fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP). This may require in-
tensive care and early delivery of the fetus. Only a small 
number of women with HELLP and AFLP carry affected 
fetuses, but it is imperative that their newborn infants are 
screened by measurement of plasma acylcarnitines to ex-
clude a fat oxidation defect. Screening only for the as-
sociated dicarboxylic aciduria, using urinary organic acid 
analysis, is not sensitive enough and has led to the diag-
nosis being overlooked.
Presentation postpartum
Women with partial OTC deficiency may present for the 
first time a few days after delivery. They are able to with-
stand the increased metabolic stress of pregnancy and 
delivery, but the massive protein load presented by the 
involution of the uterus precipitates hyperammonaemia. 
Many of these women have never had previous symp-
toms that might alert their obstetrician to the cause of 
their illness, although some have an aversion to high 
protein diets.
Clinical abnormalities in the infant may also reveal 
an undetected IMD in the mother. Maternal PKU 
syndrome is a description of the clinical consequences 
to the fetus of in utero exposure to elevated plasma 
phenylalanine resulting from PKU in the mother. A 
mother not known to have PKU, usually because she 
was born in an area without a neonatal screening pro-
gramme, may have had hyperphenylalaninaemia that 
was sufficiently mild for her not to have come to medi-
cal attention, but significant enough to affect the fetus. 
Typical features are low birth weight, microcephaly, 
cardiac abnormalities and developmental delay. The 
infant does not have PKU or hyperphenylalaninaemia, 
and therefore does not require dietary restriction. The 
diagnosis is usually made when the infant is investi-
gated for microcephaly or developmental delay. Plasma 
phenylalanine needs to be measured in the mother for 
diagnosis; urinary amino acids may not be sufficiently 
sensitive and diagnoses have been missed when only 
this investigation has been used.
NEWBORN SCREENING
Newborn screening is used to detect conditions that 
have a presymptomatic period during which treatment 
can dramatically improve outcome. In the UK, condi-
tions screened for at this time include congenital hypo-
thyroidism (see below), PKU, MCADD, cystic fibrosis 
and sickle cell disorders. A pilot study is underway in 
the UK to examine an expanded neonatal screening pro-
gramme including maple syrup urine disease, glutaric 
aciduria type 1, isovaleric acidaemia, LCHADD and 
pyridoxine unresponsive homocystinuria. This is modest 
compared to some countries, e.g. the USA where new-
borns are screened for over 30 conditions. However, for 
many of these conditions the natural history is not fully 
understood, treatments are only partially effective and 
infants may present and die prior to the screening result 
being available. The detection of infants who will never 
develop symptomatic disease remains a real concern. 
During the development of MCADD screening, mu-
tations were identified in infants with raised octanoyl-
carnitine that have never been associated with clinical 
abnormalities.
Screening is also used to detect IMDs in populations 
with higher frequencies of a particular condition, usu-
ally secondary to a founder effect (a mutation occurring 
early in the settlement of a geographically isolated area or 
within a limited gene pool so that it occurs with high fre-
quency), for example Tay–Sachs disease in the Ashkenazi 
Jewish population.
Newborn screening is widely practised for congeni-
tal hypothyroidism, but while some of these infants have 
inherited disorders of thyroid hormone synthesis, some 
have thyroidal agenesis or dysgenesis (that is, failure of 
development of the gland), for which a genetic basis has 
not been defined.
INHERITANCE
The molecular bases of IMDs are mutations in genes that 
adversely affect the functions of specific proteins. The 
patterns of inheritance vary, but the majority of these 
conditions are autosomal recessive.
Autosomal recessive inheritance
Autosomal recessive inheritance requires both ­parents to 
carry a mutation affecting the same gene. It is ­estimated 
that we each carry 250–300 loss of function mutations 
in our genes, but, as we also have a normal copy of the 
gene, the resultant 50% activity is more than sufficient 
for normal function: as a result, carriers of autosomal 
recessive conditions are generally not clinically affected 
(patients with IMDs typically have <5% activity). Even 
if the parents are carriers for the same condition, both 
faulty copies of the gene need to be passed on to the 
embryo, resulting in a 1 in 4 risk of the infant being 
affected in each pregnancy (Fig. 24.2A). There is also a 
1 in 4 chance that neither faulty gene will be inherited 
and a 2 in 4 (1 in 2) chance that the embryo will be a 
carrier.
If the frequency of the gene defect in the general 
population is known, the incidence can be calculated: for 
example the carrier frequency for PKU is 1 in 50, so the 
incidence equals (1/50 × 1/50) (the chance of two carriers 
having children together) multiplied by 1/4 (the chance 
of them having an affected child), that is, 1/10 000. If a 
certain condition is known to exist in a family, genetic 
counsellors can use calculations of this sort to inform in-
dividual couples of their risk of having an affected child. 
For example, if the sister of an individual PKU were to 
have a child with an unrelated man, the risk of the baby 
having the condition would be 1 in 300, which is con-
sidered negligible. (She is not affected: she has a 2 in 3 
chance of being a carrier and 1 in 3 of being homozy-
gous normal – the denominator is three rather than four 
because she is unaffected). The man’s chance of being 
	
24  Inherited metabolic disease	
467
a carrier is 1 in 50 (the carrier frequency in the general 
population), so the risk of two faulty genes being passed 
to an embryo is 2/3 × 1/50 × 1/4 = 1/300.)
Consanguinity within a family increases the risk 
of ­autosomal recessive conditions and there are some 
­disorders with a high frequency within particular 
populations. There may be a founder effect within 
certain populations, for example the Pennsylvanian 
Mennonites, in whom the severe form of maple syrup 
urine disease has an incidence of 1:176. In these kin-
dred, lineage can be traced to one couple who emi-
grated from Europe in the eighteenth century. The 
tradition of first cousin ­marriages in some immigrant 
groups is increasing the ­incidence of IMDs in some 
­areas of the UK.
It should be noted that, although affected individuals 
with autosomal recessive IMDs are often classified as ho-
mozygotes, the existence of multiple mutations affecting 
individual genes means that some are, strictly speaking, 
compound heterozygotes.
Autosomal dominant inheritance
Autosomal dominant inheritance is rare in IMDs with the 
exception of some of the porphyrias, for example acute 
intermittent porphyria, hereditary coproporphyria and 
porphyria variegata (see Chapter 28). The risk of trans-
mission in autosomal dominant disorders is 1 in 2, as only 
one faulty copy of the gene is required to cause disease 
(Fig.  24.2B), although variable penetrance and other 
factors may influence the degree to which the offspring 
are affected. Dominant inheritance is less common than 
recessive, as severe disease may result in death prior to 
an individual reaching reproductive maturity and so the 
defective gene fails to pass on to the next generation. 
However, in some cases, the mutation may have occurred 
de novo in the embryo. For some dominantly inherited 
conditions, the condition may provide some protection 
against another serious condition (e.g. the sickle haemo-
globin trait provides protection against P. falciparum ma-
laria, see Chapter 29).
X-linked inheritance
X-linked recessive inheritance occurs with a variety of 
IMDs, for example: OTC deficiency; pyruvate dehy-
drogenase complex deficiency; Hunter syndrome (mu-
copolysaccharidosis type II); Lesch–Nyhan syndrome (a 
purine disorder); Fabry disease (sphingolipidosis), and 
ALD. This pattern of inheritance is characterized by car-
rier females (unaffected, as they have a normal copy of 
the gene on their other X chromosome) passing the gene 
to their affected sons (the Y chromosome does not carry 
the gene so there is no normal copy) (Fig. 24.3A). The 
chance of a son being affected is 1 in 2 in each pregnancy, 
the same as the risk of a daughter being a carrier. As the 
affected gene lies on the X chromosome, affected fathers 
can only pass it to their daughters, who will be obligate 
carriers.
Unlike autosomal recessive conditions, in X-linked 
disorders carriers may manifest the disorder clinically, for 
example in OTC deficiency. As discussed previously, in 
carrier females the variation in the degree of symptoms is 
due to lyonization, the random inactivation of one of the 
two X chromosomes in all cells, including hepatocytes. 
The severity of disease depends on the percentage of he-
patocytes expressing the normal gene. This can lead to 
a varied clinical presentation within families, with some 
female carriers presenting with severe hyperammonae-
mia in the neonatal period and others being apparently 
unaffected.
X-linked dominant conditions require only one copy 
of the gene to be inherited to express the condition, 
hence males and females are equally affected, for example 
vitamin D-resistant rickets (Fig. 24.3B).
Mitochondrial inheritance
Mitochondria are unique intracellular organelles, in that 
they have their own genes. However, a fully functional 
mitochondrion is the product of both the nuclear and 
mitochondrial genomes with the vast majority of genes, 
in the order of 1300, being encoded in the nucleus. 
Carrier
father
Carrier
mother
R  r
R r
R  R
R r
R r
r r
Normal
(25%)
Carrier
(50%)
Affected
(25%)
R = working gene
r = mutated gene
A
Affected
father
Normal
mother
D  d
d d
D  d
d d
D d
d d
Affected
son
Normal
daughter
Affected
daughter
Normal
son
D = mutated gene
d = working gene
B
FIGURE  24.2  ■  (A) 
Autosomal 
recessive 
inheritance. 
(B) 
Autosomal dominant inheritance.
468	
Clinical biochemistry
If disease-causing mutations arise in the nucleus, these 
can be inherited in the usual way, for example as au-
tosomal recessive or dominant, or X-linked traits. 
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is inherited in a matrilin-
eal fashion; that is, mtDNA is inherited exclusively from 
the mother. Paternal mitochondrial DNA is present in 
the mitochondria in the sperm’s tail to provide ATP for 
propulsion. On fertilization, the tail of the sperm is left 
outside and hence no paternal mtDNA enters the zygote. 
Mitochondrial DNA mutations can therefore be inher-
ited only from females, but can affect males or females. 
Point mutations inherited in this fashion include those 
for: myoclonic epilepsy, ragged red fibres (MERRF); 
mitochondrial encephalomyopathy, lactic acidosis and 
stroke-like episodes (MELAS) and Leber hereditary op-
tic neuropathy.
The degree to which the offspring will be affected 
in these conditions is influenced by the mutant load, 
in that each cell has many mitochondria and each 
­mitochondrion has multiple copies of mtDNA, a mix of 
normal (wild type) and mutant. The presence of normal 
and mutant mtDNA within the same cell is called het-
eroplasmy. During cell division, the mtDNA becomes 
randomly divided between the daughter cells (Fig. 24.4). 
The proportion of mutant mtDNA may drift towards 
homoplasmy of either normal or mutant mtDNA. 
When the proportion of mutant mtDNA reaches a cer-
tain threshold within an individual cell, cellular func-
tion is compromised and, if sufficient cells are similarly 
affected, clinical features will develop. The distribution 
of the affected mitochondria within the body will de-
termine the presentation. Mitochondrial disorders typi-
cally present with multi­organ involvement; however, 
the high energy-requiring organs are more frequently 
involved, especially brain, muscle, liver, heart, kidneys 
and eyes. Cells that divide rapidly may clear the mu-
tant mtDNA because cells with normal function have 
reproductive advantage, e.g. refractory anaemias and 
enteropathy can resolve as the marrow or gastrointesti-
nal tract recover, whereas brain and muscle involvement 
tend to be progressive.
Rearrangements (deletions/duplications) within the 
mitochondrial genome are usually sporadic and there-
fore the risk of recurrence is small. Examples include 
Kearns–Sayre syndrome (external ophthalmoplegia, pig-
mentary retinopathy, heart block) and Pearson syndrome 
(anaemia and pancreatic dysfunction, both endocrine and 
exocrine).
DIAGNOSTIC STRATEGIES
Close collaboration between the clinician and the meta-
bolic laboratory is essential to establish the diagnosis of 
an IMD promptly. Links should be established between 
referring centres and specialist metabolic units, so that 
urgent cases can be discussed, investigations planned and 
a structured approach taken to the use of small samples. 
A
B
Normal
father
Carrier
mother
x  y
x x
x  y
x x
x y
x x
Normal
son
Normal
daughter
Affected
son
Carrier
daughter
x  y
x x
x  y
x x
x y
x x
Normal
son
Normal
daughter
Affected
son
Affected
daughter
x = normal x chromosome
x = x chromosome with mutation
y = y chromosome
FIGURE  24.3  ■  (A) X-linked recessive inheritance. (B) X-linked 
dominant inheritance.
wild-type mtDNA
mutant mtDNA
FIGURE 24.4  ■  Mitochondrial DNA replication. Mitochondria ran-
domly segregate to daughter cells following replication. Each 
cell may contain mitochondria with both mutant and wild-type 
DNA (heteroplasmy). Daughter cells may drift towards homo-
plasmy for either wild-type or mutant mtDNA. As the percentage 
mutant mtDNA load increases, the chance of developing clinical 
features increases.
	
24  Inherited metabolic disease	
469
Details of the patient’s drug and feeding history, as well as 
transfusion status, will be needed for a full interpretation 
of results. Ideally, in the specialist unit, the clinical and 
laboratory services should be integrated with a multidis-
ciplinary approach to the investigation and interpretation 
of results. This should lead to rapid diagnosis and initia-
tion of appropriate treatment.
Essential laboratory investigations
When the suspicion of an IMD is raised, there are a num-
ber of basic laboratory investigations that can be per-
formed immediately in the local hospital. These analyses 
will include full blood count and serum electrolytes as 
well as the more specific investigations discussed below. 
Their results may provide clues to the diagnosis and sug-
gest further investigations.
Blood gas analysis
Blood gas analysis is a key investigation in a patient 
with a suspected IMD, particularly during acute epi-
sodes of illness. The most common acid–base imbal-
ance seen in the paediatric population is a metabolic 
acidosis, secondary to infections, catabolic states or 
severe dehydration. The difficulty in interpretation in 
these circumstances is that these conditions are often 
the triggers of acute decompensation in patients with 
IMD. Calculation of the anion gap may assist in inter-
pretation of the blood gas analysis: metabolic acidosis 
with an increased anion gap (>16 mmol/L) is observed 
in many IMDs, whereas metabolic acidosis with a nor-
mal anion gap is more likely to be due to diarrhoea or 
renal tubular acidosis.
In patients with a metabolic acidosis and suspected 
IMD it is important to test the urine for ketones. Point-
of-care testing for urine and blood ketones, using simple 
stick technology, is readily available in most neonatal 
and paediatric units and provides a rapid indication of 
the ketotic status of the patient. Ketosis is a physiologi-
cal response to fasting, and is often seen in normogly-
caemic children with severe nausea and vomiting. 
However, during the neonatal period, metabolic acidosis 
with ­ketonuria is nearly always pathological and should 
prompt ­consideration of branched chain amino acid dis-
orders: propionic acidaemia, methylmalonic acidaemia, 
isovaleric acidaemia and maple syrup urine disease, as 
possible diagnoses. Urinary organic acids, blood acylcar-
nitine and amino acid analysis should be undertaken ur-
gently to elucidate the underlying defect.
The detection of urine ketones, in addition to blood 
­lactate and glucose measurement, provides the basis 
for the differential diagnosis of metabolic acidosis in 
the context of IMD (Box 24.2). Although diabetes mel-
litus is not an IMD, it is the most important diagnosis 
to consider when ketoacidosis is found associated with 
hyperglycaemia. In ketotic patients with hypoglycae-
mia, the gluconeogenetic and glycolytic defects should 
be considered first. The most suggestive features in this 
group are hepatomegaly and lactic acidaemia, although 
neither is consistently present. If the ketosis is sustained, 
the rare ketolysis defects (succinyl-CoA:3-oxoacid-CoA 
transferase deficiency and 3-oxothiolase deficiency) should 
be considered, as these can be easily missed. Urine or-
ganic acid profiling followed by enzyme and mutation 
analysis will be needed to confirm a diagnosis of these rare 
conditions.
It will be apparent from Box 24.2 that the predomi-
nant causes of metabolic acidosis in IMDs are ketosis 
and lactic acidosis. Lactic acidosis is frequently present 
in the acutely ill, when circulatory collapse results in tis-
sue hypoxia. It is also frequently associated with organic 
acid disorders, such as propionic acidaemia and meth-
ylmalonic aciduria, as a result of secondary interference 
with the metabolism of coenzyme A. Ketone analysis, 
again, provides clues to the differential diagnosis, since, 
although ketosis is a consistent finding in many IMDs, it 
is generally absent in lactic acidosis secondary to hypoxia. 
Secondary causes of lactate accumulation should be ex-
cluded before an inherited disease of lactate/pyruvate 
metabolism is sought.
Respiratory alkalosis is a far less frequent finding in 
IMDs and when it is present, plasma ammonia should be 
measured urgently. Ammonia stimulates the respiratory 
centre, causing hyperventilation, resulting in a decrease 
in pCO2. The finding of acute encephalopathy with re-
spiratory alkalosis should raise the suspicion of hyperam-
monaemia that, if confirmed, should prompt immediate 
investigations to exclude urea cycle disorders. In hyper-
ammonaemia due to organic acid disorders, the acid–base 
disturbance is typically a metabolic acidosis.
Blood glucose
Hypoglycaemia is a presenting feature of many IMDs, 
such as those in which there is a primary block in glucose 
metabolism, for example glycogen storage diseases, or 
those in which glucose metabolism is affected second-
arily, for example tyrosinaemia type I. Further investi-
gations to identify the underlying cause should ideally 
be carried out when the child is hypoglycaemic. If this 
window of opportunity is missed, it is often ­difficult to 
make the diagnosis, since biochemical abnormalities 
may not be present during normoglycaemia; the child 
may then have to be subjected to a controlled fast with 
all the risks associated with this procedure. It is best 
practice for any hospital with a paediatric workload to 
BOX 24.2	
Differential diagnosis of metabolic 
acidosis
Acquired causes
•	 Circulatory failure (cardiac abnormalities, hypovolaemia, 
sepsis)
•	 Renal failure
•	 Hypoxaemia
Inherited causes
•	 Organic acidaemias
•	 Lactic acidaemias (see Box 24.1)
•	 Renal tubular acidosis
•	 Some amino acidaemias
470	
Clinical biochemistry
have an agreed protocol for the investigation of hy-
poglycaemia. This protocol should be instituted if a 
child has a laboratory blood glucose of <2.6 mmol/L 
(or point-of-care testing glucose <3 mmol/L). Best 
practice guidelines are available from the MetBioNet 
­website: www.metbio.net
Plasma ammonia
It is essential to measure plasma ammonia in all children 
with acute or chronic encephalopathy, recurrent vomit-
ing or hyperventilation. Suspicion of an IMD should be 
raised in an infant who is well at birth, with abnormal 
clinical features developing only after the first 24 h once 
feeds have been established. Clues may be gleaned from 
the family history: for example, where a background of 
early male deaths or females with episodic illness would 
suggest X-linked OTC deficiency.
Hyperammonaemia is often missed, particularly in the 
neonatal period, when the clinical presentation is non-
specific and can mimic sepsis. All centres with neonatal 
and paediatric units should therefore be able to provide 
rapid analysis of plasma ammonia. Care should be taken 
in the sample handling, with ammonia-free tubes used 
for collection of blood and the separation of plasma from 
cells within 15 min.
Overwhelming hyperammonaemia in the neonatal 
period is usually due either to a urea cycle disorder (ap-
proximately 70%) or to an organic acid disorder (approx-
imately 30%). The hyperammonaemia in organic acid 
disorders is a result of a deficiency in acetyl-CoA required 
for the synthesis of N-acetylglutamate, a preliminary step 
in urea synthesis. The finding of a metabolic acidosis in 
a patient with hyperammonaemia is suggestive of an or-
ganic acid disorder. Since the severity of hyperammonae-
mia does not allow a distinction between the causes, and 
treatment will differ depending on the underlying defect, 
rapid biochemical follow-up with second-line investiga-
tions is required. Analysis of urinary organic acids and 
orotic acid, in conjunction with plasma amino acids and 
acylcarnitines, is essential; results can usually be available 
the same day after discussion with the regional metabolic 
laboratory. Figure 24.5 provides a flowchart for the in-
vestigation and diagnosis of neonatal hyperammonaemia.
In older children and adults, plasma ammonia should 
be measured in those with unexplained encephalopathy 
(progressive or chronic relapsing), vomiting or drowsiness, 
Reye-like syndrome (hyperammonaemia, hypoglycaemia 
and raised amino-transferases), neurological dysfunction 
or ataxia. Clinical illness is often episodic in the late onset 
group, presentation being associated with catabolism such 
as occurs during infections. If a complete dietary history 
is taken clues, such as self-selection of a low protein diet, 
may be revealed. In those patients with a Reye-like pre-
sentation, the possibility of a fatty acid oxidation disorder 
should be considered.
Liver function tests
Jaundice, accompanied by other features of liver dys-
function, is one of the most frequent presenting features 
of IMDs. This is not surprising, given the central role of 
the liver in metabolism. Liver function tests are there-
fore essential first-line investigations in suspected IMDs. 
They should comprise measurement of bilirubin (total 
and conjugated), aminotransferases, alkaline phospha-
tase and the prothrombin time (or international normal-
ized ratio).
Many IMDs present with liver failure, often in the 
neonatal period. The liver function test findings are 
characterized by a severe conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia 
and raised serum aminotransferases. The most striking 
of this group of disorders is classic galactosaemia (galac-
tose 1-phosphate uridyl transferase deficiency), which 
typically presents after introduction of milk feeding. The 
principal IMDs causing neonatal liver disease are listed 
in Box 24.3. This box does not include the inherited hy-
perbilirubinaemias, which are not associated with other 
features of hepatic dysfunction.
Measurement of ketones
Ketosis is a normal response to fasting and, when not as-
sociated with either acidosis or hypoglycaemia, should, 
in infancy and childhood, be considered as physiologi-
cal. However, as previously mentioned, the presence of 
ketones in a neonate is abnormal and requires urgent 
follow-up. Although ketosis is a physiological response, 
it is likely to be of clinical significance when it is associ-
ated with acidosis. The detection of urine ketones, us-
ing a simple point-of-care testing device, is therefore the 
starting point for the investigation of metabolic acidosis 
(see Box 24.2).
The absence of ketones can also give a clue to the 
underlying IMD, the most classic example of which is 
hypoketonuria with hypoglycaemia due to a fatty acid ox-
idation defect such as MCADD. Patients with this group 
of disorders are able to mobilize fat stores during periods 
of fasting or catabolic stress but, owing to enzyme defi-
ciencies, are unable to oxidize the fatty acids completely, 
leading to a relative deficiency of acyl-CoA required for 
ketogenesis. Although classically considered to lead to a 
complete absence of ketone production, it is more com-
mon to see some ketones present but at an inappropri-
ately low concentration. The presence of ketonuria in 
hypoglycaemia should therefore not preclude investiga-
tion for fatty acid oxidation defects.
Urinary reducing substances
The detection of reducing substances in the urine, us-
ing simple but non-specific tablets, has historically been 
a mainstay of first-line testing for IMD. The with-
drawal from the market of Clinitest® (Bayer) in 2011 has 
prompted a review of this practice and a streamlining of 
investigations of disorders of monosaccharide metabo-
lism. Thin layer chromatography (TLC) may be useful 
to identify sugars that are present, but may give a nega-
tive result in children with IMD in whom the abnormal 
pathway is not stressed, for example if an infant with clas-
sic galactosaemia has been placed on a lactose-free milk 
formula. There are also analytical concerns with using 
	
24  Inherited metabolic disease	
471
sugar TLC, most notably a lack of a robust external qual-
ity assurance scheme and the reproducibility of results 
being highly operator dependent.
In the investigation of classic galactosaemia, where 
jaundice and liver dysfunction can rapidly deteriorate to 
hepatic failure, whole blood should be sent for urgent 
analysis of galactose 1-phosphate uridyl transferase ac-
tivity. In older infants, with progressive liver dysfunction 
and hepatomegaly presenting after weaning, the diag-
nosis of hereditary fructose intolerance should be con-
sidered. Liver biopsy for aldolase activity and mutation 
analysis will be required for diagnosis.
Key investigations:  confirm hyperammonaemia with free-flowing sample (arterial if necessary)
↑Ammonia (×2)
NO
Spurious elevation
Acidosis
YES
Ketosis
YES
Organic acidaemia (confirm with urinary organic acids)
NO
Fat oxidation defect (confirm with acylcarnitines)
YES
Specific elevation
of amino acid
YES
Argininosuccinic aciduria
↑Orotic acid
YES
NO
NO
NO
NO
↑Orotic acid
YES
↑Ornithine
NO
Glutamine:ammonia
        <1:6
NO
Carbamoylphosphate synthetase or N-acetyl
glutamate synthetase deficiency
YES
Transient neonatal hyperammonaemia
YES
Lysinuric protein intolerance
Ornithine transcarbamoylase deficiency
YES
↑Ornithine
↑Argininosuccinic
acid
↑Citrullline
↑Arginine
YES
Citrullinaemia
Arginase deficiency
Pyruvate carboxylase
deficiency
YES
NO
NO
YES
1. Hyperammonaemia hyperornithinaemia homocitrullinaemia (HHH)
    syndrome
2. Ornithine aminotransferase deficiency (only in first year of life)
NO
 
 
venous blood gases
 
amino acids (plasma)
 
 
organic acids (urine)
 
 
acylcarnitines
 
 
liver function tests including clotting (to exclude liver failure)
FIGURE 24.5  ■  A flowchart for the investigation of hyperammonaemia.
BOX 24.3	
Inherited metabolic diseases 
­presenting with neonatal liver 
disease
•	 Galactosaemia
•	 Tyrosinaemia type I
•	 α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
•	 Neonatal haemochromatosis
•	 Fatty acid oxidation disorders
•	 Respiratory chain disorders
•	 Disorders of bile acid metabolism
•	 Peroxisomal disorders
472	
Clinical biochemistry
Second-line investigations
Plasma and urinary amino acids
Amino acids are important intermediates in a number of 
metabolic pathways and are a significant source of energy, 
particularly during fasting. Their metabolism may involve 
potentially toxic intermediates that are normally further 
metabolized, but may accumulate in metabolic diseases 
involving amino acid metabolism and thus lead to organ 
damage. Amino acid analysis is therefore a key second-
line investigation when an inherited metabolic disease is 
suspected (Box 24.4), and is frequently requested as part 
of a metabolic screen.
Individually, amino acid disorders are rare, with the 
most common (PKU) having an incidence of 1 in 10 000. 
However, the combined incidence of all disorders that 
can be diagnosed using amino acid analysis is in the or-
der of 1 in 6000. As a group, they are heterogeneous, 
both in terms of clinical symptoms and age of presen-
tation. The onset of symptoms may occur anywhere 
from the neonatal period to adulthood, but is classically 
associated with periods of protein catabolism, such as 
delayed feeding in a neonate, or intercurrent infec-
tions in an infant. Acute symptoms are associated with 
the accumulation of large amounts of amino acids that 
overwhelm a defective pathway, resulting in the produc-
tion of toxic metabolites. There are certain presenting 
features in neonates, e.g. acute encephalopathy and ke-
tosis, which should prompt consideration of amino acid 
analysis. However, the clinical presentation of many of 
these disorders is disease specific, e.g. gyrate atrophy in 
ornithine aminotransferase deficiency, and may warrant 
specific investigation. An understanding of the nuances 
of presentation in amino acid disorders is the key to 
making a diagnosis.
Amino acid disorders can be simply categorized 
as primary or renal disorders (Table 24.2). In primary 
disorders, there is a defective metabolic pathway with 
accumulation of specific amino acids or metabolites as 
a result of an enzyme deficiency. A classic example is 
maple syrup urine disease, caused by a deficiency in the 
enzyme branched chain oxoacid dehydrogenase, which 
leads to the accumulation of valine, leucine and isoleu-
cine and the presence of the abnormal metabolite allo­
isoleucine. In primary amino acid disorders, the most 
informative sample is plasma, giving a snap shot of the 
metabolic pathway. Urine is less useful in this group 
since the excretion of amino acids is much more variable 
(especially in prematurity) and is significantly prone to 
interference from medication. Urine is, however, essen-
tial for the diagnosis of renal amino acid disorders such 
as cystinuria. In this group, amino acid metabolism is 
intact, but renal tubular reabsorption of specific amino 
acids is defective. The abnormal pattern is therefore 
only observed in urine.
It is important to be aware of the type of investigation 
undertaken when amino acid analysis is requested. Simple 
urine ‘spot tests’, such as the cyanide-­nitroprusside test 
for cystine and homocystine, are often employed by 
­local hospitals as a preliminary to referral to a specialist 
­centre. These simple assays are becoming increasingly 
obsolete and are limited by a lack of sensitivity and speci-
ficity and should not be used in isolation. Other screen-
ing techniques may be employed, such as thin layer 
chromatography, but again are limited in the detection 
of anything but gross abnormalities: some disorders, par-
ticularly those with mild biochemical changes, may be 
missed by these methods. If these qualitative techniques 
are employed, their limitations must be understood, and 
conveyed to the requesting clinician, so that diagnoses 
are not missed.
Amino acids are best analysed using quantitative 
techniques such as ion exchange chromatography. 
These methods are sufficiently sensitive to detect the 
newly recognized amino acid disorders characterized by 
low concentrations of amino acids, such as 3-phospho-
glycerate dehydrogenase deficiency, a disorder of serine 
synthesis.
Ion exchange chromatography is most suited to ‘rou-
tine’ analysis, but is limited by the long analysis time in 
the acute situation. To complement the approach, rapid 
tandem mass spectrometry (TMS), with analysis of a 
targeted list of amino acids and other metabolites (see 
section on acylcarnitines below), allows a diagnosis to 
be made swiftly and treatment to be instituted in an 
acutely sick child. Combining rapid targeted TMS test-
ing in the acute situation, with a routine approach that 
clearly states which disorders are excluded, may pro-
vide a balanced solution to the provision of amino acid 
analysis.
Urinary organic acids
Urine organic acid profiling is an important second-
line investigation in which up to 150 different IMDs 
can be identified from a single analysis. Organic acid 
analysis can identify intermediary metabolites from 
most amino acid, carbohydrate, purine and pyrimidine, 
neurotransmitter, cholesterol and fatty acid pathways, 
TABLE 24.2  Renal amino acid disorders
Disorder
Urinary amino acid pattern
Cystinuria
Cystine, ornithine, arginine, lysine
Hartnup disease
Neutral amino aciduria
Lysinuric protein 
intolerance
Lysine, ornithine, arginine
Iminoglycinuria
Proline, hydroxyproline, glycine
BOX 24.4	
Indications for plasma or urine 
amino acid analysis
•	 Neonatal lethargy, coma, seizures or vomiting
•	 Hyperammonaemia
•	 Hypoglycaemia
•	 Ketosis
•	 Metabolic acidosis or lactic acidaemia
•	 Metabolic decompensation or encephalopathy
•	 Unexplained liver disease
•	 Unexplained developmental delay
•	 Renal disorders, e.g. calculi, tubulopathy
	
24  Inherited metabolic disease	
473
making it a powerful investigative tool. Using organic 
acid analysis, metabolic disorders can be identified by 
the presence of pathological concentrations of normal 
metabolites, for example fumaric acid in fumarase de-
ficiency, or the presence of pathological (and in some 
cases pathognomic) metabolites such as succinylac-
etone in tyrosinaemia type I. Most laboratories use 
gas ­chromatography-mass spectrometry (GCMS) to 
undertake organic acid analysis, providing a qualita-
tive interpretation of the profile. However, the use of 
quantitative analysis by stable isotope dilution should 
be considered when small concentrations of critical 
­metabolites may lead to a diagnosis.
Many disorders can be detected by organic acid anal-
ysis regardless of whether the sample is collected when 
the child is acutely ill or not. However, some IMDs are 
clearly identifiable only during episodes of acute decom-
pensation. Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase defi-
ciency is one such disorder where the classic pattern of a 
medium chain dicarboxylic aciduria (adipic, suberic and 
sebacic acids), with an inappropriately low excretion of 
ketones in the presence of the pathognomonic metabolite 
hexanoylglycine, may only be apparent when the child 
is acutely unwell. Samples collected during episodes of 
acute decompensation are therefore vital for investiga-
tion of IMDs. The indications for urinary organic acid 
analysis are summarized in Box 24.5.
Urinary orotic acid
Increased urinary excretion of orotic acid is a feature 
of four IMDs involving the urea cycle (ornithine trans­
carbamoylase deficiency, citrullinaemia, argininosuc-
cinic aciduria and argininaemia) (see Fig. 24.1) and is 
helpful in their diagnosis. There are a number of ana-
lytical techniques that can be used for identification of 
this key metabolite, for example GCMS or TMS, and 
it is often required as part of the rapid investigation of 
a sick infant.
Blood acylcarnitines
With the advent of TMS technology, acylcarnitine pro-
filing has become a crucial investigation in the field of 
IMDs. The use of TMS for acylcarnitine profiling, 
combined with simultaneous analysis of other interme-
diary metabolites, enables the diagnosis of many of the 
treatable amino acid, organic acid, fatty acid oxidation 
and urea cycle disorders. In a clinical emergency, if one 
of these disorders is considered, then discussion with a 
specialist metabolic service to arrange urgent analysis 
should be a priority.
Acylcarnitine profiling allows the quantitation of satu-
rated and unsaturated acylcarnitine species required for 
the diagnosis of a number of IMDs. In addition, the de-
termination of both free and total carnitine (i.e. overall 
carnitine status) is required for the investigation of sus-
pected carnitine transporter defects. Typically, acylcar-
nitine analysis is undertaken on plasma or blood spot 
samples, with only a small sample usually being neces-
sary. Bile samples, collected post-mortem, on to newborn 
screening cards, can be used if the suspicion of IMD is 
raised at autopsy.
It should be noted that some conditions can only be 
diagnosed confidently with the use of acylcarnitine pro-
filing: an example is VLCADD. Acylcarnitine analysis 
should therefore be undertaken if a fatty acid oxidation 
defect is suspected; these disorders typically present with 
hypoketotic hypoglycaemia, but may be associated with 
cardiomyopathy, rhabdomyolysis or hepatomegaly. In a 
pregnant woman with AFLP or HELLP syndrome, the 
possibility of LCHADD in her infant should be con-
sidered. Rapid acylcarnitine profiling is required for 
the newborn infant of a mother with a history of either 
condition.
Blood lactate and pyruvate
Lactate and pyruvate are important intermediaries in a 
number of metabolic pathways, particularly in the pro-
duction of ATP under anaerobic conditions. It is there-
fore not surprising that assessment of these pathways, 
by analysis of blood lactate, is an essential measure-
ment in the investigation of a suspected IMD. In the 
absence of tissue hypoxia, and assuming the sample was 
collected properly, using an appropriate antiglycolytic 
agent, a blood lactate of >3 mmol/L should be consid-
ered abnormal and further investigations for an IMD 
initiated.
Lactic acidaemia is found in many groups of IMDs 
(see Box 24.1) and may lead to a metabolic acidosis when 
the lactate concentration exceeds 5 mmol/L. It is a fre-
quent finding in organic acidaemias, urea cycle disorders 
and fatty acid oxidation disorders, as a result of second-
ary interference with the metabolism of coenzyme A, and 
is ­often accompanied by ketosis. These groups of IMDs 
can be rapidly distinguished with follow-up investiga-
tions such as organic acid, amino acid and acylcarnitine 
analysis.
The primary lactic acidaemias, for example defects 
in pyruvate metabolism or respiratory chain function, 
often present with severe metabolic acidosis in the neo-
natal period. A distinguishing feature of this group, as 
opposed to the secondary IMD groups noted above, is 
that the clinical picture is unrelated to intake of pro-
tein. In the primary lactic acidaemias, analysis of both 
blood lactate and pyruvate, calculation of the lactate: 
pyruvate (L:P) ratio and measurement of cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) lactate are of assistance in directing fur-
ther investigations. It must be noted that pyruvate is 
BOX 24.5	
Indications for urinary organic acid 
analysis
•	 Unexplained metabolic acidosis
•	 Hypoglycaemia
•	 Ketonuria (urgent in newborn)
•	 Lactic acidosis
•	 Hyperammonaemia
•	 Encephalopathy
•	 Unexplained neurological disorder
•	 Multisystem failure
•	 Hepatic dysfunction
474	
Clinical biochemistry
an extremely unstable analyte and needs careful sample 
handling with immediate precipitation of whole blood. 
However, if accurate measurement of lactate and pyru-
vate is undertaken, the L:P ratio can give valuable in-
sight into the cytoplasmic redox status. An elevated L:P 
ratio (>25) is suggestive of a respiratory chain defect 
or pyruvate carboxylase deficiency, with a normal ratio 
(<25) ­suggesting a disorder of gluconeogenesis or pyru-
vate dehydrogenase deficiency.
Further information can be gained from assessing 
plasma lactate concentrations in relation to the fed and 
fasted states. This is of particular use in the investigation 
of glycogen storage disorders (GSDs). Lactic acidaemia 
in the fasted state is a key finding in GSD type I (glu-
cose 6-phosphatase deficiency), in contrast to GSD type 
III (amylo-1,6-glucosidase deficiency), in which the in-
crease in lactate is most noticeable after feeding. In in-
vestigating these conditions, it is important that samples 
are collected both pre- and postprandially so that lactic 
acidaemia is not missed. It is for this reason that lactate 
is a key measurement in many diagnostic fasts and 24 h 
metabolite profiles (see below).
Urinary glycosaminoglycans
The mucopolysaccharidoses are a group of lysosomal 
storage disorders characterized biochemically by the ac-
cumulation of glycosaminoglycans (GAGs) in the urine. 
Clinically, they present with coarsening of the facies, in 
conjunction with features including skeletal abnormali-
ties, hepatosplenomegaly and hearing loss. The majority 
of these features are not present at birth but develop pro-
gressively with age. If this group of disorders is suspected, 
a random urine sample should be collected for analysis of 
GAGs. In the first instance, quantitative analysis is usually 
undertaken with interpretation against age-related refer-
ence ranges. This is then followed-up by electrophoresis 
to identify the individual GAGs from the typical patterns 
characteristic of each disorder (see Table 24.3). Definitive 
diagnosis is by enzyme analysis.
Plasma very long chain fatty acids
Very long chain fatty acids, with carbon chain length 
≥22, are exclusively metabolized by β-oxidation in per-
oxisomes. The analysis of plasma VLCFAs is therefore an 
important second-line investigation in suspected peroxi-
somal disorders. These are a genetically heterogeneous 
group but, in disorders both of peroxisomal biogenesis 
(such as Zellweger syndrome), and single peroxisomal 
protein defects (the most common of which is X-linked 
ALD), β-oxidation is impaired, leading to the accumu-
lation of saturated VLCFAs. The finding of an elevated 
ratio of C26:C22 fatty acids is a clear indication of per-
oxisomal dysfunction. However, it should be noted that 
although analysis of VLCFAs identifies the presence of 
a peroxisomal disorder, results should be viewed in con-
junction with the clinical findings, imaging and further 
laboratory analysis, such as erythrocyte plasmalogen, bile 
acid intermediates and pristanic acid to enable a precise 
diagnosis.
Functional and loading tests
The aim of functional or loading tests is to unmask 
IMDs that may be difficult to diagnose by conventional 
techniques. They are most often used in situations where 
metabolic findings are not clearly abnormal and the di-
agnosis is uncertain, for example many of the fatty acid 
oxidation disorders, where biochemical findings may be 
subtle, or absent, when the patient is well. If the win-
dow of opportunity to collect samples when the patient 
is hypoglycaemic or acutely unwell is missed, then a 
controlled diagnostic fast may be carried out to aid the 
diagnosis.
Diagnostic fast
During a diagnostic fast, blood samples are collected 
hourly. Investigations should include markers of interme-
diary metabolism (non-esterified fatty acids, hydroxybu-
tyrate and lactate), acylcarnitines and counter-regulatory 
hormones (insulin, growth hormone and cortisol). Urine 
organic acids and blood acylcarnitine should be measured 
at the beginning and end of the fast. The blood glucose 
concentration is monitored using a point-of-care testing 
device appropriate for the detection of hypoglycaemia; 
such results must be confirmed in the laboratory. Given 
the risks associated with this procedure, diagnostic fasts 
must be performed under medical supervision in a spe-
cialist unit. In addition to providing valuable diagnos-
tic information, a fast allows the determination of the 
TABLE 24.3  Mucopolysaccharidoses
Type
Disorder
Urinary glycosaminoglycan
Enzyme deficiency
I
Hurler
Dermatan sulphate, heparan sulphate
α-Iduronidase
II
Hunter
Dermatan sulphate, heparan sulphate
Iduronate sulphatase
IIIA
Sanfilippo A
Heparan sulphate
Heparin sulphamidase
IIIB
Sanfilippo B
Heparan sulphate
N-acetyl- α-glucosaminidase
IIIC
Sanfilippo C
Heparan sulphate
N-acetyltransferase
IIID
Sanfilippo D
Heparan sulphate
N-acetylglucosamine sulphatase
IVA
Morquio A
Keratan sulphate
N-acetylgalactosamine 6-sulphatase
IVB
Morquio B
Keratan sulphate
β-Galactosidase
VI
Maroteaux–Lamy
Dermatan sulphate
N-acetylgalactosamine 4-sulphatase
VII
Sly
Dermatan sulphate, heparan sulphate,
chondroitin sulphate
β-Glucuronidase
	
24  Inherited metabolic disease	
475
maximum safe fasting period before the onset of hypo-
glycaemia, and is often undertaken on a yearly basis in 
patients with glycogen storage disease.
Allopurinol loading test
Loading tests can be used to expose an enzyme defect, 
where there is residual activity. The allopurinol test can 
be used in this way to confirm heterozygote status in fe-
male carriers of OTC deficiency. Urine is collected for 
measurement of orotidine and orotic acid, before and 
after administration of a dose of allopurinol. Although 
this is a safe and noninvasive approach, not all at-risk 
females will be detected. This strategy, although still 
in use, is now being superseded by the use of mutation 
analysis.
Confirmatory investigations
Enzyme analysis: general principles
Final confirmation of the diagnosis of a suspected IMD 
often requires enzyme analysis. In some cases, confir-
matory testing is not undertaken, because the diagno-
sis can be inferred from a typical clinical history and a 
characteristic pattern of abnormal metabolites. In con-
ditions such as PKU, the use of an invasive procedure, 
such as liver biopsy, to obtain tissue for enzyme analysis 
would not contribute further to the management of the 
patient. However, the majority of patients with a sus-
pected IMD will have enzyme analysis to confirm the 
diagnosis.
Enzyme analysis can be undertaken in various tissue 
types, ranging from blood cells to liver and muscle sam-
ples, obtained by biopsy. It is of particular importance that 
for IMDs that are tissue specific, an appropriate specimen 
is used, e.g. liver biopsy samples in the urea cycle disor-
ders and muscle or liver in the glycogen storage disorders 
that are either muscle or liver specific. If a patient with a 
suspected IMD is not expected to survive, plasma, urine, 
skin and, if possible, muscle and liver biopsies should be 
collected. Skin biopsies are of particular use since fibro-
blast cultures can be established and DNA harvested if 
required.
Red cell galactose 1-phosphate uridyltransferase. 
Classic galactosaemia, due to a deficiency in the en-
zyme galactose 1-phosphate uridyltransferase (Gal-1-
PUT or GALT), leads to the accumulation of galactose 
and other toxic metabolites on introduction of lactose 
into the diet. In the past, testing for urine reducing 
substances provided an easily available screening test 
for galactosaemia. Now, clinical suspicion should be 
urgently followed-up with confirmatory testing of red 
cell GALT activity. The requesting clinician must state 
clearly the transfusion status of the child, since previous 
blood transfusion will invalidate the result. If a child has 
been transfused, it may be possible to infer the diagnosis 
by analysing parental blood and demonstrating that they 
are heterozygotes.
Lysosomal enzyme screening. The lysosomal ­storage 
disorders are a group of approximately 40 different 
IMDs characterized by the accumulation of macromol-
ecules in lysosomes, as a result of specific enzyme or 
protein transporter defects. The accumulated material 
results in an increase in the size and number of these or-
ganelles, leading to cellular dysfunction and subsequent 
pathological features. The lysosomal storage disorders 
are generally classified on the basis of the accumulated 
material, for example sphingolipidoses, mucolipidoses 
and muco­polysaccharidoses. These conditions typically 
present in a chronic and progressive manner, in many 
cases with neurological degeneration. The principal 
clinical ­features are summarized in Box 24.6.
Diagnosis of this group of disorders is often difficult, 
as there is an overlap in the clinical presentation of each 
disease. A ‘screening’ approach is, therefore, adopted 
by specialist laboratories: this ensures the maximum 
possibility of making a diagnosis. Groups of lysosomal 
enzymes in plasma and leukocytes are analysed depend-
ing on the clinical features, for example whether the 
patient has neurodegeneration or the presence or ab-
sence of hepatosplenomegaly. The choice of enzymes 
is tailored to exclude the majority of lysosomal storage 
disorders. This approach requires good communication 
between the local hospital and specialist enzyme labora-
tory so that a systematic approach to the investigation is 
undertaken.
Complementation studies
Although in the vast majority of IMDs the enzyme de-
ficiency is well characterized, there are still a number 
of disorders in which the protein or gene defect has not 
been identified. In these conditions, such as those that 
lead to decreased synthesis of adenosylcobalamin and 
the clinical features of cobalamin-responsive methyl-
malonic aciduria (classified as Cbla and Cblb), a dif-
ferent approach to confirm the diagnosis may be taken. 
To distinguish these different groups, complementation 
studies can be undertaken in cultured fibroblasts. The 
principle of the investigation is to compare the incor-
poration of a marker substance, in this case propionate, 
in parallel fused and unfused cell cultures. The classi-
fication of the patient in this way is of use in assessing 
the possible prognosis and excluding disease in other 
family members. However, it is likely that this approach 
will be superseded once the enzyme or gene locus is 
identified.
BOX 24.6	
Clinical and laboratory features 
suggestive of a possible lysosomal 
storage disorder
•	 Neonatal ascites
•	 Hydrops fetalis
•	 Coarse features
•	 Skeletal dysplasia
•	 Hepatosplenomegaly
•	 Neurodegeneration
•	 Corneal clouding
•	 Cherry red spots in macula
•	 Vacuolated lymphocytes
476	
Clinical biochemistry
Genetic mutation analysis
Mutation analysis is playing an increasingly important 
role in the diagnosis of IMDs The use of next generation 
sequencing has enabled a rapid and more cost-­effective 
approach and is becoming a mainstay of diagnostic 
pathways.
Mutation analysis has many benefits in the diagno-
sis of IMDs. It is of particular use in prenatal diagno-
sis, where mutation analysis in chorionic villus samples 
(CVS) can be performed much earlier than enzyme di-
agnosis in cultured amniocytes. Once the mutation has 
been defined in the proband, testing of family members 
may overcome the need for invasive sampling, such as 
liver biopsies or functional tests that may give ambigu-
ous results.
Where mutations are classified and the genotype/
phenotype correlation is well recognized, this may pro-
vide useful information regarding prognosis and possible 
treatment options. In some disorders, such as MCADD, 
a common disease-causing mutation (A985G) is present 
in many cases, allowing the use of mutation analysis to se-
cure the diagnosis. The approach of combining metabo-
lite assays with mutation analysis confirms the diagnosis 
rapidly and may obviate the need for fibroblast culture. 
Problems may arise, however, when compound hetero-
zygotes are identified: in these instances it might not be 
clear what the clinical outcome of a combination of po-
tentially less severe mutations would be.
PRENATAL DIAGNOSIS
The availability of prenatal diagnosis gives a number of 
options to a family in whom a serious genetic disorder 
is suspected. In the field of IMDs, prenatal diagnosis is 
often requested if a previously affected child has a poor 
prognosis, particularly where the options for treatment 
are limited. Inherited metabolic diseases are generally 
diagnosed prenatally using either enzyme analysis in cul-
tured amniocytes or mutation analysis in CVS.
Amniocentesis, undertaken in either the first or sec-
ond trimester, provides fetal amniocytes for culture. 
Enzyme analysis can be undertaken in these cultures and 
the activity compared with appropriate reference ranges 
to confirm the diagnosis. The limitation of this ap-
proach is the time scale: amniocyte culture typically takes 
4–6 weeks to establish, leading to additional anxiety for 
the family and limited time for decision-making. Since 
only a small number of analyses are undertaken each year, 
prenatal diagnosis of IMDs using these techniques is un-
dertaken at only a few specialized centres.
Chorionic villus sampling is generally undertaken at 
9–12 weeks of gestation, providing the opportunity for 
earlier diagnosis and giving additional time for counsel-
ling and safer termination, if this option is chosen. In this 
technique, fetal villus cells obtained by amnioscopy are 
dissected from the maternal decidual tissue, and DNA 
extracted and used for mutation analysis. Adherence to 
strict techniques is paramount, to avoid maternal cell 
contamination that may result in diagnostic ambiguity.
MANAGEMENT
Many treatment modalities are adopted to manage IMDs, 
dependent on whether pathology results from deficiency 
of the product, the build up of a toxic metabolite or a 
combination of the two. At present, most treatments re-
main symptomatic rather than curative.
Strategies to replace a missing product
Supply of precursor
Enzymes catalyse reactions that would proceed at a much 
reduced rate in their absence. Provision of large doses of 
precursor can shift the reaction in the direction of making 
the product by a mass action effect: in some cases this is 
sufficient to ameliorate symptoms.
Hydroxycobalamin is converted in the body via a num-
ber of intracellular conversions from its dietary hydroxy-
cobalamin form to its two active forms, adenosylcobalamin 
and methylcobalamin. In the cobalamin disorders, blocks 
in these conversions lead to accumulation of homocys-
teine, methylmalonate or both, dependent on the po-
sition of the block (Fig. 24.6). Cobalamin C disorder is 
the commonest of these rare IMDs. Patients present in 
the neonatal period and first year with neurological dete-
rioration, poor feeding and hypotonia, and often develop 
Hydroxycobalamin
(Cbl3+)
Cbl1+
Methionine synthase-Cbl2+
Methionine synthase-methyl Cbl
L-methylmalonyl-CoA
Succinyl-CoA
Adenosylcobalamin
Homocysteine
Methionine
Cbl2+
FIGURE 24.6  ■  Cobalamin metabolism.
	
24  Inherited metabolic disease	
477
seizures. Anaemia is common, as is multiorgan involve-
ment including the kidneys, liver and heart. The diag-
nosis is suggested by elevated plasma homocysteine and 
urinary methylmalonate concentrations, in the absence of 
hydroxycobalamin deficiency. Diagnosis is confirmed by 
fibroblast incorporation studies and decreased synthesis of 
adenosyl- and methylcobalamin. Treatment with regular 
intramuscular hydroxycobalamin leads to a marked reduc-
tion in homocysteine and methylmalonate, but not com-
plete biochemical normalization. Clinical improvement is 
limited even in prospectively treated affected siblings.
Replacement of product
Replacement of the deficient product of a blocked path-
way is another solution to the treatment of some IMDs: it 
effectively bypasses the block. Its efficacy depends on the 
product being available and its potential to be given in a 
form that can be taken by the patient and then reach its 
site of action in a usable form.
Such an approach is used in the congenital disorder 
of glycosylation (CDG) Ib (phosphomannose isomer-
ase deficiency). Glycosylation is an essential process 
in the body, as almost all proteins that are secreted 
or membrane bound are dependent on their glycans 
­(carbohydrate side chains) for normal activity. The pro-
duction of ­glycoproteins begins with the manufacture 
of the oligosaccharide precursor and its transfer to the 
nascent polypeptide chain in the endoplasmic reticu-
lum, with subsequent modification within the Golgi 
apparatus to produce the desired glycan. Defects of the 
pathway were first established when examining transfer-
rin, which has two glycans with four sialic acid residues. 
Defective glycosylation results in variation in the num-
ber of sialic acid residues, which affects the charge on the 
protein. This can be detected using isoelectric focusing, 
which shows additional bands. Children with CDG Ib 
present with recurrent vomiting and diarrhoea, coagu-
lopathy, protein-losing enteropathy, hypoalbuminaemia, 
delayed growth and hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia. 
Liver fibrosis has also been noted. Treatment with oral 
mannose effectively bypasses the block by replacing the 
missing product (Fig. 24.7). Clinically, there is a reduc-
tion in diarrhoea and vomiting with improved growth. 
Biochemically, the isoelectric focusing pattern normalizes 
as glycan production beyond the block is normal. Plasma 
concentrations of antithrombin III, the cause of the co-
agulopathy, also return to normal.
In dihydropteridine reductase deficiency, there is de-
creased recycling of biopterin, the essential cofactor for 
pheknylalanine hydroxylase, the enzyme responsible 
for the conversion of phenylalanine into tyrosine, with 
­resultant phenylketonuria. In addition, biopterin is the 
essential cofactor for two other hydroxylases in the body, 
namely tyrosine and tryptophan hydroxylases, required 
for the production of l-DOPA and 5-­hydroxytryptophan 
(5-HT), respectively. These are, in turn, converted to 
dopamine and serotonin, which are two of the major 
neurotransmitters in the brain. Dihydropteridine reduc-
tase deficiency was originally termed malignant PKU, as 
following the introduction of the PKU screening in the 
1970s it became apparent that there were very rare pa-
tients who still went on to have marked developmental 
delay and characteristic axial hypotonia and limb dysto-
nia, in spite of excellent phenylalanine control by diet. 
Now, all neonates with hyperphenylalaninaemia detected 
on newborn screening are screened for biopterin defects, 
usually performed on dried blood spots by measuring 
­total biopterins. Dihydropteridine reductase deficiency is 
managed with a phenylalanine restricted diet and supple-
mentation with 5-HT and l-DOPA. The latter is given 
in combination with carbidopa in the ratio 4:1. Carbidopa 
is a peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor, which reduces pe-
ripheral conversion of l-DOPA to dopamine, thereby 
increasing the amount of l-DOPA reaching the brain 
and reducing side-effects, which include nausea, vomit-
ing, postural hypertension, dystonic reactions and psy-
chological disturbance. Dose increments should be small, 
as initially patients are very sensitive to the effect of the 
treatment owing to upregulation of receptors. Dosage 
requirements are monitored clinically and by measur-
ing the breakdown products of dopamine and serotonin, 
namely homovanillic acid (HVA) and 5-hydroxyindole-
acetic acid (5-HIAA), in the CSF. A slightly greater dose 
of l-DOPA is given compared with 5-HT, to mimic the 
naturally slightly higher amounts within the brain. In ad-
dition, folinic acid is required to combat the associated 
central folate deficiency seen in this condition.
Replacement of the missing product is also used in 
pyridoxal phosphate-dependent seizures in pyridoxamine 
5-phosphate oxidase deficiency. Pyridoxal phosphate is 
the active form of pyridoxine, required for a number of es-
sential reactions in the body and particularly in the brain. 
Pyridoxamine 5-phosphate oxidase deficiency presents 
with devastating neonatal seizures, which can be effec-
tively treated by giving pyridoxal phosphate orally. The 
cessation of seizures is immediate and dramatic but as-
sociated with transient hypotonia and apnoea. Treatment 
should therefore be initiated with full resuscitation facili-
ties available.
Replacement of the missing product in utero has been 
successful in 3-phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase defi-
ciency, a serine biosynthesis disorder, characterized by 
congenital microcephaly, severe psychomotor retardation 
and intractable seizures. The treatment of affected chil-
dren with oral l-serine has proved effective in preventing 
the seizures: however, development is not normalized and 
Glucose
Glucose 6-P
Fructose 6-P
Mannose
Mannose 6-P
Mannose 1-P
GDP mannose
Phosphomannose
isomerase
FIGURE 24.7  ■  Mannose therapy for CDG Ib (phosphomannose 
isomerase deficiency). Mannose is phosphorylated by hexoki-
nase to mannose 6-phosphate, thereby bypassing the block. 
GDP, guanosine 5′-diphosphate; P, phosphate.
478	
Clinical biochemistry
the congenital microcephaly suggests impaired fetal brain 
growth in utero. It has now been shown that giving l-serine 
to the mother during pregnancy can reverse the decrease in 
fetal head growth in utero with resultant normal neurologi-
cal development. The key diagnostic investigation for this 
condition is analysis of serine concentration in CSF.
Synthetic analogues
It may not be possible to replace the product directly, ow-
ing to difficulties with absorption and denaturation when 
exposed to the acidity of the stomach and digestive en-
zymes. Synthetic analogues of the missing product are, 
however, used in some circumstances. N-acetylglutamate 
synthetase (NAGS) deficiency is a rare urea cycle defect 
that may present with devastating hyperammonaemic 
crises. N-acetylglutamate is an essential activator for car-
bamoylphosphate synthetase, the second enzyme in the 
urea cycle pathway (see Fig. 24.1). Carbamylglutamate, 
a synthetic analogue of N-acetylglutamate, is an effec-
tive treatment for NAGS deficiency. It allows activation 
of carbamoylphosphate synthetase, in the absence of a 
working NAGS enzyme, reducing the risk of hyperam-
monaemia and improving neurological outcome. In or-
ganic acidaemias, hyperammonaemia can occur as a result 
of secondary inhibition of NAGS; carbamylglutamate is 
used in their management.
Receptor agonists can be used where the site of action 
of a deficient product is a receptor. Aromatic amino acid 
decarboxylase (AADC) converts 5-HT into serotonin and 
l-DOPA into dopamine. Clinical features of AADC de-
ficiency include intermittent oculogyric crises, limb dys-
tonia, generalized hypotonia, developmental delay and 
autonomic dysfunction. The diagnosis is indicated by low 
concentrations of the neurotransmitter breakdown prod-
ucts, HVA and 5-HIAA, in CSF. Dopamine receptor ago-
nists, such as pramipexole and rotigotine, are being used 
to reduce the frequency of crises, and also improve volun-
tary movements, but the benefits have so far been variable.
Alternate product
A further strategy employed in the treatment of IMDs is to 
use an alternate product to bypass the block. The classic ex-
ample is the use of a ketogenic diet in deficiency of glucose 
transporter type 1 (GLUT1), a membrane transporter that 
transports glucose across the blood–brain barrier: a defective 
protein results in hypoglycaemia in the brain, with a normal 
plasma glucose concentration. Presentation is in infancy 
with epilepsy, global developmental delay and complex 
movement disorders. Diagnosis requires the simultaneous 
measurement of glucose in the plasma and CSF which re-
veals a decreased CSF:plasma glucose ratio. Although glu-
cose is the preferred fuel for the brain, ketones may be used 
for energy and gain entry to the brain via the monocar-
boxylate cotransporter (MCT1) transporter, thus avoiding 
the block (Fig. 24.8). The ketogenic diet promotes keto-
genesis by restricting carbohydrate (typically a 4:1 ratio of 
fat to combined protein and carbohydrate), with clinical 
improvement in seizure control, development and move-
ments. The condition tends to stabilize after puberty, but 
the degree of residual impairment is highly variable.
Ketogenic diets are similarly used in pyruvate dehy-
drogenase deficiency, bypassing glycolysis.
Inhibition of product breakdown
Enzyme blocks in IMDs are not usually complete, and 
usually some product is made. Preventing or delaying 
breakdown of the product can have useful therapeutic ef-
fects. In AADC deficiency described above, a combination 
of a dopamine agonist and a monoamine oxidase inhibitor, 
such as tranylcypromine, can be used in combination. The 
latter prevents the natural breakdown of dopamine and 
serotonin and therefore boosts their concentrations. This 
has the positive effect of reducing the frequency of oculo-
gyric crises and improving muscular tone.
Enzyme replacement therapy
Replacement of the missing enzyme is an obvious po-
tential solution to the management of IMDs, but many 
obstacles have to be overcome, including production, 
purification and targeting of the enzyme. Access to the 
CNS across the blood–brain barrier remains a techni-
cal challenge. Nearly 40 years ago, it was noted that co-­
culture of fibroblasts from Hurler and Hunter syndrome 
­patients mutually corrected the defects in  vitro, sug-
gesting the existence of a diffusible substance that could 
correct the block. Twenty years later, the first enzyme 
replacement therapy (ERT) became commercially avail-
able. Gaucher disease (glucocerebrosidase deficiency) 
has been the forerunner of the ever expanding number 
of conditions considered for ERT. Storage of glucocer-
ebroside occurs in liver, spleen and bone, and, in two out 
of the three forms, brain. Type 1 is the most common, 
presenting with hepatosplenomegaly, anaemia, lung in-
filtration and bony changes: the brain is not involved. 
Type 1 is prevalent in the Ashkenazi Jewish population. 
Type 2 is rapidly progressive with severe neurological 
involvement and hepatosplenomegaly. Type 3 has brain 
involvement, but a much milder course. Inheritance of 
all three forms is autosomal recessive. The diagnosis is 
made by measuring the glucocerebrosidase activity in 
leukocytes.
Glucose
Glucose
Acetyl CoA
Glycolysis
TCA Cycle
PDH
b-oxidation
Ketones
Fat
Energy
MCT1
GLUT1
FIGURE  24.8  ■  Providing alternate fuel utilizing ketones in the 
management of GLUT1 deficiency and pyruvate dehydroge-
nase deficiency. PDH, pyruvate dehydrogenase; GLUT1, glucose 
transporter protein 1; MCT1, monocarboxylate transporter 1; 
TCA cycle, transcarboxylic acid cycle.
	
24  Inherited metabolic disease	
479
The absence of brain involvement in type 1 made it an 
obvious target for ERT as the enzyme does not cross the 
blood–brain barrier. The enzyme used is a recombinant 
modified human placental glucocerebrosidase, with an ex-
posed mannose terminus to enhance lysosomal targeting, 
following uptake by macrophages. Uptake of glycoproteins 
is mediated via carbohydrate-specific receptors, which are 
present on macrophages. Enzyme replacement therapy has 
revolutionized the management of type 1 Gaucher disease, 
with improvement in haematological parameters, regres-
sion of organomegaly and reduction in bone pain. The 
enzyme is given fortnightly as an intravenous infusion, ini-
tially in hospital, but later at home, utilizing a home-care 
nursing team. Some individuals produce antibodies to the 
enzyme protein, but therapy can usually continue.
Fabry disease (α-galactosidase deficiency) is another 
condition for which ERT has been developed. Previously, 
treatment was supportive, including dialysis and the use of an-
algesics. Enzyme replacement therapy is effective in reducing 
plasma glycosphingolipid concentrations, preserving renal 
function, improving cardiac conduction and reducing pain.
Replacement enzymes have been developed for other 
lysosomal storage disorders, including: Hurler syn-
drome (α-iduronidase deficiency); Hunter syndrome 
(iduronate-2-sulphatase deficiency); Morquio syndrome 
Type A (N-acetylgalactosamine-6-sulfatasedeficiency); 
Maroteaux Lamy syndrome (N-acetylgalactosamine-
4-sulfatase deficiency); Pompe disease (acid maltase 
deficiency), and Wolman disease (lysosomal acid lipase 
deficiency). At present, relatively small numbers of pa-
tients have been treated, for relatively short time peri-
ods. It is hoped that early treatment will prevent storage 
occurring and therefore give optimal outcomes, but, for 
those conditions with neurological involvement, the lack 
of brain penetrance remains a concern.
Cofactor supplementation
Many enzymes have vitamin cofactors that are essential for 
normal function. Cofactor supplementation may increase 
residual enzyme activity in deficient patients. Although 
the absolute response may be quite small, because clini-
cal features often only develop at extremely low levels of 
enzyme activity (<5%), even a small increase (e.g. by 1% 
of normal activity) may prove to be clinically significant.
Patients may have sensitive deficiencies that are totally 
correctable by giving the enzyme cofactor. Some condi-
tions can be characterized by their response to cofactor 
supplementation. An example is homocystinuria (cys-
tathionine β-synthase deficiency), which is classified as 
being either pyridoxine responsive or pyridoxine unre-
sponsive. In patients who respond to pyridoxine, there is 
a reduction in fasting plasma homocysteine concentra-
tion and characteristic hypermethioninaemia, on pyri-
doxine supplementation. A pyridoxine challenge should 
therefore be undertaken in all new patients, with mea-
surements of plasma homocysteine and methionine con-
centrations before, during and after supplementation. 
Some patients have a partial response to pyridoxine.
Once a diagnosis has been established, cofactors are rou-
tinely given in a number of IMDs, to assess whether any clin-
ical benefit can be gained by supplementation (Table 24.4).
Organ transplantation
Purified enzymes for replacement therapy are available 
for only a very small number of IMDs. A more crude 
form of enzyme replacement is whole organ transplanta-
tion. This most frequently involves the liver, as this is the 
principal site of many metabolic pathways, for example 
the urea cycle. It is important to examine whether there 
are significant extrahepatic manifestations of the disorder 
for which transplantation is being considered. If there 
is significant enzyme expression in other tissues, then it 
may be that liver transplantation, although improving 
hepatic enzyme function, will not counteract these other 
harmful effects. This importance of extrahepatic morbid-
ity is demonstrated by methylmalonic acidaemia, where 
liver transplantation fails to protect the patient from fur-
ther neurological decompensation. In contrast, the risk 
of metabolic stroke post liver transplantation in propi-
onic acidaemia appears much lower, even though the 
enzyme deficiencies affect the same catabolic pathway 
(see Fig. 24.9). Correcting the defect in the liver abol-
ishes metabolic decompensation, thereby permitting a 
free diet. Cerebrospinal fluid propionate concentrations 
do not completely normalize and therefore it has been 
suggested that relaxing the diet post transplant, but con-
tinuing modest protein restriction, may abolish the risk 
of further neurological sequelae.
TABLE 24.4  Vitamin cofactors, ­supplementation 
of which may be beneficial in inherited 
­metabolic disorders
Cofactor
Disorder
Ascorbic acid
Tyrosinaemia type III
Transient tyrosinaemia of the newborn
Glutathione synthase deficiency
Congenital lactic acidosis
Biotin
Biotinidase deficiency
Multiple carboxylase deficiency
Propionic acidaemia
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency
Biopterin
Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency
Cobalamin
Methylmalonic aciduria
Folate (given as 
folinic acid)
Dihydropteridine reductase deficiency
Uridine monophosphate synthase 
deficiency
Methylene tetrahydrofolate reductase 
deficiency
Methionine synthase deficiency
Primary hyperoxaluria type 1
Pyridoxine
Homocystinuria (cystathionine  
β-synthase deficiency)
Ornithine aminotransferase deficiency
Pyridoxine-responsive seizures
Pyridoxal 
phosphate
Pyridox(am)ine 5′-phosphate oxidase 
deficiency
Riboflavin
Glutaric aciduria type I
Multiple acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
deficiency
Congenital lactic acidosis
Thiamin
Congenital lactic acidosis
Maple syrup urine disease
Pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency
Tocopherol
Glutathione synthetase deficiency
Ubiquinone
Mitochondrial disorders
480	
Clinical biochemistry
Liver transplantation can also be used in urea cycle de-
fects, but the decision as to whether to transplant depends 
on the severity of the defect, the extent of pre-existing 
damage from previous hyperammonaemic crises and the 
future risk of longer term complications of the disease. 
The survival rate for liver transplantation has improved 
dramatically and, in children, is quoted as being >95% 
at five years. However, after transplantation, patients will 
require lifelong immunosuppressant therapy to prevent 
organ rejection, which increases the chance of signifi-
cant sepsis and the development of lymphoproliferative 
disease. The use of partial liver transplantation, that is, 
transplanting a donor lobe without removing the native 
liver, has the added advantage of correcting the metabolic 
defect (100% liver activity is not required for normal 
function), while leaving the native liver (which is other-
wise healthy) in situ. A partial liver transplant also has 
the potential, if gene therapy becomes standard practice, 
to allow the anti-rejection drugs to be stopped and the 
transplanted lobe to be rejected.
An alternative to transplantation of a whole liver, or a 
lobe of a liver, is hepatocyte transplantation. Neonates who 
present with OTC deficiency have a very poor prognosis. 
Mortality is extremely high and, even in prospectively 
treated patients (including those receiving a liver transplant 
in the first six months of life), neurological damage remains 
common. Hepatocyte transplantation has been used as a 
bridge to organ transplantation. Donor hepatocytes are in-
fused into the hepatic circulation to seed in the native liver. 
Some of these cells engraft and replicate, thus increasing 
enzyme activity within the liver. This technique has been 
used to stabilize babies, and to avoid hyperammonaemic 
crises, before liver transplantation, which is usually car-
ried out at about six months of age. Neurological out-
come has been good. It is hoped that further refinement 
of this technique may allow longer lasting effects that 
would obviate the requirement for later surgical transplan-
tation. Conditions in which there is liver destruction are 
likely to benefit the most, as this provides a stimulus for 
hepatic regeneration to which the transfused hepatocytes 
respond. Hepatocyte transplantation would be appropri-
ate for several inherited disorders including Crigler–Najjar 
syndrome, glycogen storage disease type Ia and infantile 
Refsum disease. Immunosuppression is still required, but, 
as with auxiliary liver transplantation, there is the potential 
for withdrawing immunosuppressants when gene therapy 
becomes feasible, as the native liver remains in situ. A fur-
ther advantage of hepatocyte transplantation is that livers 
that might otherwise be considered unsuitable for liver 
transplantation can be used as a source of healthy hepato-
cytes, as can redundant liver lobes following the transplant 
of livers from adults into children.
Bone marrow transplantation has been used in a num-
ber of lysosomal disorders, fundamentally changing the 
natural history of these conditions. Bone marrow trans-
plantation has an advantage over ERT, in that a small 
number of stem cells do pass beyond the blood–brain 
barrier and therefore have the ability to improve neu-
rological outcome. Bone marrow transplantation has 
been attempted in nearly all lysosomal disorders, but 
has proven ineffective in some, particularly those in 
which there is severe rapid neurodegeneration, such as 
San  Filippo syndrome (MPS III). Bone marrow trans-
plantation has proven successful in MPS type I, which is 
the model lysosomal condition for bone marrow trans-
plantation, but it needs to be performed early, ideally 
within the first 12–18  months of life. However, bone 
marrow transplantation does not ameliorate all the prob-
lems of this condition, including articular disease and 
spinal problems.
Isoleucine
Valine
2-Methylacetoacetyl-CoA
Methylmalonic
semialdehyde
Acetyl-CoA
Propionyl-CoA
Methylmalonyl-CoA
Succinyl-CoA
Propionyl-CoA carboxylase
Propionic acidaemia
Methylmalonyl-CoA mutase
Methylmalonic acidaemia
Disorder
FIGURE 24.9  ■  Isoleucine and valine metabolism, showing the position of enzyme blocks in propionic acidaemia and methylmalonic 
acidaemia.
	
24  Inherited metabolic disease	
481
Gene therapy
Correction of single gene disorders by gene therapy (see 
also Chapter 43), replacing the faulty copy of the gene 
with a fully working copy, remains the ultimate goal for 
the treatment of IMDs. The technical challenges have 
proven considerable; for example the cystic fibrosis 
gene was first cloned at the end of the 1980s, and nearly 
20 years later gene therapy remains in development.
The first condition for which gene therapy was used 
clinically was adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency, one 
of the causes of severe combined immunodeficiency dis-
ease (SCID). This is a combined profound impairment 
of both humoral and cellular immunity, presenting with 
multiple life-threatening recurrent infections. Bone mar-
row transplantation gives a good chance of complete cure; 
however, if no histocompatible donor is identified, ERT 
with polyethylene glycol-modified ADA (PEG-ADA) 
is given every one to two weeks, by intramuscular injec-
tion. Gene therapy trials started in the early 1990s, and 
involved the culture and collection of peripheral blood T 
cells of patients, insertion of a fully functional ADA gene, 
by means of a retroviral vector, and reinfusion into the 
patient. This improved patients’ immune function, but 
required repeated treatments as lymphocytes have a finite 
life span of a few months. The technique was further de-
veloped using gene transfer into stem cells, which have an 
unlimited life span. However, the retroviral ­vector ran-
domly inserted the gene into the cells’ DNA. A ­total of four 
children subsequently developed leukaemia owing to the 
gene being inserted into an oncogene and therefore al-
tering the control of this gene. Subsequent development 
and refinement of gene transfer technologies have allowed 
safer and more effective gene transfer and expression with 
70% having sufficient improvement in immune function 
to remain off PEG-ADA. No serious adverse events have 
been reported with the refined vectors. Gene therapy tri-
als are now under way for a number of IMDs.
Other molecular therapies
Nonsense mutations create a premature stop codon thus 
producing a truncated, usually non-functioning, protein. It 
is estimated that nonsense mutations account for 5–15% of 
disease-causing mutations. It was recognized that amino-
glycosides could influence the ability to read through the 
premature stop codon and so produce a normal length func-
tioning protein. Importantly, this affects only premature, 
and not normal, stop codons. Subsequent development of 
small read-through molecules has shown that boosting the 
affected enzyme by small amounts can significantly reduce 
disease severity. Clinical trials in cystic fibrosis have been 
promising and potential trials for patients with IMDs sec-
ondary to nonsense mutations are currently being planned.
Exon skipping is another technique to boost func-
tioning protein production, by masking the faulty exon 
harboring a frameshift mutation, using small pieces of 
DNA (antisense oligonucleotides). Bypassing the frame-
shift mutation facilitates reading of the remaining exons. 
Animal work confirmed the principal in mouse models 
and now clinical trials have started in Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy and Huntington disease.
Strategies to reduce the formation of toxic 
metabolites
Reduction of metabolic load
For IMDs in which the pathological consequences are re-
lated to the accumulation of toxic substances, one of the 
simplest and most broadly used therapeutic strategies is to 
reduce the load on the block in the pathway, by reducing 
the amount of substrate to be processed by that enzyme. 
Phenylketonuria is the classic example: blood phenylala-
nine concentrations are reduced by limiting phenylala-
nine, by strict restriction of normal dietary protein intake. 
Phenylalanine is an essential amino acid and must not be 
removed from the diet completely so a small amount of nat-
ural protein is eaten to supply phenylalanine requirements. 
Measurement of blood phenylalanine concentrations is 
performed to monitor dietary control, usually by taking 
fingerprick samples onto Guthrie cards, which are sent 
to the laboratory by the family. Phenylalanine free amino 
acid supplements are prescribed to prevent dietary defi-
ciency from the severe protein restriction. The availabil-
ity of artificial low-phenylalanine foods on prescription 
has greatly improved the tolerability of the diet, owing to 
their variety and greater acceptability to the patient.
Reduction in metabolic load is also used acutely in a 
number of conditions that present with decompensations. 
In urea cycle defects, protein intake is stopped during the 
initial presentation, while other treatment strategies that 
help reduce the hyperammonaemia take effect. A similar 
approach is used in organic acidaemias, to reduce organic 
acid production. Once recovery is apparent, protein is re-
introduced and intake is gradually increased. Removal of 
protein for longer than 72 h risks exacerbating catabolism, 
including that of muscle protein, with further production 
of organic acids (or of ammonia in urea cycle defects). It 
is therefore usual practice to introduce some protein after 
48–72 h to promote anabolism. Patients with the severest 
blocks will still be able to tolerate 0.5 g/kg/24 h of protein 
for synthetic requirements and repair, without precipitat-
ing further decompensation.
Blockage of formation of toxic metabolites
In tyrosinaemia type I, the deficiency of fumarylacetoac-
etase results in the accumulation of fumarylacetoacetate, 
which causes hepatorenal toxicity. Nitisinone (NTBC) 
is a drug used to prevent the production of these toxic 
metabolites, by blocking the catabolic pathway of tyro-
sine at an earlier stage (4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxy-
genase) (Fig. 24.10). This means that the patient has, in 
­effect, been converted from having the severe, tyrosinae-
mia type I, phenotype to the milder, tyrosinaemia type III, 
phenotype. Clinically, tyrosinaemia type I presents with 
acute metabolic decompensation, associated with severe 
liver compromise and renal impairment and, in the lon-
ger term, the development of hepatocellular carcinoma. 
The clinical picture in type III is much milder, with some 
neurological involvement reported in some patients: liver 
and renal disease are not features. In view of the continued 
block in tyrosine catabolism, albeit at an earlier stage, a 
low tyrosine diet is still required, but the need for liver 
482	
Clinical biochemistry
transplantation for hepatocellular carcinoma is dramati-
cally reduced. Paradoxically, patients with milder tyros-
inaemia type I that presents later, now do less well than 
those that present as neonates, as more hepatic fibrosis oc-
curs before presentation and the introduction of NTBC.
Similarly, tyrosinaemia type III has a milder pheno-
type than alkaptonuria, caused by deficiency of homo-
gentisate dioxygenase, the third enzyme in the pathway 
(see Fig. 24.10). This recessive condition, one of the con-
ditions on which Garrod based his inherited metabolic 
traits theory, is manifest clinically by darkening of the 
urine on standing (usually presenting as staining of nap-
pies). In the longer term, darkening of the sclerae and ear 
cartilage is observed, with subsequent darkening of the 
skin, especially over the nose, cheeks and axillae. In al-
kaptonuria, the joint involvement leads to arthritis, which 
can be severely debilitating. Low dose NTBC is now be-
ing evaluated in the management of this disorder.
Blockage of site of action of toxic 
metabolites
The effects of toxic metabolites can be limited by block-
ing their site of action. An example of this strategy is the 
use of dextromethorphan in the management of non-­
ketotic hyperglycinaemia, a glycine cleavage defect which 
results in high plasma concentrations of glycine. Glycine 
is a neurotransmitter with a central excitatory effect and 
inhibitory peripheral effect. Excessive concentrations, 
therefore, result in seizures with hypotonia. Infants 
classically present with increased fetal movements (sei-
zures in utero), hiccups and progressive apnoeas in the 
first days after birth, before developing encephalopathy 
and profound global developmental delay in the longer 
term. Sodium benzoate is used to reduce glycine lev-
els, but this has little effect on long-term outcome. The 
use of partial antagonists of the N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NMDA) receptor, the site of glycine binding, e.g. dex-
tromethorphan and ketamine, improve seizure control, 
but do little to improve developmental outcomes.
Strategies to remove toxic substances
It may not be possible to reduce toxin production, and in 
acute decompensation, rapid clearance of toxic metabo-
lites is required. This can be achieved either with the use 
of drugs that permit alternate pathways of excretion, or 
with dialysis or haemofiltration.
Drugs
Carnitine therapy is widely used in the management of 
IMDs for conjugating toxic metabolites and facilitat-
ing their urinary clearance as carnitine conjugates. This 
therapeutic approach is particularly used in organic aci-
daemias, e.g. propionic acidaemia and glutaric aciduria 
type I. Glycine is used in a similar way in isovaleric aci-
daemia. In urea cycle defects, sodium benzoate and so-
dium phenylbutyrate are used to conjugate with glycine 
and glutamine, respectively, which can then be excreted 
Tyrosine
4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate
Homogentisate
Maleylacetoacetate
Succinylacetoacetate
Fumarylacetoacetate
Succinylacetone
Fumarate
Acetoacetate
4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase
Homogentisate dioxygenase
Fumarylacetoacetase
Disorder
Tyrosinaemia type III
Alkaptonuria
Tyrosinaemia type I
—
Nitisinone
FIGURE 24.10  ■  Blocking the production of toxic metabolites: nitisinone blocks tyrosine catabolism at the level of 
4-­hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase, thus preventing the production of the toxic metabolites maleylacetoacetate and 
­fumarylacetoacetate; this modifies the clinical phenotype to that of the milder tyrosinaemia type III from the more severe type I.
	
24  Inherited metabolic disease	
483
in the urine, bypassing the urea cycle and reducing its 
metabolic load (Fig.  24.11). However, as conjugation 
may be immature in neonates, these drugs may prove 
less effective in the newborn period. In organic acid-
aemias, this treatment strategy is used to help control 
hyperammonaemia, which may cause sufficient vomit-
ing to perpetuate the catabolic state driving metabolic 
decompensation.
Dialysis and haemofiltration
These techniques can be used effectively in acute set-
tings, to clear toxic metabolites from the bloodstream. 
Originally, exchange transfusion was used for this pur-
pose, but this procedure is inefficient and not without 
complications. Continuous venovenous haemofiltration, 
although not as efficient as haemodialysis at clearing toxic 
metabolites, has less impact on haemodynamic status. 
It is very effective at clearing lactate, ammonia, leucine 
and organic acids. Peritoneal dialysis is used in infants 
<2.5 kg, owing to the technical difficulties of performing 
haemodialysis on small babies.
Additional treatments
Appropriate nutritional support is essential to promote 
anabolism and prevent the catabolic drive to decom-
pensation. To ensure that adequate calories are pro-
vided, when patients with IMDs require intravenous 
infusions, they are given fluids containing higher con-
centrations of glucose than are used in intravenous flu-
ids administered to most other patients. A minimum of 
10% dextrose (with appropriate electrolyte additives) is 
used in all age groups. Patients with congenital lactic 
acidosis are an exception as, in this group, the use of 
high concentrations of dextrose may exacerbate hy-
perlactataemia; in these patients, 5% dextrose-based 
solutions are used. Fat emulsions are used to provide 
additional calories, provided that a fat oxidation de-
fect has been excluded. Patients known to have IMDs, 
are instructed to use an emergency regimen to help 
to reduce catabolism, during episodes of intercurrent 
infection. This comprises a glucose polymer drink that 
has the advantage of easy absorption without a great os-
motic load, thus reducing the risk of diarrhoea. These 
drinks can be administered at home during intercurrent 
illnesses, but if they are not tolerated, owing to vomit-
ing or diarrhoea, admission to hospital is required, for 
intravenous dextrose therapy.
Substrate depletion
Different strategies are needed to manage storage dis-
orders. Cystinosis is an autosomal recessive disorder 
presenting with a severe renal Fanconi syndrome and 
growth failure. The biochemical basis is a defective ly-
sosomal membrane cystine transporter, leading to in-
tracellular cystine accumulation. Cysteamine has been 
used successfully to reduce the progression of renal 
glomerular damage and improve growth. Cysteamine 
can combine with cystine to produce cysteine and a 
mixed disulphide cysteine-cysteamine, which can be 
exported by the cysteine and the lysine transporters, 
respectively.
Substrate deprivation
Substrate deprivation therapy is used in the management 
of lysosomal storage disorders. The principle is to reduce 
the amount of substrate synthesized so that it matches the 
impaired rate of catabolism. In this way, substrate does not 
accumulate. Miglustat is an inhibitor of glucosylceramide 
synthase, an essential enzyme in glycosphingolipid syn-
thesis. It is used in the management of Gaucher disease 
type I and Niemann Pick C and is being investigated for 
the management of late onset Tay–Sachs disease.
CONCLUSION
Although the IMDs are individually rare, collectively 
they are an important cause of morbidity and mortality, 
particularly in the newborn, but in some cases in later life. 
Although the presentation of some IMDs is characteris-
tic, for many it is non-specific, for example with growth 
failure, acidosis or hypoglycaemia. Nevertheless, the sys-
tematic use of investigations, starting with the simple and 
proceeding to more complex, will usually allow a diagno-
sis to be established and, when available, treatment to be 
commenced. Treatment is usually directed at overcoming 
the effect of the defective enzyme, but strategies for en-
zyme replacement are being developed and gene therapy 
may become more widely available in the future.
Further reading
Green A, Morgan I, Gray J. Neonatology and laboratory medicine. 
London: ACB Venture Publications; 2003. 
This book covers acquired, as well as inherited, neonatal illness, with 
chapters on presenting features (e.g. jaundice) and prenatal diagnosis as well 
as a summary chapter on inherited metabolic disorders.
Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WS et  al. editors. The metabolic and 
molecular bases of inherited disease. 8th ed., New York: McGraw-
Hill; 2001. www.OMMBID.com. 
The ultimate reference work for inherited metabolic diseases.
HEPATIC
NITROGEN
POOL
UREA
CYCLE
Phenylbutyrate
Phenylacetate
Glutamine
Benzoate
Glycine
Phenylacetylglutamine
Hippurate
Urea
Urine
NH3
FIGURE 24.11  ■  Alternate pathway therapy in urea cycle defects; 
phenylbutyrate is metabolized to phenylacetate, which can com-
bine with glutamine, allowing the latter to be excreted as phenyl­
acetylglutamine; benzoate can combine with glycine to form 
hippurate, which can be excreted in the urine.
484
C H A P T E R  2 5
Paediatric clinical biochemistry
Fiona Carragher
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  484
POSTNATAL INVESTIGATION OF THE SMALL  
FOR GESTATIONAL AGE NEWBORN  484
Intrauterine infections  484
Maternal drug abuse  485
RESPIRATORY DISORDERS  485
Respiratory distress  485
Apnoea of prematurity  486
RENAL FUNCTION  486
Hyponatraemia  487
Hypernatraemia  487
Hydrogen ions  488
Interpretation of renal function  
tests  488
CARBOHYDRATE METABOLISM  488
Neonatal hypoglycaemia  489
CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS METABOLISM  490
Disorders of calcium and phosphorus 
metabolism  490
DISORDERS OF LIVER FUNCTION  493
Bilirubin metabolism  493
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia: 
­physiological jaundice  493
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia: 
­pathological causes  494
Conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia and 
­hepatocellular disease  494
Liver disease in older children  495
INTRODUCTION
National statistics for the UK record approximately 
700 000 live births per year. In England and Wales in 
2010, the infant mortality rate was 4.3 deaths per 1000 
live births, the lowest ever recorded, which compares 
with an infant mortality rate of 12 deaths per 1000 live 
births in 1980. This considerable decrease in infant mor-
tality can be partly explained by improvements in health 
care and more specifically, in midwifery and neonatal in-
tensive care. The neonatal period, defined as the first four 
weeks of life, is associated with the highest mortality rate 
in childhood, with infants of very low (<1500 g) and low 
(<2000 g) birth weight accounting for a significant pro-
portion of deaths. The mortality rate reflects the conse-
quences of congenital malformation and disease and the 
difficulties of transition from intra- to extrauterine life, 
particularly in premature infants; such a high rate is not 
seen again until the seventh decade of life. For these rea-
sons, the majority of this chapter is devoted to neonatal 
clinical biochemistry. Disorders of older children are only 
included where there are particular problems with inter-
pretation of clinical biochemistry data.
The most common cause of admission to a neonatal 
intensive or special care unit is prematurity. ‘Pre-term’ in 
the practical sense rarely includes neonates of more than 
32 weeks of gestation at birth. The problems of prema-
turity can be related to immaturity of vital systems, for 
example the lungs, kidneys and central nervous system, 
or inadequacy of energy stores or of nutrients such as 
calcium and iron that are accreted during the third tri-
mester of pregnancy. Another high-risk group is those 
neonates with a birth weight inappropriate for their 
gestational age. In most cases, these babies are small for 
gestational age (SGA), defined as birth weight below the 
10th centile for newborns of the same gestational age in 
the same population. However, neonates born to moth-
ers with diabetes may be overweight as a result of hyper-
glycaemia in utero.
POSTNATAL INVESTIGATION OF THE SMALL  
FOR GESTATIONAL AGE NEWBORN
Inappropriate birth weight is often readily explicable 
from the clinical history. Common causes of growth 
retardation are multiparity, pre-eclampsia, infection 
and drug addiction. An uncommon example would 
be a first-born SGA infant with microcephaly, the 
mother of whom should be investigated for possi-
ble hyperphenylalaninaemia by analysis of maternal 
plasma amino acids.
Intrauterine infections
Antenatal infections can affect the developing fetus, leading 
to congenital malformations and/or low birth weight. Many 
viruses have teratogenic effects on the fetus, so maternal in-
fection in the first trimester, when organogenesis is occur-
ring, tends to cause the greatest effect. In the UK, universal 
	
25  Paediatric clinical biochemistry	
485
screening for syphilis, hepatitis B, HIV and susceptibility to 
rubella infection is offered to all mothers in the early stages 
of pregnancy, with follow-up diagnosis and treatment avail-
able for both mother and infant as appropriate.
Intrauterine infection is indicated by an increase in the 
infant’s serum IgM concentration (Table 25.1) and is of-
ten associated with prolonged unconjugated hyperbiliru-
binaemia and abnormal liver function tests. Measurement 
of the serum IgM concentration is only useful as an in-
dicator of intrauterine infection before six weeks of age. 
After this time, the normal rise in serum IgM concentra-
tion may mask any early increase, and investigation re-
quires specific serological testing.
Maternal drug abuse
Two percent of women in urban areas of the UK have 
been reported to have had a positive screening test for at 
least one prohibited substance at the time they first 
attended for antenatal care. These positive tests included 
amphetamines, barbiturates, cannabinoids, cocaine me-
tabolites, methadone and opiates.
The consequence of maternal drug abuse is dependent 
upon the intensity of use. Infants may be born prema-
turely and/or SGA, and a proportion exhibit withdrawal 
symptoms during the neonatal period. The appearance 
of these symptoms depends upon the rates of clearance 
of the drugs and their active metabolites. For ­example, 
the irritability, tremors and convulsions of heroin 
­withdrawal appear during the first 24 h of life, whereas 
the same symptoms do not generally appear until after 
­24–48 h when methadone is the substance involved.
A urine drug screen of a symptomatic neonate is often 
negative. Poor drug penetration across the placenta means 
that there are higher concentrations in maternal tissues 
and, consequently, it is more rewarding to screen maternal 
urine. The likelihood of detecting maternal drug abuse by 
investigating the urine of the neonate follows a decreasing 
order of cocaine > methadone > heroin > benzodiazepines.
RESPIRATORY DISORDERS
Respiratory distress
Up to 55% of the fetal cardiac output goes to the placenta. 
At birth there is an increase in peripheral resistance and a 
reduction in pulmonary vascular resistance, both of which 
ensure the closure of the foramen ovale and constriction 
of the ductus arteriosus. Blood is then diverted through 
the pulmonary vessels and the adult type of circulation is 
established. In newborn infants, haemoglobin F (HbF) is 
the predominant haemoglobin, accounting for about 75% 
of the total. Haemoglobin F has a greater affinity for oxy-
gen than haemoglobin A (HbA) and its oxygen dissocia-
tion curve is shifted to the left, ensuring adequate oxygen 
exchange at a significantly lower partial pressure of oxygen 
(PO2). As the partial pressure of arterial oxygen (PaO2) in 
blood rises with postnatal age, blood HbF concentrations 
fall, and by six months of age HbF accounts for only about 
5% of the total haemoglobin.
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) may be caused by 
a variety of conditions (see Box 25.1). The most common 
cause in pre-term infants is hyaline membrane disease, 
primarily attributable to immature surfactant synthesis. 
Surfactant ensures patency of the alveoli by reducing the 
surface tension of the alveolar wall, and is made up of 
phosphatidylcholine (lecithin), phosphatidylglycerol and 
phosphatidylinositol. Surfactant synthesis begins by the 
20th week of gestation. It increases slowly until the 34th 
week and then more rapidly as the type II alveolar cells 
mature. The rate of synthesis is sensitive to cold, hypoxia 
and acidaemia and may be halved by postnatal exposure 
to temperatures <35°C or an arterial [H
+] >56 nmol/L 
(pH <7.25). High intrauterine glucose concentrations, 
resulting from poorly controlled maternal diabetes melli-
tus, can also delay maturation of fetal surfactant synthesis. 
Fetal type II alveolar cell maturation may be enhanced 
by maternal steroid therapy. Corticosteroids are often 
given to women who are at risk of premature delivery at 
­24–34 weeks of gestation.
The incidence of hyaline membrane disease is inversely 
related to postconceptional age. The signs of the disease, 
which occur within four hours of birth, include sternal 
retraction, intercostal and subcostal recession, expiratory 
grunt and tachypnoea with a respiratory rate >60 per 
min. A characteristic ‘ground glass’ appearance is present 
on radiological examination of the chest. The appearance 
TABLE 25.1  Reference ranges (5–95th centile) for 
serum immunoglobulins (g/L) in UK Caucasians
Age
IgG
IgA
IgM
Term cord blood
5.2–18.0
<0.02
0.02–0.20
0–2 weeks
5.0–17.0
0.01–0.08
0.05–0.20
2–6 weeks
3.9–13.0
0.02–0.15
0.08–0.40
6–12 weeks
2.1–7.7
0.05–0.40
0.15–0.70
Adult  
15–45 years
6.0–16.0
0.80–2.80
0.50–1.90
From the PRU Handbook of Clinical Immunochemistry – see  
Milford-Ward et al. in Further reading.
BOX 25.1	
Some causes of neonatal respiratory 
distress
Pulmonary
•	 Hyaline membrane disease
•	 Pneumonia
•	 Meconium aspiration
•	 Transient tachypnoea of the newborn
•	 Pneumothorax
•	 Pulmonary haemorrhage
Non-pulmonary
•	 Patent ductus arteriosus
•	 Acute blood loss
•	 Congenital heart disease
•	 Hypo/hyperthermia
•	 Metabolic acidosis
•	 Polycythaemia
•	 Intracranial birth trauma
486	
Clinical biochemistry
of these reticulogranular opacities allows diagnosis of 
hyaline membrane disease with 90% confidence. Other 
entities that may produce similar opacities include im-
mature lung, wet lung disease, neonatal pneumonia, idio-
pathic hypoglycaemia, congestive heart disease, maternal 
diabetes and early pulmonary haemorrhage.
Group B streptococcal pneumonia may present as 
early as four hours after infection, during birth, from 
this common vaginal organism. It occurs more often in 
the pre-term than the full-term infant. Measurement of 
serum C-reactive protein and microbiological investiga-
tions can be used to distinguish bacterial pneumonia from 
hyaline membrane disease.
Meconium aspiration and transient tachypnoea of 
the newborn (TTN) occur most often in full- or post-
term infants. The passage of meconium (the contents 
of the fetal bowel) in utero is associated with fetal hy-
poxia. In some cases, the contaminated liquor is aspi-
rated. Clinical symptoms usually appear 12–24 h after 
birth. Transient tachypnoea of the newborn occurs in 
term neonates, usually those born by caesarean section, 
and appears to be due to incomplete stimulation of ad-
renergic mechanisms for lung clearance during birth. 
Pneumothorax may occur as a complication of either of 
these conditions or as a result of mechanical ventilation 
of pre-term infants.
In RDS, the neonate develops hypoxia and a respira-
tory acidosis, both of which cause an increase in pulmo-
nary vascular resistance and thus pulmonary hypertension 
with a left-to-right shunt. Hypoxia enhances anaerobic 
glycolysis and may result in lactic acidosis. Additional 
complications include brain damage and oedema, and hy-
potension that may lead to renal failure, paralytic ileus 
and/or necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC).
Non-pulmonary causes of respiratory distress are 
usually self-evident and normally improve with treat-
ment of the underlying conditions (see Box 25.1). Up 
to 20% of infants weighing <1750 g at birth have a 
patent ductus arteriosus (PDA). Medical management 
of PDA includes fluid restriction and stimulation of 
diuresis. Pharmacological closure may be achieved 
using indometacin, an inhibitor of prostaglandin syn-
thetase. Contraindications to this treatment include 
renal insufficiency (plasma creatinine concentration 
>160 μmol/L) with or without oliguria, bleeding dis-
orders and NEC.
Management of respiratory distress
This may involve assisted ventilation with oxygen, aim-
ing to maintain the PaO2 in the range 6–12 kPa, PaCO2 
5.5–8.0 kPa and arterial O2 saturation (SaO2) 88–95%. 
Although careful monitoring of blood gases is required, 
repeated blood sampling may cause anaemia. Anaemia 
may necessitate transfusion, usually with adult haemo-
globin. Increased HbA may compromise oxygen uptake 
in the lungs in the presence of low alveolar PO2, thereby 
further aggravating tissue hypoxia. Correction of the 
metabolic acidosis with sodium bicarbonate can cause oe-
dema and precipitate heart failure, owing to sodium and 
water overload. Too much oxygen may result in retro-
lental fibroplasia with retinal detachment and blindness. 
Long-term ventilation is associated with bronchopulmo-
nary dysplasia, hyperinflated emphysematous lungs with 
extensive alveolar destruction and widespread fibrosis. 
The proposed role of free oxygen radicals in the devel-
opment of these complications has led many paediatri-
cians to administer vitamin E routinely to all infants on 
ventilators.
Transcutaneous PO2 (TcO2) polarographic electrodes 
can be used to monitor oxygen treatment in infants who 
have good skin perfusion; the results correlate well with 
arterial PO2 measurements. Transcutaneous PO2 is mea-
sured at a skin temperature of 44 °C so the electrodes ­require 
frequent re-siting with recalibration in order to prevent 
skin burns. These problems do not occur with pulse ox-
imetry, which measures SaO2 of oxyhaemoglobin and 
reduced haemoglobin during an arterial pulse, by dif-
ferential light absorption at 660 and 940 nm. The results 
correlate well with arterial PaO2 measurements at SaO2 
values >65%, but are falsely low in the presence of me-
thaemoglobin because its molar extinction characteristics 
imitate reduced haemoglobin.
Surfactant administered through an endotracheal tube 
significantly reduces the incidence and complications of 
respiratory distress in newborns at risk of developing hya-
line membrane disease.
Apnoea of prematurity
Apnoea of prematurity, defined as a cessation of 
breathing for >20 s, with or without bradycardia and 
cyanosis, occurs in up to 85% of infants weighing 
<1000 g at birth. The major cause of apnoea is im-
maturity of the central respiratory drive, with poor 
sensitivity to changes in PaCO2. This is compounded 
by the suppressed respiratory response to hypoxia, 
which serves to reduce oxygen requirements in utero 
and which persists in the pre-term infant. Poor co-
ordination of the major respiratory muscles of the 
chest wall and the upper airways can lead to obstruc-
tion, usually at the level of the pharynx. Respiratory 
effort against a closed airway distorts the chest wall 
and activates the intercostal phrenic inhibitory reflex. 
Apnoea is worsened by infection, thermal instability 
and hypoglycaemia.
Apnoea of prematurity is treated with methylxanthines, 
which augment central respiratory drive and increase the 
sensitivity of chemoreceptors to changes in PaCO2.
RENAL FUNCTION
The investigation of renal disorders and the monitoring 
of fluid and electrolyte replacement in pre-term infants 
are complicated by immaturity of organ function, and by 
the difficulty in collecting accurately timed urine samples.
Nephrons develop from about the sixth week of gesta-
tion and start producing urine from about the tenth week. 
The full complement of nephrons is present by the 36th 
week of gestation. Glomerular function develops more 
rapidly than tubular function. At term, the tubules are 
relatively short and underdeveloped. They increase in 
length and develop increasing absorptive and secretory 
	
25  Paediatric clinical biochemistry	
487
function during the neonatal period. Functional imma-
turity is characterized by an inappropriately high uri-
nary sodium excretion for the glomerular filtration rate 
(GFR) and an impaired response to a sodium load. This 
is pertinent to the management of pre-term infants, in 
whom the sodium requirement per kg body weight may 
be higher than that for term or older infants, with more 
mature tubular function (Table 25.2). The loops of Henle 
are principally juxtamedullary in position: they, too, are 
relatively short compared with those in older infants and 
adults and do not penetrate deeply into the renal medulla, 
thereby limiting renal concentrating ability.
In low birth weight infants, glomerular function is ad-
equate for growth but may be inadequate to cope with the 
increased nitrogenous load during periods of catabolism, 
starvation, hypoxia, infection and infusion of nitrogen-
containing solutions. Tubular function is adequate for 
the filtered load associated with a reduced GFR and can 
normally maintain an appropriate excretory function and 
systemic acid–base status during the anabolic growth 
phase.
The GFR increases with postconceptional age as re-
nal blood flow increases and renal vascular resistance de-
creases; full functional maturity is not reached until about 
the second year of life.
Total body water constitutes about 85% of the body 
weight of pre-term infants weighing <1.0 kg at birth, 
compared with about 75% in term infants and 60% in 
adults (Fig. 25.1). Relatively more water is in the extra-
cellular compartment than in the intracellular compart-
ment. Total body sodium is about 45 mmol and potassium 
75 mmol, and blood volume about 70 mL. During the 
first few weeks of life, there is a contraction of the ex-
tracellular space associated with an increase in urinary 
sodium loss. This results in an initial 10–15% reduction 
in body weight. The onset of natriuresis coincides with 
improvement of lung function and is probably related 
to a reduction in pulmonary vascular resistance and the 
release of natriuretic peptides. This contributes to the 
contraction of the extracellular fluid space. Excess fluid 
and sodium administration, before the onset of the natri-
uretic phase, may worsen respiratory distress, delay the 
closure of the ductus arteriosus and precipitate oedema 
with hyponatraemia. It is not appropriate to rely on spot 
urinary sodium concentrations to monitor water and so-
dium requirements during the first few weeks of life in a 
premature infant.
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion, in response 
to volume reduction and hyperosmolality, occurs from 
about the 25th week of gestation. The interstitial os-
molality of the renal medulla, which is the main de-
terminant of the urine concentrating ability in the 
presence of ADH, is dependent on the countercurrent 
multiplication mechanism in the loops of Henle and on 
the interstitial concentrations of sodium, chloride and 
urea. The reduced GFR and urea clearance decrease 
the tubular reabsorption of urea and the interstitial 
urea concentration; consequently, the concentrating 
ability is impaired, despite appropriate ADH out-
put. Even full-term infants have a limited capacity 
to conserve water, and urine osmolality rarely rises 
>700 mmol/kg. Approximate fluid requirements are 
shown in Table 25.2.
Hyponatraemia
In neonates, hyponatraemia may be caused by maternal 
fluid retention or overload during labour, or excess neo-
natal hypotonic fluid administration during the postna-
tal period. In addition, inappropriate antidiuresis may 
develop as a consequence of respiratory disease or intra-
ventricular haemorrhage. In older infants, a dilutional 
hyponatraemia may be seen, caused by a combination 
of water retention and sodium depletion in response to 
increased intestinal or renal fluid losses. Signs of hy-
ponatraemia are related to the rate of fall of plasma so-
dium concentration rather than to its actual value, and 
may include hypotension, drowsiness and convulsions. 
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) must always be 
considered as a possible cause of hyponatraemia (see 
Chapter 21).
Hypernatraemia
As in adult patients, hypernatraemia may be caused either 
by water depletion or by excess sodium administration or 
TABLE 25.2  Daily fluid and electrolyte 
­requirements in infants and children compared 
with adults
 
Water  
(mL/kg)
Sodium 
(mmol/kg)
Potassium 
(mmol/kg)
<1 month
150
 
 
<1 year
100
 
 
1–3 year
90
 
 
3–6 year
80
2–6 (mean 4)
2–6 (mean 4)
6–9 year
70
 
 
9–12 year
60
 
 
Adult
30–40
1.5
1
Postconceptional
age (months)
Postnatal
age (months)
Extracellular water
Intracellular water
Total body water
Excepted date
of birth
Water as a percentage of body weight
FIGURE 25.1  ■  Changes in body water as a function of age for 
pre-term and term infants. The timescale indicates expected 
date of birth and postnatal age.
488	
Clinical biochemistry
retention. Insensible water loss is significantly greater in 
pre-term infants compared with children and adults. The 
reasons include:
•	 greater surface area to body volume ratio
•	 increased skin blood flow
•	 increased metabolic and respiratory rates
•	 lack of subcutaneous fat
•	 greater transepidermal fluid loss.
The epidermis of the skin matures by about the 28th 
week of gestation with keratinization of the stratum 
corneum. Consequently, infants born before 28 weeks 
are at greater risk of excess fluid loss and may lose up 
to 60 mL/kg/24 h of water through the skin, compared 
with about 10 mL/kg/24 h in term infants. Additional 
environmental factors, such as temperature and humid-
ity, also affect transepidermal fluid loss.
Impaired responses to changes in blood volume and 
plasma osmolality make infants particularly vulnerable to 
developing hypernatraemia. Increased urinary free water 
loss may be caused by glycosuria secondary to either hy-
perglycaemia or to the low renal threshold for glucose. 
In pre-term infants, glycosuria may be present when the 
plasma glucose concentration is as low as 5.6 mmol/L. 
Diabetes insipidus, caused, for example, by intracranial 
injury at birth, may also result in an increase in free water 
clearance.
Although the major cause of sodium and water imbal-
ance in premature infants is related to the functional im-
maturity of organs, it is important to be aware that some 
drugs may exacerbate the situation, e.g. sodium bicarbon-
ate, indometacin and methylxanthine derivatives such as 
caffeine.
Morbidity and mortality from hypernatraemia are 
caused by the increased extracellular osmolality and 
its effects on fluid distribution between fluid com-
partments. Infants with hypernatraemia may present 
clinically with irritability and lethargy, convulsions 
and coma; lesions within the CNS include intrace-
rebral and intraventricular haemorrhages, as well as 
sinus and small vessel thromboses. The majority of 
infants who survive suffer no long-term sequelae, 
although a minority develop persistent neurological 
abnormalities.
Hydrogen ions
Under normal circumstances, the kidneys can excrete 
the hydrogen ion load and generate sufficient buffering 
capacity to maintain normal systemic acid–base status, 
despite apparent immaturity of renal tubular function. 
However, if hydrogen ion production is increased, pre-
mature infants are prone to develop a metabolic acidosis 
in addition to the respiratory acidosis of respiratory dis-
tress. The proximal tubular threshold for bicarbonate 
reclamation is reduced, as is the distal tubular response 
to an ammonium chloride load: thus the generation of 
buffering capacity is reduced. In addition, urinary phos-
phate excretion, which is dependent on GFR, phos-
phorus intake and plasma phosphate concentration, 
may be significantly reduced in infants with phosphate 
depletion.
Metabolic acidosis is frequently related to disorders 
of respiratory and cardiac function. Echocardiography is 
invaluable in the investigation of congenital abnormali-
ties of the heart and of left ventricular function. Inherited 
metabolic diseases, such as mitochondrial dysfunc-
tion with lactic acidosis and organic acidaemias, should 
be excluded early by appropriate investigations (see 
Chapter 24).
Interpretation of renal function tests
Renal function tests must be interpreted with caution 
in pre-term infants. Despite the low glomerular filtra-
tion rate (GFR), plasma urea concentrations are low in 
neonates compared with adults, because of increased 
utilization of nitrogen. Plasma concentrations fluctuate 
markedly in response to changes in the catabolic rate, 
GFR and nitrogen intake. Plasma creatinine concen-
trations are high at birth, being determined principally 
by maternal concentration: they fall initially and then 
gradually increase with respect to postnatal age and 
muscle mass. Measurements may be subject to analyti-
cal variation owing to negative interference by biliru-
bin, and reference intervals may therefore be method 
dependent.
The interpretation of tubular function tests may be 
complicated in premature infants in whom the presence 
of a generalized aminoaciduria and glycosuria may be 
misinterpreted as a type 2 renal tubular acidosis (RTA). 
However, despite immature tubular function, maximum 
phosphate reabsorption occurs in premature infants 
when plasma phosphate concentrations fall below about 
1.5 mmol/L. Impaired response to an ammonium chlo-
ride load in the presence of a systemic acidosis may be 
wrongly interpreted as a type 1 RTA, rather than as a re-
sult of immaturity of distal tubular function.
CARBOHYDRATE METABOLISM
The fetus receives a constant, transplacental supply of 
glucose and amino acids, maintained by maternal inter-
mediary metabolism. Although free fatty acids are trans-
ported across the placenta, they are not used for oxidative 
metabolism but are stored in adipose tissue as triglycer-
ides (triacylglycerols). At birth, the umbilical vein plasma 
glucose concentration is about 70% that of the maternal 
circulation. After birth, the plasma glucose concentration 
falls, resulting in an increase in the circulating concen-
trations of glucagon, catecholamines and growth hor-
mone (GH), which, together with a fall in plasma insulin 
concentration, stimulate the release of glucose from he-
patic glycogen and activate lipolysis and gluconeogenesis 
(Fig. 25.2). Increased hepatic cAMP synthesis is associated 
with glycogenolysis and, through induction of synthesis 
of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, gluconeogenesis. 
Substrates such as pyruvate, lactate and alanine, which 
are diverted to gluconeogenesis, are no longer avail-
able to form malonyl-CoA and hence fatty ­acids. As the 
­cytosolic concentration of malonyl-CoA falls, its inhibi-
tory ­effect on carnitine palmitoyltransferase I activity is 
	
25  Paediatric clinical biochemistry	
489
reduced. Carnitine ­palmitoyltransferase I plays a role 
in transferring long chain free fatty acids, released from 
­triglycerides through the action of hormone-­sensitive 
lipase, into the mitochondria where they undergo 
­β-oxidation. Activation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-
CoA (HMG-CoA) synthase enhances the hepatic forma-
tion of ketones from acetyl-CoA.
Although glucose is the major source of energy for the 
brain, fetal and neonatal brains have an enhanced capac-
ity to utilize ketones, lactate and amino acids as alterna-
tive fuels. Circulating free fatty acids and glycerol appear 
within 3 h after birth in the fasting full-term infant, but 
plasma concentrations of ketones begin to rise only after 
12–48 h of fasting. This relative resistance to ketonaemia 
is caused by the high turnover of ketones in the neo-
nate, for example ketones can be metabolized at a rate of 
13–22 pmol/kg/min, after only 8 h of fasting and may 
account for up to 25% of the infant’s basal energy re-
quirements. Such a high ketone turnover is observed only 
after several days of fasting in adults.
The maintenance of normal plasma glucose con-
centrations during the immediate postpartum period 
depends upon regulated insulin and glucagon secretion, 
adequate reserves of both glycogen and triglycerides 
and the possession of operational intermediary metabo-
lism. When all these factors are present and functioning 
appropriately, glucose production can reach 5–8 mg/kg/
min in full-term infants, compared with about 2 mg/kg/
min in adults. This requirement for a high rate of glu-
cose production is related to the higher brain to body 
mass ratio of infants.
Neonatal hypoglycaemia
Hypoglycaemia of the newborn is defined as a blood 
glucose concentration of <2.5 mmol/L. It occurs in up 
to 0.4% of all newborns, but is much more common in 
infants of diabetic mothers (previously diagnosed as hav-
ing diabetes or with gestational diabetes) and in low birth 
weight and premature infants. Signs of hypoglycaemia 
include:
•	 jitteriness
•	 feeding problems
•	 abnormal cry
•	 floppiness
•	 pallor
•	 apnoea
•	 cyanosis
•	 convulsions.
The severity of symptoms will, in part, depend on the 
rate of fall of the plasma glucose concentration and on the 
infant’s ability to adapt to alternative sources of energy. 
In all cases, early diagnosis and the prompt restoration of 
normoglycaemia are critical in order to minimize damage 
to the developing CNS.
Infants at risk of developing hypoglycaemia should be 
monitored regularly. Hypoglycaemia detected by point-
of-care testing should be confirmed by laboratory testing, 
as falsely low results may be obtained in the presence of 
a high packed cell volume and poor peripheral perfusion 
of the site of testing.
The aetiology of neonatal hypoglycaemia must be 
identified so that causes of persistent hypoglycaemia 
associated with rare disorders and inherited diseases of 
intermediary metabolism can be excluded (see below). 
Some causes of hypoglycaemia that may occur dur-
ing the neonatal period or later in infancy are shown in 
Box 25.2.
The major cause of hypoglycaemia in pre-term in-
fants is inadequacy of energy stores that would nor-
mally have accumulated during the last trimester of 
pregnancy. The glycogen content of fetal liver increases 
by 300%, from 0.9 to >3.9 g/100 g, between 31 and 
40 weeks of gestation. Small for gestational age infants 
also have reduced energy stores and they, too, are at risk 
of hypoglycaemia. Infants in shock, for example follow-
ing perinatal asphyxia or because of neonatal sepsis, 
may develop hypoglycaemia owing to underperfusion 
of the liver.
Hyperinsulinism is the most common cause of se-
vere and persistent hypoglycaemia in term infants. 
Hyperinsulinaemic infants are particularly prone to 
complications of hypoglycaemia, as the high insulin 
[Glucagon]
[Insulin]
Glycogen
Glucose
Oxaloacetate
Pyruvate
Acetyl-CoA
Malonyl-CoA
Glucose 6-phophate
Glucose
Ketones
Mitochondrion
FIGURE 25.2  ■  Changes in energy metabolism at birth. Plasma 
glucagon rises and insulin falls after birth, in response to fall-
ing plasma glucose concentrations. Hepatic glycogenolysis 
is stimulated. Increased synthesis of phosphoenolpyruvate 
carboxykinase (PEPCK) stimulates gluconeogenesis. The −ve 
sign indicates that pyruvate is no longer used to form 
­malonyl-CoA. Malonyl-CoA-dependent inhibition of carnitine 
palmitoyltransferase (CPT) is reduced and free fatty acids (FFA) 
can be transferred into the mitochondria where they are sub-
ject to β-oxidation. Activation of 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-
CoA (HMG-CoA) synthase permits hepatic ketone synthesis. 
The dotted lines indicate transfer (active or passive) across 
membranes.
490	
Clinical biochemistry
concentrations inhibit lipolysis and the generation of 
alternative energy sources, such as ketones.
Hyperinsulinism in infants born to diabetic mothers 
is due to in utero hyperglycaemia-induced hyperplasia of 
the islets of Langerhans. Idiopathic transient hyperinsu-
linism may occur in interuterine growth-retarded infants 
and those suffering from perinatal asphyxia.
Persistent hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia of in-
fancy (PHHI), previously called familial hyperinsulinism, 
pancreatic nesidioblastosis or hyperinsulinaemic hypo-
glycaemia, causes recurrent severe hypoglycaemia that 
may present in term newborn infants or during the first 
few weeks of life. It can be subdivided into two types: fo-
cal adenomatous hyperplasia of the islets of Langerhans 
and diffuse (but discrete) hyperplasia. Mutations in sev-
eral different genes that code for proteins involved with 
insulin release have been identified as being responsible. 
These include mutations associated with the two sub-
units of the β cell ATP-sensitive potassium channel – the 
sulphonylurea receptor proteins (SUR1) and the inward 
rectifier potassium channel proteins (Kir 6.2). Activating 
mutations in the glucokinase (GK) and glutamate dehy-
drogenase (GDH) genes have also been identified in this 
disorder. Glutamate dehydrogenase is a regulator of in-
sulin secretion in pancreatic β cells and of ureagenesis in 
the liver, and defects in enzyme activity are characterized 
by hyperinsulinism with mild, asymptomatic hyperam-
monaemia. In many patients, the only therapeutic option 
is partial pancreatectomy, which carries the long-term 
risk of diabetes mellitus as apoptosis depletes the β-Cell 
mass. Those forms of PHHI resulting from mutations in 
GK and GDH are more amenable to pharmacological in-
tervention, for example with diazoxide.
If the amount of glucose required to prevent recur-
rence of hypoglycaemia exceeds about 10 mg/kg/min, 
then hyperinsulinaemia is likely. If there is no known 
history of maternal diabetes mellitus or any of the other 
classic features (e.g. cherubic appearance and polycythae-
mia), blood samples taken during the hypoglycaemic epi-
sode should be assayed for insulin and 3-hydroxybutyrate. 
In hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia, the plasma insulin 
concentration is inappropriately high for the low plasma 
glucose concentration; plasma C-peptide concentrations 
are not a reliable reflection of pancreatic β-Cell func-
tion in neonates because of renal immaturity and re-
duced GFR. A plasma 3-hydroxybutyrate concentration 
<1.1 mmol/L during hypoglycaemia suggests that fatty 
acid oxidation and ketone synthesis are impaired. This 
can be due to hyperinsulinaemia, inadequate adipose 
stores or to a defect in β-oxidation of fatty acids.
The symptomatic treatment of hypoglycaemia is not 
without its complications, which include hyperglycaemia 
associated with hyperosmolality and cerebral hemor-
rhage, glycosuric osmotic diuresis and water overload.
CALCIUM AND PHOSPHORUS METABOLISM
Disorders of calcium and phosphorus metabolism 
are relatively common in pre-term infants. Calcium 
and phosphorus are actively transported across the 
­placenta with fetal plasma concentrations higher than 
those in the maternal circulation. The transplacental 
transport is probably enhanced by locally synthesized 
1,25-­dihydroxy vitamin D (1,25(OH)2D) and by para-
thyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP), for which 
receptors have been identified in the placenta. The 
high plasma calcium concentration suppresses ­fetal 
parathyroid gland activity and probably inhibits ­fetal 
1,25(OH)2D synthesis. During the last trimester of 
pregnancy, there is a three-fold increase in fetal calcium 
and phosphorus uptake (Table 25.3): the changes in fetal 
hormone concentrations facilitate bone mineralization 
and growth. Consequently, infants born prematurely 
during the last trimester of pregnancy are significantly 
disadvantaged and are prone to develop complications 
of calcium and phosphorus metabolism.
Disorders of calcium and phosphorus 
metabolism
Hypercalcaemia
Hypercalcaemia is relatively uncommon during the neo-
natal period. The condition may occur in phosphorus-­
depleted premature infants receiving unsupplemented 
breast milk or parenteral nutrition: it is invariably associ-
ated with hypophosphataemia. Treatment with phosphorus 
supplementation alone may precipitate acute hypocalcae-
mia. Idiopathic hypercalcaemia, with a normal or high 
TABLE 25.3  Fetal calcium and phosphorus 
accumulation
Postconceptional 
age (weeks)
Body 
weight 
(kg)
Accretion rate  
(mmol/kg/day)
Calcium
Phosphorus
28
1.0
3.0
2.0
40 (term)
3.0
3.4
3.0
BOX 25.2	
Some causes of neonatal 
hypoglycaemia
•	 Inadequate energy stores
•	 Prematurity
•	 Small for gestational age
•	 Impaired hepatic glucose production
•	 Perinatal asphyxia
•	 Neonatal sepsis
•	 Hormone 
deficiency 
(hypopituitarism, 
adrenal 
insufficiency)
•	 Transient hyperinsulinism
•	 Infants of diabetic mothers
•	 Erythroblastosis fetalis
•	 Idiopathic transient hyperinsulinism
•	 Persistent hypoglycaemia
•	 Persistent hyperinsulinaemic hyperglycaemia of in-
fancy due to adenomatous or diffuse hyperplasia of the 
islets of Langerhans
•	 Inherited metabolic diseases
	
25  Paediatric clinical biochemistry	
491
normal plasma phosphate concentration, is more common 
in mature infants but may occur in premature infants re-
ceiving high-dose vitamin D prophylaxis. It may also be 
associated with subcutaneous fat necrosis of infants. This 
disorder usually affects healthy full-term infants who have 
suffered perinatal asphyxia. These infants usually develop 
subcutaneous plaques over the buttocks and back. The 
condition is caused by excess production of 1,25(OH)2D 
by the granulomatous cells, similar to that observed in sar-
coidosis in adults. Although very rare, it is the most com-
mon cause of hypercalcaemia in full-term neonates.
Hypercalcaemia during infancy and childhood is also 
rare but may be caused by immobilization, primary hy-
perparathyroidism, familial hypocalciuric hypercalcae-
mia or infantile hypercalcaemia (Williams syndrome). 
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia is a rare, autosomal 
dominant condition caused by mutations in the calcium 
sensing receptor (CASR). It is characterized by mild hy-
percalcaemia and a low urine calcium excretion and does 
not usually require treatment. Infants with mutations of 
the CASR gene may occasionally present in the neonatal 
period with severe hypercalcaemia (neonatal severe pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism). Features of Williams syn-
drome include failure to thrive, hypercalcaemia, elfin-like 
facial features, supravalvular aortic stenosis and learning 
disabilities. Microdeletion of the 7q11.23 region on chro-
mosome 7, which contains the elastin gene, can be dem-
onstrated by fluorescence in-situ hybridization (FISH).
Hypocalcaemia
Some causes of neonatal hypocalcaemia are shown in 
Box  25.3. After parturition, plasma total and ionized 
calcium concentrations fall, reaching a nadir between 
the 24th and 48th hour of life, then rising, such that the 
ionized calcium concentration is 1.10–1.40 mmol/L by 
about the fifth day of life. Plasma ionized calcium con-
centrations as low as 0.70 mmol/L have been observed in 
pre-term infants without apparent clinical abnormalities. 
The degree of fall is inversely related to gestational age 
and is more marked in infants born to diabetic mothers 
and those with perinatal asphyxia. These changes, which 
are usually self-limiting, are probably caused by transient 
suppression of fetal parathyroid gland activity.
Permanent causes of hypocalcaemia include hypo-
parathyroidism, either X-linked or autosomal recessively 
inherited, or as part of the DiGeorge syndrome and pseu-
dohypoparathyroidism. DiGeorge syndrome is associ-
ated with hypoplasia or aplasia of the parathyroid glands 
and congenital heart anomalies with partial or complete 
absence of the thymus. Many infants have a partial dele-
tion of chromosome 22q11.
Pseudohypoparathyroidism is characterized by hypo-
calcaemia and hyperphosphataemia with appropriately 
increased secretion of parathyroid hormone (PTH) but 
end-organ resistance to its effect: in the common form 
of the condition this is caused by mutations in the GNAS 
gene. Clinically, infants with this disorder present with a 
constellation of features known as Albright hereditary os-
teodystrophy. Signs include short stature, dysmorphism, 
obesity and shortening of the fourth and fifth metacar-
pals. There may be associated hypothyroidism; subcuta-
neous calcification may also occur.
Osteopenia of prematurity
Significant failure of bone mineralization, or osteopenia, 
occurs in >50% of premature infants weighing <1000 g 
at birth. Osteopenia has a reported incidence of up to 
13% in infants weighing <1500 g at birth.
Osteopenia of prematurity is caused by impaired min-
eralization of normal osteoid of the epiphyseal growth 
plate with proliferation of unmineralized osteoid. The 
clinical condition usually presents between the 6th and 
12th postnatal weeks, associated with a fall-off of longitu-
dinal growth, with continued growth in head circumfer-
ence and frontal bossing. Swelling of the costochondral 
junctions of the ribs may result in the classic ‘rachitic 
rosary’. Softening of the rib cage with impaired chest 
wall compliance and patchy lung atelectasis impairs ven-
tilation and may cause late onset respiratory distress, so 
that ventilatory support may be required. Multiple non-­
traumatic fractures may also be present.
The aetiology of osteopenia of prematurity is mul-
tifactorial but the condition is primarily caused by 
deficient mineral substrate intake, particularly of phos-
phorus. Human breast milk is capable of providing up 
to 1.4 mmol/kg/24 h of calcium and 0.9 mmol/kg/24 h 
of phosphorus. Although these calcium and phosphorus 
intakes are adequate to enable normal bone mineraliza-
tion and skeletal development in term infants, they fall 
far short of the mineral accretion that should have taken 
place during the last trimester of pregnancy and are not 
sufficient for a rapidly growing pre-term infant. Infants 
born as early as 26 weeks are able to hydroxylate vitamin 
D in the 25 position, but there may be maturational delay 
of the renal 1α-hydroxylase enzyme, and, consequently, 
BOX 25.3	
Some causes of neonatal 
hypocalcaemia
Early
•	 Prematurity (inversely related to postconceptional age)
•	 Infants with perinatal asphyxia
•	 Infants of diabetic mothers
Late
•	 Mineral depletion
•	 Unsupplemented breast milk
•	 Inadequate parenteral nutrition
•	 Maternal vitamin D deficiency
•	 Exchange transfusion
•	 Iatrogenic
•	 Diuretic therapy
•	 High phosphorus intake
•	 Organ disease
•	 Liver disease
•	 Renal disease
•	 Endocrine disorders
•	 Transient hypoparathyroidism
•	 Hypoparathyroidism
•	 DiGeorge syndrome
492	
Clinical biochemistry
concentrations of 1,25(OH)2D may be inappropriately 
low until about the third week of extrauterine life. This, 
coupled with the limited absorptive capacity of the pre-
term intestinal tract, contributes to the mineral substrate 
deficiency.
The biochemical changes in plasma that may identify 
those infants at risk of developing clinically significant os-
teopenia of prematurity are shown in Table 25.4. Plasma 
alkaline phosphatase activity fluctuates considerably dur-
ing the neonatal period, but rises rapidly to values above 
six times the upper adult reference limit in the majority 
of infants at risk. High plasma enzyme activities are in-
versely related to growth velocity, a fall in which is an 
early clinical manifestation of the disorder. Plasma phos-
phate concentrations are invariably low–normal or low 
and urinary phosphate excretion is significantly reduced. 
Plasma calcium concentrations are a poor indicator of 
impending rickets and may be low, normal or even raised, 
depending upon the aetiology and stage of the disorder. 
Urinary calcium excretion is variable and related to the 
plasma phosphate concentration: the lower the plasma 
phosphate, the greater the urinary calcium excretion.
The treatment for this common form of osteopenia of 
prematurity is to increase calcium and phosphorus intake 
in order to maintain a normal plasma calcium concentra-
tion, but, more importantly, to keep the plasma phosphate 
close to about 1.50 mmol/L. Vitamin D supplementation, 
in an active form such as 1-alphacalcidol, is often admin-
istered. Following successful treatment, plasma alkaline 
phosphatase activity may continue to rise for about two 
weeks before falling to expected pre-term values.
Rickets during childhood
Rickets occurs in growing children as a result of defec-
tive mineralization of growth plates: it is similar to os-
teomalacia in adults. The major cause of rickets during 
childhood is nutritional vitamin D deficiency. Other 
causes include malabsorption and anticonvulsant therapy. 
Hypocalcaemia with secondary hyperparathyroidism is 
invariably present and children may present with tetany 
and convulsions. Older infants may present with a char-
acteristic waddling gait.
Inherited forms of rickets must be considered in the 
differential diagnosis. They can be divided into two 
main groups: those associated with hypophosphataemia, 
caused by an isolated or generalized renal tubular defect, 
and those in which the main defect is in vitamin D metab-
olism (Box 25.4). X-linked dominant hypophosphataemic 
rickets is the most common form and occurs in about one 
in 20 000 live births. Hypophosphataemia, with isolated 
hyperphosphaturia, usually presents during the first 
year of life and is associated with growth retardation. 
Remission may occur when the epiphyseal plates fuse and 
growth ceases, but the condition can relapse in later life. 
Female patients are less severely affected than males, the 
difference being caused by the random inactivation of one 
of the paired X chromosomes (lyonization). In females, 
presentation may be as osteomalacia in adulthood. A low–
normal or low plasma concentration of 1,25(OH)2D in 
the presence of hypophosphataemia is suggestive of an 
altered feedback control on 1α-hydroxylase and impaired 
vitamin D metabolism.
Although rare, cystinosis is the most common cause of 
rickets in infants with type 2 RTA or Fanconi syndrome. 
Rickets develops by the second year of life and is probably 
caused by a combination of hypophosphataemia, systemic 
acidosis and impaired renal hydroxylation of vitamin D. 
In contrast, infants with type 1 RTA develop hypercalcu-
ria and nephrocalcinosis and may present clinically with 
polyuria and polydipsia, renal stones or rickets, usually 
before the fifth year of life. The diagnosis of cystinosis is 
confirmed by the finding an increased concentration of 
white cell cystine.
Plasma alkaline phosphatase activity in infancy
Plasma alkaline phosphatase (ALP) fluctuates considerably 
in the pre-term infant, and activities up to six times the 
adult reference limit are considered appropriate for age.
TABLE 25.4  Biochemical changes in osteopenia of prematurity and reference intervals compared  
with adults
Analyte (in plasma)
Units
Reference interval 
(Adults)
Reference interval (Pre-term 
infants, 3–10 weeks)
Change in osteopenia 
of prematurity
Alkaline phosphatase
U/L
30–130
<600
Raised
Phosphate
mmol/L
0.80–1.50
1.50–2.55
Low-normal or low
Calcium
mmol/L
2.20–2.60
2.15–2.65
Low, normal or high
Albumin
g/L
35–50
25–40
Variable
BOX 25.4	
Classification of inherited causes of 
osteopenia/rickets
Isolated renal tubular defect
•	 X-linked hypophosphataemic rickets
•	 Autosomal dominant/recessive hypophosphataemic 
rickets
Generalized renal tubular defect
•	 Renal tubular acidosis type 2
•	 Cystinosis
•	 Classic galactosaemia
•	 Hereditary fructose intolerance
•	 Tyrosinaemia type I
•	 Wilson disease
•	 Renal tubular acidosis type 1
Defective vitamin D metabolism
•	 1α-Hydroxylase deficiency
•	 End-organ resistance
	
25  Paediatric clinical biochemistry	
493
Plasma ALP consists primarily of the bone isoform in 
infants, although fetal intestinal ALP, the gene for which 
is normally suppressed after the 30th week of gestation, 
may be present in the plasma of pre-term neonates receiv-
ing an oral fat intake. The hepatic isoform of ALP is rarely 
detected before one year of age, even in the presence of 
hepatic disease. Placental ALP is not present in the plasma 
of the newborn. Age and sex variation in plasma ALP dur-
ing childhood and adolescence is shown in Figure 25.3.
Transient hyperphosphatasaemia of infancy is a rare 
disorder of unknown aetiology that occurs in infants 
and children up to the age of about five years, although 
it may occasionally present in older children and adults. 
It is characterized by a rapid rise in plasma ALP activ-
ity to values >20 times the upper adult reference limit 
and a subsequent return to normal, usually within three 
months. There is no associated bone or liver disease and 
the disorder has no proven long-term sequelae. Its early 
recognition is important as it prevents unnecessary inves-
tigations (see Chapter 13).
DISORDERS OF LIVER FUNCTION
Bilirubin metabolism
Bilirubin is formed in the reticuloendothelial system of 
the liver, spleen and bone marrow from the breakdown 
of haemoglobin. Unconjugated bilirubin is transported in 
plasma bound to albumin, which has two bilirubin bind-
ing sites, one high and one low affinity, with a maximum 
binding capacity of about 20 μmol bilirubin/g albumin.
Bilirubin crosses the sinusoidal membranes of hepato-
cytes by non-energy-dependent passive diffusion. It be-
comes bound to Y protein (ligandin) and is transported to 
the smooth endoplasmic reticulum where it is conjugated, 
by the enzyme uridine diphosphate (UDP)-glucuronosyl 
transferase, to form a water-soluble mono- and then di-
glucuronide. The monoglucuronide is the predominant 
conjugate of bilirubin in the newborn, but only accounts 
for about 15% of total bilirubin conjugates in adults. The 
ability of the neonatal liver to conjugate bilirubin is lim-
ited (see below), but by two years of age, the conjugating 
capacity greatly exceeds the rate of delivery of bilirubin to 
the liver and only 1% of the enzyme activity is required to 
clear bilirubin at the normal rate of production.
Bilirubin conjugates are secreted across the canalicular 
membrane into the bile by a multispecific anion trans-
porter. The rate of secretion of bilirubin into the biliary 
canaliculi is dependent on the active secretion of bile salts 
and the rate of bile flow. Up to 25% of the conjugated 
bilirubin may be hydrolysed within the intestinal lumen, 
either non-enzymatically, under alkaline conditions, or 
by the mucosal enzyme β-glucuronidase, to unconjugated 
bilirubin, which is reabsorbed and returned to the liver 
via the enterohepatic circulation. Conjugated bilirubin 
is converted to bile pigments (urobilinoids), primarily by 
intestinal bacteria in the distal ileum and colon.
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia: 
­physiological jaundice
Bilirubin bound to albumin in the blood may be displaced 
by drugs, such as antibiotics, and by hormones and free 
fatty acids. Free bilirubin is lipid soluble and can cross 
the blood–brain barrier, where its toxic affects result in 
irreversible brain damage (kernicterus). This is thought 
to be caused by uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation. 
Significant free bilirubin occurs when the plasma total bil-
irubin concentrations exceed 340 μmol/L in term infants, 
with a conjugated bilirubin <25 μmol/L. The absence of 
a clear relationship between circulating bilirubin concen-
trations and the development of kernicterus in pre-term 
infants has led to the ‘action level’ for total bilirubin be-
ing reduced to as low as 170 μmol/L. Putative additional 
risk factors for the development of kernicterus include 
acidosis, sepsis and hypothermia. National guidelines 
have been adopted for the detection and management 
of neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia to prevent the potential 
devastating effects. However, given that the cause may be 
a sudden and unpredictable haemolytic crisis, kernicterus 
has yet to be completely eliminated.
Hyperbilirubinaemia is usually treated with photo-
therapy, which converts the bilirubin to water soluble 
isomers but, if severe, may require treatment by exchange 
transfusion. This latter procedure may be complicated by 
a fall in plasma ionized calcium concentration and there 
is an associated risk of cardiac arrest.
Transient unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia, pre-
senting with jaundice on the second or third day of extra-
uterine life and persisting for about two weeks, is known 
as ‘physiological jaundice of the newborn’. In premature 
infants, such jaundice may last for up to four weeks. 
During the first week of life, plasma bilirubin concen-
trations rise to >220 μmol/L in 6% of healthy full-term 
neonates and a greater proportion of pre-term neonates. 
The cause is controversial and almost every phase of 
bilirubin metabolism and transport has been implicated. 
Bilirubin synthesis is increased during the first three 
weeks of life, particularly in premature infants, because 
of the reduced erythrocyte half-life. The high biliru-
bin production (100–140 μmol/kg body weight/24 h), 
­almost three times the normal adult production, exceeds 
the capacity of the neonatal liver to clear unconjugated 
bilirubin from the plasma, owing to reduced membrane 
uptake and ligandin production, the low activity of 
UDP-glucuronosyl transferase and inefficient bile acid 
metabolism and transport.
12
Girls
Upper limit of adult reference
range
Boys
Alkaline phosphatase (U/L)
10
8
Age (years)
6
4
2
birth
0
100
200
300
400
14
16
18
FIGURE 25.3  ■  Age- and sex-related changes in plasma alkaline 
phosphatase activity during childhood and adolescence.
494	
Clinical biochemistry
After the third week of life, the increased bilirubin load 
is derived principally from the enhanced reabsorption of 
unconjugated bilirubin from the gut. The reduced uptake 
and conjugation of the increased load by the liver of the 
premature infant contributes to the prolonged ‘physi-
ological’ jaundice in this age group. It has been suggested 
that bilirubin, through its oxidation to biliverdin, pro-
vides a scavenging mechanism for free radicals produced 
during disease and that physiological jaundice may have a 
beneficial role in the neonate.
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia:  
pathological causes
Unconjugated hyperbilirubinaemia that occurs within 
24 h of birth, which rises rapidly (>85 μmol/L/24 h) or 
which is persistent, should prompt investigation for the 
secondary conditions shown in Box  25.5. Haemolytic 
disease of the newborn is now uncommon following the 
widespread use of prophylactic rhesus immune globu-
lin: when it occurs, jaundice develops within the first six 
hours of life. Congenital spherocytosis and ABO hae-
molytic disease are usually associated with less severe 
jaundice. The latter condition resolves as the circulating 
erythrocytes coated with anti-A and anti-B antibodies are 
broken down.
Erythrocyte glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase defi-
ciency is a common inherited cause of haemolytic disease 
and should be ruled out in neonates with persistent hy-
perbilirubinaemia. Haemolysis in this condition may be 
precipitated by exposure to chemicals, drugs and infec-
tion and may be more severe in the Mediterranean and 
Oriental type than in that seen in African-Americans.
Congenital infections such as syphilis, rubella and 
toxoplasmosis may cause increased erythrocyte turnover 
and haemolysis, which can contribute to unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia.
Inherited disorders of bilirubin metabolism  
presenting in childhood
Inherited glucuronosyl transferase deficiency (Crigler–
Najjar syndrome) is a rare disorder of impaired bilirubin 
conjugation that presents with progressive unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia from birth. In type I, there is com-
plete absence of hepatic glucuronosyl transferase activity. 
The disorder is inherited as an autosomal recessive trait. 
With modern management of phototherapy (10–12 h/
day) and exchange transfusions, kernicterus is now less 
common, but affected individuals still go on to develop 
severe neurological complications during adolescence. 
Many individuals are treated by liver transplantation 
by the age of five years. Heterozygotes have normal 
plasma bilirubin concentrations but hepatic enzyme ac-
tivity is reduced by about 50%. Some heterozygotes 
may present in the neonatal period with unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia.
In type II, glucuronosyl transferase activity is detect-
able but markedly reduced. Unconjugated hyperbiliru-
binaemia presents at birth and persists into adult life. 
Milder forms of the disorder are indistinguishable from 
Gilbert syndrome, a benign autosomal dominant dis-
order characterized by mild fluctuating unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia. Type II glucuronosyltransferase de-
ficiency is inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with 
variable penetrance. As hepatic enzyme activity normally 
exceeds the rate of bilirubin delivery, small changes in en-
zyme activity can significantly alter the expression of the 
disorder. Treatment with phenobarbital, which induces 
enzyme activity, results in a rapid decline in plasma bili-
rubin concentration, maximal by the sixth day, in infants 
with the type II disorder but not with type I.
Conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia and  
hepatocellular disease
Conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia, defined in infants as a 
conjugated plasma bilirubin concentration of >25 μmol/L, 
is always pathological. As in adults, the cause may be 
­extra- or intrahepatic cholestasis or hepatocellular necro-
sis (Box 25.6). Routine liver function tests are often poor 
discriminators of the aetiology during the neonatal period, 
but the presence of pale stools is suggestive of cholestasis.
The biliary atresias comprise a group of disorders in 
which all grades of bile duct obstruction may be pres-
ent, from a marked reduction in bile duct numbers to 
complete absence. Conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia 
develops during the first week of life and continues 
to increase, causing a fluctuating jaundice and failure 
BOX 25.5	
Pathological causes of unconjugated 
hyperbilirubinaemia in the neonate
•	 Rhesus haemolytic disease of the newborn
•	 ABO haemolytic disease
•	 Congenital spherocytosis
•	 Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency
•	 Prenatal infection
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Inherited disorders of bilirubin metabolism
BOX 25.6	
Some causes of neonatal/childhood 
liver disease
Neonatal
•	 Cholestasis
•	 Biliary atresia
•	 Choledochal cyst
•	 α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
•	 Defects of bile acid synthesis
•	 Parenteral nutrition
•	 Hepatocellular disease
•	 Infection
•	 Neonatal haemochromatosis
•	 Inherited metabolic diseases (Zellweger syndrome, 
tyrosinaemia type I, classic galactosaemia, fructose 
intolerance, Niemann–Pick type C)
Childhood
•	 Viral hepatitis
•	 α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
•	 Wilson disease
•	 Cystic fibrosis
	
25  Paediatric clinical biochemistry	
495
to thrive. Early diagnosis, by abdominal ultrasound and 
isotope studies, is important, as extrahepatic atresia can 
be successfully treated surgically with the Kasai proce-
dure (hepatic portoenterostomy). Liver transplantation 
is undertaken in some cases.
α1-Antitrypsin deficiency is probably the most com-
mon inherited metabolic disorder to cause neonatal con-
jugated hyperbilirubinaemia sufficient to mimic severe 
biliary atresia. Liver disease occurs in those patients with 
the PiZZ phenotype, of whom 10–20% present with neo-
natal cholestasis. The diagnosis must be confirmed by de-
termining the phenotype/genotype.
Defects in the synthesis of bile acids (cholic acid and 
chenodeoxycholic acid) from cholesterol are rare inher-
ited causes of cholestatic jaundice. The jaundice is usually 
associated with steatorrhoea and malabsorption of the 
fat-soluble vitamins. Defining defects of bile acid synthe-
sis depends upon the identification of unusual profiles of 
bile acids or alcohols in urine.
Prolonged parenteral nutrition may cause cholestatic liver 
disease with a progressive rise in plasma alkaline phospha-
tase activity and a later rise in the plasma aminotransferases. 
The aetiology is unclear but it may be caused by an ascend-
ing cholangitis, secondary to intestinal stasis. The condition 
usually resolves when parenteral feeding is stopped and en-
teral feeding is started or resumed but, in some children, 
the abnormalities persist and chronic liver disease may su-
pervene. Some children have been successfully treated with 
combined liver and small bowel transplantation.
Hepatocellular disease in neonates is associated with 
raised plasma aminotransferase activities, reduced plasma 
albumin and prolonged prothrombin time. Clinically, 
there may be oedema and ascites. When liver damage has 
occurred in utero, for instance in congenital infections and 
some inherited metabolic diseases, infants may present 
soon after birth with the neurological effects of intracranial 
bleeding before liver disease becomes apparent clinically.
Postnatally acquired infection may be superimposed 
on an inherited metabolic disease, such as tyrosinaemia 
type 1 or classic galactosaemia.
Neonatal haemochromatosis is a rare inherited dis-
order characterized by jaundice, hepatic failure and 
hypoglycaemia in the newborn period. Although the dis-
tribution of iron overload in the liver and in extrahepatic 
tissues, such as the heart and pancreas, is similar to that 
of hereditary haemochromatosis, the two conditions are 
distinct. The aetiology of neonatal haemochromatosis is 
unclear; it is probably inherited as an autosomal recessive 
trait. The transferrin saturation (80–90%) and serum fer-
ritin concentration are both markedly raised.
In many infants, it is impossible to differentiate cho-
lestasis and hepatocellular disease. Several inherited 
metabolic diseases are associated with neonatal hepato-
cellular disease. Sometimes there are clinical pointers to 
a diagnosis, such as the craniofacial dysmorphia of the 
peroxisomal disorder Zellweger syndrome (p. 462). In 
the absence of any specific clinical signs, the following 
investigations should be performed:
•	 blood: gases, [H
+]/pH
•	 plasma: lactate, glucose, ammonia, amino acids, α1-
antitrypsin, prothrombin time (international nor-
malized ratio).
Given that the liver has significant metabolic turnover, 
it is not surprising that inherited metabolic diseases, such 
as fatty acid oxidation defects, glycogen storage disease 
type 1 and urea cycle disorders, are associated with early 
liver disease. Affected infants are acutely ill and the di-
agnosis may be indicated by hypoglycaemia or hyper­
ammonaemia, in addition to deranged liver function tests.
Disorders in which the major initial biochemical 
­findings relate to the liver include the acute form of tyros-
inaemia type I (fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase deficiency). 
Signs and symptoms of the acute neonatal onset form 
­include acute liver failure with hepatomegaly, a tubulopa-
thy, hypoglycaemia, failure to thrive, vomiting, diarrhoea 
and a cabbage-like odour; some infants may present with 
a neurological crisis. Plasma tyrosine and methionine 
­concentrations are markedly raised. Urine organic acid 
analysis shows raised concentrations of the tyrosine me-
tabolites, 4-hydroxyphenyllactic and 4-hydroxyphenyl-
pyruvic ­acids, and succinylacetone. Of these biochemical 
findings, only the latter, succinylacetone, is specific to the 
defect, and allows differentiation from transient tyrosinae-
mia of infancy. Tyrosinaemia type I can now be successfully 
treated using 2-(2-nitro-4-trifluoromethylbenzoyl)-1,3-
cyclohexanedione (NTBC), which inhibits the enzyme 
4-hydroxyphenylpyruvate dioxygenase and thus the 
formation of fumarylacetoacetate and succinylacetone. 
Succinylacetone inhibits the enzyme porphobilinogen 
synthase; consequently, older individuals with tyrosinae-
mia type I may present with features resembling those of 
acute intermittent porphyria. Hepatocellular carcinoma is 
a significant complication, and patients should be moni-
tored regularly by measuring plasma α-fetoprotein.
There are three separate inherited disorders of ga-
lactose metabolism. The most common and severe of 
these (classic galactosaemia) is galactose 1-phosphate 
­uridyltransferase (GALT) deficiency. The acute clini-
cal presentation of galactosaemia includes vomiting and 
­diarrhoea, hepatic dysfunction, with a pronounced coag-
ulopathy, an Escherichia coli septicaemia due to impaired 
leukocyte bactericidal activity, and cataracts. Galactose 
1-phosphate uridyltransferase activity should be mea-
sured in red blood cells.
Dietary galactose restriction can reverse these acute 
problems, but the development of long-term complica-
tions, such as developmental delay, speech abnormalities 
and premature ovarian failure, may not be affected by the 
early institution of therapy. The poor treatment outcome 
in classic galactosaemia is due either to endogenous pro-
duction of galactose 1-phosphate through the action of 
epimerase or to the low intracellular availability of UDP-
galactose, a necessary component of some glycolipids and 
glycoproteins.
Liver disease in older children
The most common causes of liver disease in child-
hood are viral, autoimmune and drug-induced hepatitis. 
However, some metabolic diseases, such as α1-antitrypsin 
deficiency, tyrosinaemia, Wilson disease or cystic fibrosis 
should be excluded. A Fanconi-like picture with osteope-
nia and rickets may indicate the presence of renal tubular 
damage secondary to tyrosinaemia type I, Wilson disease 
496	
Clinical biochemistry
or hereditary fructose intolerance. Tyrosinaemia type I 
may also present with hypertension and a porphyria-like 
crisis, owing to succinylacetone-induced inhibition of 
5-aminolaevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD), the rate-
limiting enzyme in the porphyrin metabolic pathway.
Wilson disease
This recessively inherited disorder is caused by the im-
paired hepatic incorporation of copper into caeruloplas-
min and by reduced biliary excretion of copper. Copper 
accumulates in the liver and later in the brain and kid-
neys. The disorder may present with acute liver failure, 
cirrhosis or chronic hepatitis after four years of age but 
asymptomatic hepatocellular damage has been found ear-
lier in life. A more detailed account of Wilson disease is 
given in Chapter 14.
Reye syndrome or Reye-like illness
Hepatitis associated with acute encephalopathy and fatty 
infiltration of tissues is known as Reye syndrome. The 
onset of the disorder may be precipitated by a variety of 
conditions, including viral illness, especially varicella or 
influenza A or B, drugs, such as salicylates or sodium val-
proate, and toxins, including insecticides and aflatoxins.
The condition usually presents in children aged 
3–12  years. Following a viral-like illness, the child de-
velops persistent vomiting and a progressive encepha-
lopathy, with irritability, confusion and, in its most severe 
form, coma. Jaundice is rarely present. Biochemical fea-
tures include hypoglycaemia, raised plasma ammonia 
concentration and aminotransferase activity and a pro-
longed prothrombin time.
Several inherited metabolic disorders present clinically 
and biochemically in a manner similar to Reye syndrome. 
These include disorders of medium and long chain fatty 
acid oxidation and some organic acidaemias. Reye syn-
drome should not be diagnosed in a child <3  years of 
age until a genetic defect has been excluded. Given the 
possible link between Reye syndrome and salicylates it is 
recommended that they are not given to children under 
16 years. This has led to a significant drop in the number 
of cases recorded.
Further reading
Blau N, Duran M, Blaskovics ME et  al. Physician’s guide to the 
laboratory diagnosis of metabolic diseases. 2nd ed. Berlin: Springer-
Verlag; 2003.
Green A, Morgan I, Gray J. Neonatology and laboratory medicine. 2nd 
ed. London: ACB Venture Publications; 2003. 
A succinct, inexpensive book for the biochemist covering primarily 
the laboratory diagnosis and management of disorders presenting in the 
neonate. The book also includes a number of illustrative cases and specific 
investigation protocols.
Mérelle ME, Nagelkerke AF, Lees CM et al. Newborn screening for 
cystic fibrosis. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2001;3, CD001402.
Milford-Ward A, Sheldon J, Rowbottom A et al. editors. PRU handbook 
of clinical immunochemistry. 9th ed. Sheffield: PRU Press; 2007.
Rennie JM, editor. Rennie & Roberton’s textbook of neonatology. 5th 
ed Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2012. 
An extensive textbook covering all aspects of clinical neonatology including 
laboratory investigations; this is an important reference book for clinical 
biochemists working closely with neonatal units.
Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WS et  al. editors. The metabolic and 
molecular bases of inherited disease. 8th ed New York: McGraw-
Hill; 2001. 
The essential standard reference book for those with a special interest in 
inherited metabolic disorders.
Zschocke J, Hoffmann GF. Vademecum metabolicum. Manual of 
metabolic paediatrics. 2nd ed. London: Schattaeur; 2004.
Internet resources [All Accessed October 2013]
Congenital disorders of glycosylation, http://www.euroglycanet.org.
Mitochondrial disorders, http://www.neuro.wustl.edu/neuromuscular/
mitosyn.html.
Neuromuscular Disease Center, Washington University, St Louis, MO, 
USA. http://neuromuscular.wustl.edu/.
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
omim.
Catalogue of human genes and genetic disorders maintained by the 
National Centre for Biotechnology Information, USA.
UK Metabolic Biochemistry Laboratory Network. http://metbio.net. 
Assay directory for specialist metabolites and enzymes for inherited 
metabolic disorders. There is also an active training and education initiative 
and best practice guidelines aimed at helping local non-specialist laboratories 
and clinical teams.
UK Newborn Screening Programme Centre. http://newbornscreening-
bloodspot.org.uk. 
Website includes details of the UK screening programme and UK 
standards.
497
C H A P T E R  2 6
Introduction to haematology 
and transfusion science
David Ah-Moye  •  Ceinwen Davies  •  Joanne Goody  •  Peter Hayward  •  Rebecca Frewin
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION 497
GENERAL HAEMATOLOGY  497
Analysis of the full blood count  497
Reticulocyte count  499
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and plasma 
viscosity  499
Flow cytometry  499
Haematinic studies  500
Haemoglobinopathy screening  500
Tests for infectious mononucleosis  500
MORPHOLOGY  501
Blood film examination  501
Normal red cell morphology  501
Morphology of the anaemias  501
Normal white cell morphology  503
Abnormal white cell morphology  504
Haematological malignancies  504
HAEMOSTASIS  507
The coagulation cascade  507
Laboratory tests of coagulation  507
Interpretation of coagulation  
tests  509
BLOOD TRANSFUSION  510
Introduction  510
Blood group antigens  510
Laboratory transfusion tests  511
Investigation of suspected transfusion 
­reaction  512
Haemolytic disease of the  
newborn  512
Blood products  513
Risks of transfusion  513
Regulations  514
CONCLUSION  514
INTRODUCTION
Haematology is the study of blood, its formation, com-
position, functions and diseases. Blood cell formation 
(haemopoiesis) is described in Chapter 27. Haematology 
laboratories perform a wide range of tests of the ­composition 
and function of the blood that assist the ­clinician in the 
diagnosis and management of disease. They are typically 
divided into three principal sections: general haematology, 
haemostasis and blood transfusion. This chapter provides 
an overview of the different diagnostic techniques offered 
in each.
GENERAL HAEMATOLOGY
The general haematology laboratory performs numeri-
cal, morphological and biochemical analysis of blood 
samples (now often as part of a combined blood sciences 
laboratory). Blood samples must be anticoagulated, for 
example with ethylenediamine tetra-acetic acid (EDTA) 
for determination of full blood count and reticulocyte 
count, blood film examination and plasma viscosity and 
tri-sodium citrate for coagulation tests and measurement 
of erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
Analysis of the full blood count
The full blood count (FBC) is the most requested test 
profile in haematology. It comprises:
•	 haemoglobin (Hb) concentration
•	 red blood cell (RBC) count
•	 red cell indices (volume and haemoglobin content)
•	 white blood cell (WBC) count
•	 white blood cell differential count (neutrophils, 
lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils and basophils)
•	 platelet count.
The FBC is a valuable first-line screening test from 
which further investigations may be generated (see 
Table 26.1). The clinician uses information from the FBC 
in conjunction with the clinical history, physical examina-
tion and other investigations to help formulate and dis-
tinguish between differential diagnoses.
Full blood counts are usually performed on fully au-
tomated analysers, which provide accurate quantitation 
of cell parameters and can generate alerts, commonly 
498	
clinical biochemistry
known as ‘flags’, to the presence of unusual characteris-
tics that may warrant review of a blood film.
Haemoglobin
The main function of haemoglobin, which is present 
solely within the red cells, is to transport oxygen from 
the lungs to the tissues (see Chapter 5). Haemoglobin is 
measured by spectrometry. Diluted whole blood is mixed 
with a reagent (e.g. Stromatolyser™) that results in cell 
lysis and conjugates the haemoglobin with a compound 
such as potassium cyanide or sodium lauryl sulphate prior 
to measurement of its absorbance. The presence of high 
concentrations of substances that increase absorbance, 
e.g. triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, may cause a falsely 
raised haemoglobin result with some methods.
Cell counting
Blood cells are counted and sized either by electrical 
impedance or laser light scattering methods. The im-
pedance method utilizes the fact that blood cells are 
very poor conductors of electricity. When a cell passes 
through a small aperture across which an electric current 
is applied, there is a measurable rise in the electrical im-
pedance, with the pulse height being proportional to the 
volume of the cell. Each cell generates a separate impulse. 
Light scatter utilizes the fact that cells scatter light when 
passed through a laser beam: the number of cells can be 
counted and information about the cells can be obtained 
according to the pattern of scatter. White cell counting is 
performed after lysis of the red cells.
Clumping of cells results in underestimation of cell 
numbers. This may occur, for example, as a result of au-
toagglutination of red cells in cold agglutinin disease or 
in vitro clumping of platelets because of inadequate mix-
ing with EDTA anticoagulant.
Red cell indices
The red cell indices are a combination of measured and 
derived red cell parameters. The red cell indices usually 
reported are:
•	 mean cell volume (MCV)
•	 haematocrit (HCT) or packed cell volume (PCV), 
the percentage volume of red cells in the blood
•	 mean cell haemoglobin (MCH), the average mass of 
haemoglobin per red cell
•	 mean cell haemoglobin concentration (MCHC), the 
average concentration of haemoglobin per red cell.
Some analysers measure the MCV and calculate the 
HCT or PCV; others measure the HCT and calculate 
the MCV.
Mean cell volume is useful when assessing anaemia. For 
example, it is reduced in iron deficiency anaemia and in-
creased in megaloblastic anaemia.
Mean cell haemoglobin is reduced in iron deficiency 
anaemia and thalassaemias; further tests such as ferritin 
and HbA2 measurement may be performed to differenti-
ate between these two conditions.
Mean cell haemoglobin concentration is reduced in 
iron deficiency but is probably a more useful tool within 
the laboratory than clinically. It is very stable in health, 
so it can be used as an internal quality control; a signifi-
cant change in the daily mean MCHC indicates a drift in 
analyser calibration or a fault in its function. The MCHC 
is also useful for detecting anomalous results: a falsely 
raised Hb concentration, for example as a consequence 
of lipaemia, or a falsely reduced RBC count, for example 
owing to red cell autoagglutination, will result in a falsely 
raised MCHC.
The formulae for the derived parameters are as follows:
White cell differential
The white blood cells are involved in the cellular immu-
nological response to infection and other causes of in-
flammation. The five types of white blood cell differ in 
volume, conductivity, light scattering properties, uptake 
of fluorescent dyes and cytochemical stains, and resis-
tance to lytic agents. These properties, used in various 
MCV fL
HCT L L
RBC
L
(
) =
×
(
/
)
(
/
)
1000
1012
MCH pg
Hb g L
RBC
L
(
)
( /
)
(
/
)
=
1012
MCHC g L
Hb g L
HCT L L
( /
)
( /
)
(
/
)
=
TABLE 26.1  Haematology adult typical reference 
ranges (based on those used in the authors’ 
laboratory)
Parameter
Units
Range 
(females)
Range  
(males)
Hb
g/L
115–165
130–180
RBC
10
12/L
3.80–5.80
4.50–6.50
HCT
L/L
0.37–0.47
0.40–0.54
MCV
fL
80.0–100.0
80.0–100.0
MCH
pg
27.0–32.0
27.0–32.0
MCHC
g/L
285–330
285–330
WBC
10
9/L
3.6–11.0
3.6–11.0
PLT
10
9/L
140–400
140–400
Neutrophils
10
9/L
1.8–7.5
1.8–7.5
Lymphocytes
10
9/L
1.0–4.0
1.0–4.0
Monocytes
10
9/L
0.2–0.8
0.2–0.8
Eosinophils
10
9/L
0.1–0.4
0.1–0.4
Basophils
10
9/L
0.01–0.1
0.01–0.1
ESR (age <50)
mm/h
3–9
1–7
ESR (age ≥50)
mm/h
5–15
2–10
Plasma viscosity
mPa/s
1.50–1.72
1.50–1.72
Reticulocytes
10
9/L
76–130
76–130
Serum B12
ng/L
180–1000
180–1000
Serum folate
μg/L
>4.0
>4.0
Serum ferritin
μg/L
10–300
25–350
All values are for whole blood unless stated. Hb, haemoglobin; 
RBC, red blood cells; HCT, haematocrit; MCV, mean cell volume; 
MCH, mean cell haemoglobin; MCHC, mean cell haemoglobin 
concentration; WBC, white blood cells; PLT, platelets; ESR, 
­erythrocyte sedimentation rate.
	
26  Introduction to haematology and transfusion science	
499
combinations, enable their identification. Figure  26.1 
shows typical white cell scattergrams for a normal blood 
sample.
Platelet count
The main function of platelets is to form a plug at sites 
of damage to vascular endothelium. A low platelet count 
(thrombocytopenia) may result from decreased produc-
tion, increased consumption or abnormal pooling in the 
spleen. Decreased production is a consequence of either 
general marrow failure or selective depression, for ex-
ample by viral infection, drugs and chemicals. Platelet 
consumption is a feature of certain types of autoimmune 
diseases and occurs in disseminated intravascular coagu-
lation (which is often a result of septicaemia) and throm-
botic thrombocytopenic purpura. A high platelet count 
(thrombocytosis) may be seen as part of a reactive pro-
cess such as infection or in myeloproliferative neoplasms. 
Automated haematology analysers routinely measure the 
platelet count by impedance or laser light scattering; the ref-
erence method uses flow cytometry after labelling the plate-
lets with CD41 or CD61 antibodies.
Reticulocyte count
Reticulocytes are immature red cells, which are released 
from the bone marrow into the circulation one to two 
days before maturation. An increase in the reticulocyte 
count is indicative of an increase in red cell production 
(erythropoiesis) to meet physiological demand, for ex-
ample in haemolytic anaemia.
Reticulocytes contain ribosomal RNA, which can be 
detected by two main methods. When unfixed red cells 
are incubated with dyes such as new methylene blue, the 
ribosomal RNA precipitates out and appears as a blue re-
ticular network within the cells, which can be visualised 
using a light microscope, allowing the reticulocytes to be 
counted. Most automated FBC analysers now perform 
reticulocyte counts by flow cytometry, using a fluores-
cent dye that binds to the ribosomal RNA; the number of 
reticulocytes can be expressed as a percentage of total red 
cells and as an absolute count.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate and  
plasma viscosity
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) expressed in 
mm/h, is a measure of the rate at which red blood cells 
settle when an anticoagulated blood sample is left to 
stand in a column.
Plasma viscosity is usually measured by an automated 
viscometer. The plasma is drawn through a capillary tube 
under constant pressure and temperature; the rate of flow 
is measured and expressed as viscosity of plasma relative 
to distilled water.
Measurement of ESR or plasma viscosity may be useful 
when assessing the acute phase response. Both are ­affected 
by the presence of large proteins such as fibrinogen, 
­α2-macroglobulin and immunoglobulins, and are therefore 
usually raised during an acute phase response. They are 
non-specific screening tools for inflammation, and are use-
ful in monitoring of diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis 
and response to treatment for example with non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs and anti-tumour necrosis factor.
Plasma viscosity has several advantages over ESR. For 
example, it is not affected by physiological and environ-
mental factors. Measurement is rapid, reproducible and 
lends itself better to quality assurance procedures than 
measurement of ESR. Conversely, ESR is a cheap test, 
but is influenced by factors such as anaemia, sex, age and 
(in females) stage of the menstrual cycle and must be car-
ried out within about six hours of venepuncture.
Flow cytometry
White cells express characteristic nuclear, cytoplasmic 
and surface antigens; this is referred to as the immuno-
phenotype of the cell. Immunophenotyping has been 
made possible by the availability of a large number of 
antibodies, which target specific cellular antigens. For 
example, antibodies that are directed against the CD19 
antigen will bind to B lymphocytes.
Immunofluorescence forms the basis of flow cyto-
metric investigations. It uses antibodies conjugated to 
fluorescent dyes (fluorochromes) such as fluorescein 
isothiocyanate (FITC), phycoerythrin (PE) and phyco-
erythrin cyanin (PC). Whole blood or bone marrow is 
incubated with one or more antibodies, each conjugated 
to a different fluorochrome. The cells are then injected in 
single file into the path of a laser beam. As the cell passes 
through, the light is scattered in all directions. Forward 
scatter (FSC) is influenced by cell size whereas side scat-
ter (SSC) is influenced by the cellular structure and con-
tents. The different cell populations can be visualized by 
plotting SSC against FSC. As the cell–antibody complex 
passes through the laser beam it fluoresces. The different 
wavelengths of light emitted are filtered, enabling specific 
cell populations to be selected (gated) and the data can be 
displayed as dot plots or histograms. The dot plots show 
the intensity of fluorescence as well as the number of cells 
Fluorescence
Side scatter
Monos
Neuts + basos
Eos
Lymphs
DIFF
SFL
SSC
Forward scatter
Side scatter
Other white cells
Basos
WBC/BASO
FSC
SSC
A
B
FIGURE 26.1  ■  Five-part WBC differential from Sysmex XE2100
TM 
analyser. Note that neutrophils and basophils cannot be sepa-
rated in the side fluorescence (SFL) vs side scatter (SSC) popula-
tion scattergram (A). The basophil count is obtained by treating 
the white cells with an acidic reagent that shrinks all white cells, 
leaving bare nuclei, except for basophils, which remain intact 
(B). The neutrophil count is then derived by subtracting the ba-
sophil count from the combined neutrophil and basophil count. 
Lymphs, lymphocytes; monos, monocytes; neuts, neutrophils; 
eos, eosinophils; basos, basophils.
500	
clinical biochemistry
that are positive for the particular antigen; the intensity 
of fluorescence is proportional to the strength of antigen 
expression. In the example shown in Figure 26.2, whole 
blood was incubated with three antibody-dye conjugates, 
CD8-FITC, CD4-PE and CD3-PC5.
Flow cytometry allows rapid immunophenotyping of 
cells. This is essential in the diagnosis and classification of 
leukaemias and lymphomas, but is also a useful tool in the 
assessment of non-malignant conditions and for monitor-
ing the CD4+ lymphocyte count during the treatment of 
­human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. Flow 
­cytometry can also be used to confirm feto–maternal haem-
orrhage (see p. 512), by the detection of Rh D positive fetal 
cells and measurement of haemoglobin F in the fetal cells.
Haematinic studies
These comprise direct measurement of the concentra-
tion of ferritin (a measure of iron status), vitamin B12 and 
­folate. They are discussed further in Chapter 27.
Haemoglobinopathy screening
The haemoglobinopathies and the techniques used for 
their diagnosis are discussed in Chapter 29.
Tests for infectious mononucleosis
Infectious mononucleosis (IM), also known as glandular 
fever, is caused by the Epstein–Barr virus (EBV), which 
infects B lymphocytes. It is associated with a high titre 
of a heterophile antibody, so-called because it also reacts 
with red cells of other species, for example sheep, ox and 
horse. This antibody has been termed the Paul–Bunnell 
antibody, named after John Paul and Walls Bunnell who 
discovered them.
The Paul–Bunnell antibody is not adsorbed by guinea 
pig kidney, in contrast to other heterophile antibod-
ies (Forssman antibodies). Differential adsorption tests 
­utilize this principle; the patient’s serum is incubated with 
ox red cells and separately with guinea pig kidney anti-
gen, after which horse red cells (reagent) are added to the 
mixtures. Red cell agglutination only in the latter mixture 
indicates the presence of the Paul–Bunnell antibody.
An alternative test is the latex agglutination test. A re-
agent containing latex microspheres coated with purified 
Paul–Bunnell antigen is mixed with the patient’s serum; 
agglutination indicates presence of the Paul–Bunnell 
antibody.
Definitive confirmation of EBV infection requires 
serological detection of a rise in the titre of specific 
Forward scatter
Side scatter
0
0
Granulocytes
Monocytes
Lymphocytes
CD3-PC5
D1
1.0%
D2
24.8%
D3
9.2%
D4
65.0%
[A] FL4 Log/FL2 Log-ADC
CD4-PE
0
100
101
102
103
0
100
101
102
103
CD3-PC5
C1
1.3%
C2
59.2%
C3
9.0%
C4
30.6%
[A] FL4 Log/FL1 Log-ADC
CD8-FITC
0
100
101
102
103
0
100
101
102
103
CD3-PC5
[A] FL4 Log-ADC
0
0
100
101
102
103
90.0%
G
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 26.2  ■  Scatter plots, dot plots and histogram printouts from Beckman Coulter FC500 flow cytometer. (A) Side scatter vs forward 
scatter, showing white cell populations. (B) CD4 vs CD3 dual dot plots. (C) CD8 vs CD3 dual dot plots. (D) Single histogram for CD3 
gated for the lymphocyte population. Note: Granulocytes is the collective name for neutrophils, eosinophils and basophils.
	
26  Introduction to haematology and transfusion science	
501
anti-EBV capsid antigen IgM, which occurs in the first 
few weeks following infection.
MORPHOLOGY
Blood film examination
Microscopic examination of a well stained blood film is 
an essential part of many haematological investigations. 
The film may be made either manually or by an auto-
mated slide maker. After being air dried, it is stained with 
Romanowsky dyes such as May–Grünwald Giemsa or 
modified Wright stain, which contain azure B and ­eosin. 
This enables the assessment of the size, shape, maturity 
and contents of blood cells by light microscopy. Blood 
film examination is useful in the investigation of the 
causes of anaemia and to diagnose white cell ­disorders 
such as leukaemia and parasitic infections such as ­malaria. 
Less commonly, a blood film may be requested for 
­specific reasons such as to look for acanthocytes (red cells 
with irregular spicules), which are associated with abetali-
poproteinaemia, liver disease and several rare degenera-
tive neurological diseases.
Normal red cell morphology
In health, there is little variation in the shape and size 
of red blood cells. On a well spread and stained blood 
film, red cells appear circular in outline, with a well 
stained outer rim and a paler central area that occupies 
­approximately a third of the cell (see Fig. 26.3). The 
normal red cell appears slightly smaller than the nu-
cleus of a small lymphocyte. It is referred to as normo-
cytic (normal size) and normochromic (normal staining 
characteristics).
Valuable information can be obtained from the shape of 
a red cell, as shown in Figure 26.4. In many haematologi-
cal conditions there may be an increase in the proportion 
of non-specifically abnormal red cells, termed poikilo-
cytosis. It is also good practice to check the patient’s 
biochemistry results, to corroborate the morphological 
features; for example, if acanthocytes are present, the 
liver function tests should be checked, as acanthocytes are 
commonly present in liver disease.
Morphology of the anaemias
Anaemia is a condition in which the number of red blood 
cells, or their oxygen-carrying capacity, is insufficient to 
meet physiological needs. This is conventionally ­defined 
as a reduction in haemoglobin concentration below 
the reference range, i.e. <130 g/L in adult males and 
<115 g/L in adult females. The causes and assessment of 
anaemia are discussed in Chapter 27.
Iron deficiency anaemia
In iron deficiency anaemia, the red cells are smaller than 
normal (microcytosis). This is because the maturing red 
cells undergo an extra cellular division before the critical 
haemoglobin concentration required to arrest mitosis is 
achieved. The cells are also hypochromic, with a larger 
area of central pallor (see Fig. 26.5). Polychromatic cells 
(immature red cells that have a bluish hue on routine 
staining because of retained ribosomal ribonucleic acid) 
may be present, indicating increased erythropoiesis.
Megaloblastic anaemia
Megaloblastic anaemia is commonly caused by deficiency 
of vitamin B12 or folate, both of which are essential for 
DNA synthesis, or the administration of drugs that inter-
fere with DNA synthesis (e.g. methotrexate). Defective 
DNA synthesis results in the nucleus maturing at a slower 
rate than the cytoplasm, thereby producing a red cell that 
is larger than normal (macrocyte). Teardrop cells and red 
cell fragments may also be seen, as a consequence of inef-
fective erythropoiesis (see Fig. 26.6). A common finding 
is the presence of hypersegmented neutrophils (defined 
as presence of a nucleus with more than five lobes).
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia
Haemolytic anaemia is a term used to describe ­anaemia 
caused by a shortened red cell lifespan. In autoimmune 
haemolytic anaemia, the red cells are coated with ­antibody 
(usually IgG) that is directed against the patient’s own 
cells. When these cells circulate through the reticuloen-
dothelial system, the surface of the red cells is eroded, 
leading to a change in their shape from a biconcave disc 
to a sphere (see Fig. 26.7).
Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia
Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia is a term that is used 
to describe the anaemia that results from physical dam-
age to the red cells following the occlusion of arterioles 
and capillaries as a result of fibrin deposition or platelet 
aggregation. There are numerous causes, including infec-
tions (resulting, for example in disseminated ­intravascular 
coagulation (Fig. 26.8) or haemolytic ­uraemic syndrome), 
physical trauma (e.g. from mechanical heart valves) 
and autoimmune (e.g. thrombotic thrombocytopenic 
FIGURE  26.3  ■  Normal red cells. Shows area of central pallor 
­(arrow) occupying one-third the size of the cell.
502	
clinical biochemistry
Hypersegmented 
neutrophil 
Oval macrocytes 
Teardrop cell 
FIGURE  26.6  ■  Megaloblastic anaemia Hb 86 g/L, MCV 121.9 fL, 
MCH 43.9 pg, PLT 110 × 10
9/L, Vit B12 62 ng/L. Blood film shows 
macrocytic red cells, including oval macrocytes. The film also 
shows teardrop cells, a hypersegmented neutrophil and re-
duced platelet numbers.
Target cell
Iron deficiency, liver  
disease, post-
splenectomy,
haemoglobinopathies, e.g. 
thalassaemia  
Tear drop cell
Myelofibrosis, metastatic 
marrow infiltration,  
megaloblastic anaemia  
Sickle cell
Diseases associated with 
the presence of  
haemoglobin S, e.g. sickle 
cell disease, haemoglobin 
SC disease  
Irregularly 
contracted red 
cell; similar to 
spherocyte but 
not round 
Haemoglobinopathies,  
oxidant damage  
especially in G6PD defi-
ciency
Stomatocyte
Liver disease, alcoholism 
Spherocyte;
no area of 
central pallor 
Immune haemolytic  
anaemia, post-  
splenectomy, hereditary 
spherocytosis, severe 
burns  
Elliptocyte
Hereditary elliptocytosis,
some haemoglobinopathies, 
iron deficiency, myelofibrosis,
megaloblastic anaemia  
Ovalocyte
S.E. Asian ovalocytosis, 
macro ovalocytes –
impaired DNA synthesis,
e.g. B12 and folate  
deficiency  
Keratocyte  
(horned cell) 
Microangiopathic  
haemolytic anaemia, e.g.
disseminated  
intravascular coagulation, 
thrombotic  
thrombocytopenic purpura
Schistocyte 
(red cell frag-
ment) 
Microangiopathic and  
mechanical  
haemolytic anaemia  
Echinocyte 
(crenated red 
cell); short, 
regular spicules  
Multi-organ failure  
including hepatic and
renal failure. Most
commonly an artefact 
when a blood film is made
from an old sample
Acanthocyte;
irregular 
spicules 
Liver disease,  
abetalipoproteinaemia, 
inherited acanthocytosis 
Red cell  
abnormality 
Possible causes 
Red cell  
abnormality 
Possible causes 
FIGURE 26.4  ■  Red blood cells. Commonly observed morphological changes in red cells and the disorders in which they arise.
Polychromatic
cells 
Neutrophil
Elliptocyte (pencil cell)
Lymphocyte
FIGURE  26.5  ■  Iron deficiency anaemia (IDA). Hb 58 g/L, MCV 
52.1 fL, MCH 12.7 pg, PLT 608 × 10
9/L, ferritin <5 μg/L. Blood film 
shows microcytic hypochromic red cells, polychromatic red cells 
and pencil cells. The film also shows two neutrophils, a lympho-
cyte and an increase in platelet numbers.
	
26  Introduction to haematology and transfusion science	
503
purpura). The blood film contains numerous fragmented 
cells (called schistocytes), and immature red cells (which 
have variable blue–grey colouration (polychromasia) ow-
ing to the presence of ribosomal material) released by the 
marrow in an attempt to compensate for the shortened 
red cell survival (see Fig. 26.9).
Malaria
Malaria is caused by infection with parasites of the 
Plasmodium species. It causes anaemia through marrow 
suppression, splenic pooling and sequestration of red cells. 
There is also haemolysis because of removal and destruc-
tion of parasitized red cells, and intravascular ­haemolysis 
when the sporozoites are released from the infected red 
cells. There are four Plasmodium species, each having dis-
tinct morphological features that can be recognized by 
microscopic examination of a stained thick blood film in 
the majority of infected patients (see Fig. 26.10).
Normal white cell morphology
In health, five types of WBCs (also called leukocytes) 
are found in the peripheral blood (see Fig. 26.11). Their 
function is to protect the body against infection and 
other foreign invasion. This is facilitated by phagocyto-
sis (neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils and monocytes) 
and humoral and cell mediated immunological activity 
(lymphocytes).
The most common cause of a raised WBC count 
­(leukocytosis) is a neutrophil leukocytosis (neutro-
philia), which may occur after severe exercise or tissue 
damage, and in bacterial infections, metabolic disor-
ders and neoplasms of both haematological and non- 
haematological aetiology. The monocyte count may be 
raised in chronic bacterial infections and malignancies 
(again of both solid and haematological origin). A raised 
lymphocyte count (lymphocytosis) may be found in viral 
infections such as infectious mononucleosis and mumps, 
in chronic lymphocytic leukaemia and non-Hodgkin 
Polychromatic  
cells 
Neutrophil 
Howell–Jolly body 
Lymphocyte 
Monocyte 
Spherocytes 
FIGURE  26.7  ■ Warm autoimmune haemolytic anaemia. Hb 
104 g/L, reticulocytes 604 × 10
9/L, haptoglobin <0.2 g/L (reference 
range 0.7–3.2), direct antiglobulin test positive. Blood film shows 
numerous spherocytes, polychromatic cells and a red cell con-
taining a Howell–Jolly body. Howell–Jolly bodies are typically 
found in patients who have undergone splenectomy. The film 
also shows two neutrophils, a monocyte and a lymphocyte.
Schistocytes
FIGURE 26.8  ■  Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Hb 
89 g/L, WBC 3.0 × 10
9/L, PLT 77 × 10
9/L. Blood film shows numer-
ous schistocytes and reduced platelet numbers.
Keratocytes 
FIGURE  26.9  ■  Haemolytic uraemic syndrome. Hb 84 g/L, WBC 
24.3 × 10
9/L, PLT 23 × 10
9/L. Blood film shows numerous red cell 
fragments, some with the characteristic horn shape (keratocyte) 
and reduced platelet numbers. The WCC is increased because of 
neutrophilia as a result of bacterial infection with E. coli.
FIGURE  26.10  ■  Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Hb 149 g/L, 
WBC 6.1 × 10
9/L, PLT 111 × 10
9/L. Blood film stained by the dilute 
Giemsa method, showing Plasmodium falciparum trophozoites 
(ring forms) in three red cells (arrows).
504	
clinical biochemistry
lymphoma. Allergic disorders, parasitic infections and 
Hodgkin lymphoma are associated with a raised eosino-
phil count.
A low WBC count (leukopenia) is usually a reflection 
of a ­reduction in the concentration of neutrophils (neu-
tropenia) or of all blood cells (pancytopenia). Causes 
of ­neutropenia include therapeutic drugs, autoimmune 
­diseases and viral infections, whereas pancytopenia is gen-
erally caused by marrow failure.
Abnormal white cell morphology
Morphological abnormalities may be divided into those 
resulting from benign and malignant disorders. Benign 
disorders include:
•	 toxic changes in neutrophils in bacterial ­infection; 
neutrophils often exhibit coarser granules in the 
­cytoplasm, cytoplasmic vacuolation and Döhle 
­bodies (Fig. 26.12)
•	 neutrophil hypersegmentation in megaloblastic 
anaemia (Fig. 26.6)
•	 atypical lymphocytes in viral infection (Fig. 26.13)
•	 inherited disorders, for example Pelger–Huët 
anomaly and May–Hegglin anomaly.
Haematological malignancies
The haematological malignancies are clonal diseases 
originating from a single cell in the bone marrow or 
lymphoid tissue that has become genetically altered. 
They represent approximately 7% of all malignant dis-
eases. They include acute leukaemias, chronic leukae-
mias, myeloproliferative neoplasms, myelodysplasia, 
non-Hodgkin lymphoma and multiple myeloma and 
its related disorders. The World Health Organization 
(WHO) classification of tumours of haematopoietic and 
lymphoid tissues is widely used to classify these malig-
nancies. This system is based on morphologic, immuno-
phenotypic, cytogenetic, molecular genetic and clinical 
features.
Acute leukaemia
Acute leukaemias have a rapid onset and progression and 
are invariably fatal if left untreated. They are charac-
terized by an accumulation of early haemopoietic cells, 
known as blast cells (see Fig. 26.14), in the bone mar-
row. Morphologically, acute leukaemia is defined as the 
presence of >20% blast cells in the bone marrow or 
Basophil
The nucleus often has two lobes but is difficult to see as it is
obscured by the large basophilic (purple) granules within the
cytoplasm. The cytoplasm stains pale blue.
Neutrophil
Deep purple staining nucleus with some chromatin clumping.
Nucleus has 2–5 lobes separated by fine
filaments of chromatin. Pale blue cytoplasm with an
irregular outline. Numerous fine azurophilic or grey–blue
granules.
Monocyte
Irregularly shaped cell with a large amount of cytoplasm.
Cytoplasm is grey–blue and often described as having a
‘ground glass’ appearance. The cytoplasm may contain 
vacuoles and/or fine azurophilic granules. The nucleus
makes up 70–80% of the cell and is often oval or kidney
shaped.
Lymphocyte 
Round or irregular cells with clear, pale blue cytoplasm.
Nuclear chromatin varies from dense to more finely stained
with occasional nucleoli present. Can be subdivided into
three groups based on size and granularity:
small lymphocyte 
large lymphocyte 
large granular lymphocyte.
Cell type
Morphological features
Eosinophil
Usually has a bilobed nucleus. Pale blue cytoplasm packed
with eosinophilic (red–orange) granules. 
FIGURE 26.11  ■ White blood cells. Normal morphological features of the myeloid and lymphoid white blood cells, shown in order of 
prevalence in the peripheral blood.
	
26  Introduction to haematology and transfusion science	
505
peripheral blood. The acute leukaemias are a heteroge-
neous group of conditions; the role of morphology in 
classifying them into subtypes of myeloid and lymphoid 
leukaemias has been superseded by the use of molecu-
lar genetics, cytogenetics and immunophenotyping. This 
­allows classification of these complex disorders into prog-
nostically relevant categories, and aids decision-making 
over the role of chemotherapy or the requirement for 
bone marrow transplantation after disease remission has 
been induced. The use of molecular genetics is becoming 
increasingly important in monitoring both the response 
of the disease to treatment and detecting patients at risk 
of relapse.
Chronic leukaemia
Chronic leukaemias are characterized by their slower dis-
ease progression and can broadly be divided into myeloid 
and lymphoid types.
Chronic myeloid leukaemia is a clonal disorder of 
pluripotent stem cells, as shown by the presence of the 
Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome, an abnormal chro-
mosome 22, which results from translocation t(9:22) 
(q34:q11) between chromosome 9 and 22. The fusion 
gene BCR-ABL1 is also created as a result of the trans-
location. The white cell count is usually >50 × 10
9/L and 
the blood film shows all the stages of the myeloid series, 
from myeloblasts through to neutrophils, and an increase 
in basophils (see Fig. 26.15).
Chronic lymphoid leukaemias are characterized by an 
accumulation of mature B or T lymphocytes. Included in 
this group are chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, prolym-
phocytic leukaemia, hairy cell leukaemia and plasma cell 
leukaemia. Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia is the most 
common of the chronic lymphoid leukaemias and occurs 
in older subjects, typically between 60 and 80 years of age. 
Immunophenotyping shows the cells to be of B-lineage. 
Döhle bodies 
FIGURE  26.12  ■  Bacterial infection. Hb 101 g/L, WBC 4.9 × 10
9/L, 
PLT 218 × 10
9/L. Blood film shows toxic changes in a neutrophil: 
coarse granulation of the nucleus, cytoplasmic vacuolation and 
Döhle bodies (arrows) on the edge of the cytoplasm. Döhle bod-
ies may also be found in myelodysplastic syndromes and acute 
myeloid leukaemia.
FIGURE  26.13  ■  Infectious mononucleosis. Hb 165 g/L, WBC 
23.9 × 10
9/L, lymphocytes 13.9 × 10
9/L, PLT 195 × 10
9/L. Blood film 
shows two atypical lymphocytes with basophilic cytoplasm. 
These are T lymphocytes that react against B lymphocytes in-
fected with EBV. The film shows a typical appearance of red cells 
‘wrapped’ around the lymphocytes.
Auer rods
B
Blast cells 
Lymphocytes
Nucleolus
Neutrophil
Bare nucleus
A
FIGURE 26.14  ■ Two cases of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). (A) Hb 111 g/L, WBC 1.0 × 10
9/L (3.6–11.0), blast cells 0.69 × 10
9/L, PLT 
16 × 10
9/L. Blood film shows three myeloblasts containing two or more nucleoli. The film also shows a neutrophil and a lymphocyte. 
(B) Hb 127 g/L, WBC 30.3 × 10
9/L, blast cells 13.3 × 10
9/L, PLT 31 × 10
9/L. Blood film shows a myeloblast containing two Auer rods in the 
cytoplasm and reduced platelet numbers.
506	
clinical biochemistry
The lymphocyte count is usually >5 × 10
9/L and the 
blood film shows presence of predominantly small lym-
phocytes and smear (smudge) cells (see Fig. 26.16).
Myeloproliferative neoplasms
These are clonal disorders of haemopoietic stem cells, 
­characterized by increased marrow proliferation of one 
or more myeloid cell lineages: granulocytic, erythroid, 
megakaryocytic and mast cells. The major myeloprolif-
erative disorders are polycythaemia vera, essential throm-
bocythaemia and primary myelofibrosis (see Fig. 26.17). 
A single acquired mutation of the cytoplasmic kinase 
Janus-associated kinase 2 (JAK-2) is found in 90% of pa-
tients with polycythaemia vera and in 50% of those with 
essential thrombocythaemia and primary myelofibrosis.
Myelodysplasia
Myelodysplastic syndrome is a term used to describe 
a heterogeneous group of clonal disorders of haemo-
poietic stem cells. The bone marrow shows increased 
proliferation but, owing to ineffective haemopoiesis, 
there is a reduction in all myeloid cell lineages (pancy-
topenia) in the peripheral blood. There is dysplasia in at 
least one of the cell lineages. The blood film often shows 
hypogranular neutrophils, pseudo-Pelger neutrophils, 
large hypogranular platelets and a dimorphic red cell 
population (see Fig.  26.18). Myelodysplastic syndrome 
occurs in older subjects, with a median age of 69 years. 
The risk of developing acute leukaemia depends upon 
numerous prognostic factors, including the number of 
blasts present in the marrow, the number of blood cell 
types affected and cytogenetic changes.
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma refers to a heterogeneous 
group of clonal lymphoid tumours. The term lym-
phoma is generally used to describe tumours arising 
in lymph nodes, the spleen and other solid organs, 
in ­contrast to leukaemias, in which the bone marrow 
is predominantly involved, but in some cases there is 
Teardrop cells 
FIGURE  26.17  ■  Myelofibrosis. Hb 86 g/L, WBC 4.3 × 10
9/L, PLT 
56 × 10
9/L. Blood film shows numerous teardrop cells, some 
polychromatic cells, one neutrophil and few platelets.
Promyelocyte 
B
Blast 
Agranular  platelet
Eosinophil
Basophil
Myelocyte
Band neutrophil
Metamelocyte
A
FIGURE 26.15  ■  Chronic myeloid leukaemia. Hb 101 g/L, WBC 125.6 × 10
9/L, PLT 338 × 10
9/L. (A) and (B) are photographs of the same 
blood film showing all stages of differentiation of the myeloid lineage. Usually this is only seen in the bone marrow.
Smear cells
FIGURE 26.16  ■  Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. Hb 73 g/L, WBC 
950 × 10
9/L (no neutrophils), PLT 85 × 10
9/L. Blood film shows 
­numerous small lymphocytes and some smear cells (fragile 
lymphocytes damaged during spreading of blood film).
	
26  Introduction to haematology and transfusion science	
507
no clear distinction between the two. Characteristic 
­lymphoma cells may be seen in the blood film, for 
­example lymphocytes with a cleaved nucleus in follicu-
lar lymphoma (see Fig. 26.19).
Multiple myeloma and related disorders are clonal 
malignancies of B lymphocytes. They are discussed in 
Chapter 30.
HAEMOSTASIS
Introduction
Haemostasis plays an essential role in preventing excess 
blood loss following injury. It is a complex process in-
volving interactions between blood vessel walls, platelets 
and coagulation factors to form a haemostatic plug with 
the consequent activation of fibrinolysis, whereby the 
clot is gradually dissolved. Excessive activation of proco-
agulant mechanisms can lead to thrombosis and vascular 
occlusion; therefore a delicate balance is maintained via 
negative and positive feedback pathways.
Following blood vessel injury, the vessel constricts to 
reduce blood flow, and subendothelial collagen and tis-
sue factor is exposed. Platelets adhere to the collagen and 
are activated, releasing procoagulant particles and un-
dergoing a change in membrane configuration to expose 
negatively charged phospholipids and coagulation factor 
receptors. The initial platelet plug formed is unstable but 
is rapidly stabilized by activation of the coagulation cas-
cade, resulting in the formation of fibrin.
The coagulation cascade
Historically, the coagulation process was divided into 
separate intrinsic and extrinsic pathways, terminating in 
the final common pathway with the formation of a stable 
fibrin clot. It is now established that the coagulation cas-
cade is a single series of more complex interactions.
In vivo, blood coagulation is initiated by the exposure 
of tissue factor (TF) following endothelial cell damage. 
The TF binds to factor VII, and functions as a cofac-
tor in the activation of factor VII, with the resulting 
TF:FVIIa complex activating factor X and factor IX, en-
abling the conversion of prothrombin to thrombin. The 
TF:FVIIa complex is quickly inhibited by tissue factor 
pathway inhibitor but the thrombin already generated 
enables the coagulation process to continue as it feeds 
back to ­activate coagulation factors V, VIII and XI, re-
sulting in amplification of the brief initiator process. 
The ultimate goal of the coagulation process is the gen-
eration of thrombin, which converts fibrinogen to fibrin. 
Fibrin monomers spontaneously join together via hydro-
gen bonds, forming insoluble fibrin polymers; these are 
then cross linked by factor XIIIa, changing the relatively 
­unstable primary platelet plug into a stable clot. In vitro, 
however, consideration of coagulation screen results in 
terms of the traditional pathways allows for the sim-
pler interpretation of the common laboratory tests (see 
Fig. 26.20).
Once a stable clot has been produced and bleeding has 
ceased, the clot is reorganized and resorbed by a process 
called fibrinolysis. The main enzyme responsible is plas-
min, which is formed from plasminogen.
In order to restrict coagulation factor activation to 
the site of injury, naturally occurring inhibitors including 
anti-thrombin, protein C and protein S are produced.
Laboratory tests of coagulation
Laboratory tests of coagulation attempt to mimic 
in ­vitro the complex in vivo coagulation processes, but 
cannot do so completely. The generation of an abnor-
mal result does not therefore necessarily mean that the 
patient has a bleeding diathesis, and a normal result does 
not completely exclude a bleeding diathesis. It is impor-
tant that the test results are interpreted in the clinical 
context; the indiscriminate use of coagulation screens is 
best avoided.
The standard tests for coagulation include ­prothrombin 
time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT), 
fibrinogen concentration, D-dimer ­concentration and 
Pseudo-Pelger
neutrophil 
Döhle body 
Döhle body 
FIGURE  26.18  ■  Myelodysplasia 
(MDS). 
Hb 
110 g/L, 
WBC 
33.6 × 10
9/L, PLT 209 × 10
9/L. Blood film shows two dysplastic 
neutrophils with few or no cytoplasmic granules. One of the 
neutrophils is a pseudo-Pelger cell (bi-lobed). Both neutrophils 
contain Döhle bodies.
Nuclear cleft 
FIGURE 26.19  ■  Follicular lymphoma Hb 101 g/L, WBC 38.5 × 10
9/L, 
lymphocytes 37.7 × 10
9/L, PLT 85 × 10
9/L. Blood film shows abnor-
mal lymphocytes, two of which have deep nuclear clefts.
508	
clinical biochemistry
thrombin time (TT). The PT measures the coagula-
tion factors involved in the classic extrinsic and common 
­pathways and the APTT is used to test the coagulation 
factors involved in the classic intrinsic and common 
pathways.
Prothrombin time and APTT are measured by tech-
niques that ultimately detect the formation of fibrin clot 
by either mechanical or optical methods.
Prothrombin time
Plasma is mixed with thromboplastin, which contains 
TF, phospholipids and calcium ions, all of which are 
required for the activation of the extrinsic pathway. 
This causes a fibrin clot to form via the extrinsic and 
common pathways. Different thromboplastin reagents 
result in differing prothrombin times but internation-
ally standardized results can be generated by correlat-
ing the thromboplastin used with the WHO reference 
standard. This converts the PT result to an International 
Normalized Ratio (INR), which is used for monitoring 
patients on warfarin.
Activated partial thromboplastin time
Measurement of the APTT involves induction of the 
formation of a fibrin clot via the intrinsic and common 
pathways. Plasma is first incubated with partial throm-
boplastin, which contains a contact activator, e.g. mi-
cronized silica or kaolin, which activates factor XII and 
phospholipids, triggering the intrinsic pathway. The fac-
tor XIIa in turn activates factor XI; this reaction is not 
significant in vivo but is used in vitro to produce factor 
XIa independently of the extrinsic pathway. A second re-
agent containing calcium ions is then added, to enable the 
process to proceed to the formation of a fibrin clot.
Fibrinogen and thrombin time
Fibrinogen concentration can be estimated from the opti-
cal density changes observed when PT is measured using 
the optical method. A more accurate measurement can 
be performed using the thrombin clotting time. In this 
investigation, a thrombin-containing reagent is added to 
a dilution of the patient’s plasma: the resultant clotting 
time is proportional to fibrinogen concentration.
D-dimer concentration
D-dimers are cross-linked D fragments: they are only 
produced as a result of the breakdown of cross-linked 
fibrin and not from the degradation of fibrinogen and 
soluble fibrin. Around 2–3% of plasma fibrinogen is 
physiologically converted to cross-linked fibrin and 
then degraded. Thus a small quantity of D-dimer is 
present in the plasma of healthy individuals. Increased 
amounts of cross-linked fibrin degradation products are 
found in states of coagulation activation and increased 
plasma D-dimer concentration may indicate an in-
creased rate of fibrinolysis; this may be a consequence 
of the presence of a deep venous thrombosis (DVT) or 
pulmonary embolus (PE), or a result of disseminated 
­intravascular coagulation (DIC). It should be noted that 
the main diagnostic value of D-dimer measurement 
lies in its negative predictive value; raised concentra-
tions are commonly found post surgery, in pregnancy, 
in ­malignancy and in other situations associated with 
activation of the fibrinolytic system, resulting in many 
false positives.
Plasma D-dimer concentration is usually measured 
by latex particle enhanced immunoassay. There are 
also many assays that measure fibrin degradation prod-
ucts (FDPs) often using latex agglutination techniques. 
Activated partial thromboplastin  time
Prothrombin time
XII 
XIIa 
XI 
XIa 
IX 
IXa 
X 
XIII 
Xa
VII 
VIIa 
X 
VIII 
XIIIa 
Phospholipid + Ca2+ 
Thrombin
Prothrombin
Fibrinogen 
Fibrin 
Stable fibrin clot 
Tissue factor 
V
Intrinsic 
pathway 
Extrinsic  
pathway 
Damaged surface 
Trauma 
Anti-thrombin 
Active protein C
Protein S
Inhibitors 
Inhibitor 
Phospholipid + Ca2+ 
Phospholipid + Ca2+ 
Phospholipid + Ca2+ 
FIGURE 26.20  ■  Coagulation cascade to illustrate use of laboratory tests and the function of naturally occurring inhibitors.
	
26  Introduction to haematology and transfusion science	
509
The diagnostic value of FDPs is reduced by the fact that 
they may be generated from the breakdown of both fibrin 
and fibrinogen and thus their presence is not necessarily 
associated with clot formation.
Specific factor assays
Deficiency of individual clotting factors is detected by 
adding the patient’s plasma to artificially produced plasma 
that is deficient in one specific factor. Measurement 
of PT or APTT on this mixture enables calculation of 
­factor concentration. Results are expressed as a percent-
age of normal activity. An abnormal result may reflect 
the presence of an inhibitor antibody as well as factor 
deficiency. This can be identified by performing a correc-
tion study where plasma from healthy subjects is added 
to the test plasma, in a 50:50 ratio. If correction is less 
than ­expected, the presence of an inhibitor of coagulation 
should be suspected.
Interpretation of coagulation tests
If a patient presents with a history of excessive bleeding or 
easy bruising, the use of the simple laboratory screening 
tests will guide the clinician to the likely underlying cause 
and what further investigations are appropriate. A guide 
to the interpretation of the results is given in Table 26.2.
Haemophilia
The most common clotting factor deficiency associ-
ated with bleeding is factor VIII deficiency, also known 
as ­haemophilia A, followed by factor IX deficiency 
(haemophilia B). Inheritance of both conditions is sex-
linked and can be caused by a number of different mu-
tations. The ­severity of the bleeding disorder depends 
on the amount of active clotting factor: individuals with 
<1% are classified as having severe haemophilia, those 
with 1–5% have moderate haemophilia and those with 
mild haemophilia have 5–40% of normal concentrations 
of active clotting factor. Patients with severe haemophilia 
suffer from ­recurrent severe and spontaneous bleeds. 
Bleeding may occur anywhere in the body but those that 
are associated with the most serious complications are 
joints, muscles, gastrointestinal tract and the brain. Most 
patients with severe haemophilia require regular prophy-
lactic supplementation with recombinant factor concen-
trate and additional supplementation following episodes 
of bleeding or to cover surgery (see p. 513). Patients may 
develop antibodies (or inhibitors) to the factor infused, 
rendering it ineffective. In these situations, recombinant 
activated factor VII and activated prothrombin com-
plex concentrates (factor VIII inhibitor bypassing activ-
ity, FEIBA) can be useful in the treatment of bleeding. 
Patients with mild haemophilia tend to bleed only after 
surgery or serious trauma and can often be managed suc-
cessfully with desmopressin, which releases stored factor 
VIII from blood vessel walls.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Disseminated intravascular coagulation can become cata-
strophic if not treated rapidly. It may be triggered by nu-
merous disorders, such as sepsis, disseminated malignancy 
and amniotic fluid embolism. These lead to the formation 
of small blood clots in blood vessels throughout the body, 
TABLE 26.2  Screening tests used in the diagnosis of coagulation disorders
Screening tests
Coagulation disorders indicated by abnormal result
Most common cause of coagulation disorder
Prothrombin time 
(PT)
Deficiency or inhibition of one or more of the 
following coagulation factors: VII, X, V, II or 
fibrinogen
Warfarin therapy
Prematurity
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)
Activated partial 
thromboplastin 
time (APTT)
Deficiency or inhibition of one or more of the 
following coagulation factors: XII, XI, IX VIII,  
X, V, II or fibrinogen
Haemophilia (factor VIII)
Christmas disease (factor IX)
Heparin therapy
Liver disease
DIC
Fibrinogen
Inflammatory or neoplastic conditions
Low concentrations: 
DIC 
Liver disease 
Fibrinolytic therapy
High concentrations: 
Inflammation 
Neoplastic conditions
D-Dimer
Fibrin clot lysis
Pulmonary embolus
Deep vein thrombosis
DIC
Postoperative
Infection
Cancer
Pregnancy (raised in normal pregnancy)
Thrombin time
Deficiency or abnormality of fibrinogen or  
inhibition of thrombin by heparin or  
fibrinogen degradation products (FDPs)
Heparin therapy
DIC
Other thrombin inhibitors
Hypofibrinogenaemia
Dysfibrinogenaemia
510	
clinical biochemistry
consuming coagulation factors and platelets and resulting 
in abnormal bleeding, e.g. from venesection sites, gastro-
intestinal tract and surgical wounds. Coagulation screen 
results will show prolonged PT and APTT, and low fibrin-
ogen and high D-dimer concentrations. In these circum-
stances, the underlying cause should be corrected as soon 
as possible and platelets, fresh frozen plasma (FFP) and 
cryoprecipitate infused if bleeding is severe (see p. 513).
BLOOD TRANSFUSION
Introduction
In the UK, blood donation is entirely voluntary and open 
to healthy individuals aged 17–65  years at the time of 
first donation. Donors undergo rigorous health assess-
ments; individuals with lifestyle risks or a recent history 
of infection are excluded from donating. Each donation 
is of 450 mL of whole blood and is tested for human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), hepatitis B and C, and 
syphilis, along with determination of the Rh and ABO 
blood group, before it is released to be transfused into a 
recipient.
Hospital blood transfusion laboratories perform a 
range of tests required for supply of patient-compatible 
blood and blood products and in the investigation of hae-
molysis resulting from blood incompatibility (including 
haemolytic disease of the newborn).
Blood group antigens
The red cell membrane carries a range of surface antigens. 
Those that differ between individuals of the same species 
as a result of genetic polymorphisms (alloantigens), and 
can therefore elicit an immune response between donor 
and recipient blood, are termed the blood group antigens. 
There are around 30 recognized blood group systems.
ABO blood group
This blood group system is considered the most impor-
tant, because of the high risk of a severe haemolytic trans-
fusion reaction if ABO incompatible blood is transfused.
There are three antigens in the ABO blood group sys-
tem, A, B and H. The ABO gene is located on chromosome 
9 and has three alleles, A, B and O. The A allele encodes 
a glycosyltransferase that adds N-acetylgalactosamine 
to the glycoprotein H antigen that is expressed on all 
normal red cells. The B allele encodes a different gly-
cosyltransferase that adds d-galactose. The O allele is 
a deletion that results in loss of enzyme translation and 
therefore presence of unmodified H antigen. A and B are 
co-dominant alleles; AB individuals express both antigens.
Individuals produce antibodies to the antigen that they 
lack on their red cells. Landsteiner’s law states that, for 
whichever ABO antigen is not present on the red cells, 
the corresponding antibody is found in the plasma (see 
Table 26.3). Antibodies to A and B antigen develop in the 
first few months of life, without exposure to the red cell 
antigen, as a result of environmental exposure to bacteria. 
They are referred to as ‘naturally occurring’ antibodies. 
ABO antibodies are usually IgM but may be IgG.
It is essential that the ABO group of transfused red 
cells is compatible with the ABO blood group of the pa-
tient. Transfusion of even a few millilitres of red cells into 
patients who have the corresponding antibody results in 
a severe immune reaction, which may be fatal. Cells of 
blood group O are compatible with patients of all ABO 
blood groups so individuals of group O can be referred to 
as universal donors. Conversely, individuals of blood group 
AB can receive blood from any of the other groups and 
are referred to as universal recipients (see Table 26.3).
Rh blood group
The Rh (formerly rhesus) blood group consists of over 
45 antigens, of which D, C, E, c and e antigen are usually 
typed in donor blood. All patient samples for blood group-
ing are ­routinely typed for their RhD status because the 
D ­antigen is clinically the most important after the ABO 
antigens. About 85% of the population express the D anti-
gen and are called RhD positive; the remainder are termed 
RhD negative. The D antigen is highly immunogenic so 
individuals who are RhD negative but receive RhD posi-
tive blood are likely to produce anti-D antibodies. Anti-D 
has the potential to cause a severe haemolytic transfusion 
reaction and cause haemolytic disease of the newborn 
(HDN) (see below).
Expression of the D antigen is variable. Some patients 
express only small amounts of the D antigen; their RhD 
status is termed weak D. Other patients express only part 
of the D antigen; their RhD status is described as partial 
D. Partial RhD individuals can produce antibody to the 
part of the D antigen, which they lack, so they should 
receive RhD negative red cells if they require transfusion.
Other important blood groups and antibodies
Kell, Kidd, Duffy and MNS blood groups are clinically 
important because antibodies to antigens of these blood 
groups can cause either transfusion reactions or HDN or 
both. They are included routinely in antibody identifica-
tion panels.
TABLE 26.3  ABO antigen, antibodies, genotype and compatibility
ABO group
Antigen on red cell
Antibody in plasma
Genotype
Compatible ABO group
A
A
Anti-B
AA or AO
A, O
B
B
Anti-A
BB or BO
B, O
O
None
Anti-A,B
OO
O
AB
A and B
None
AB
AB, A, B, O
	
26  Introduction to haematology and transfusion science	
511
The Kell antibody (Anti-K) is the most commonly 
found antibody after those to the ABO and Rh blood 
group antigens. A third of all non-ABO, non-Rh allo-
antibodies are anti-K. It is good practice to give Kell-
negative blood to patients who already have antibodies 
to other blood group antigens. Women of child-bearing 
age who require blood transfusion should also be trans-
fused with Kell negative blood of the appropriate ABO 
and Rh grouping.
The Kidd antibodies (Anti-Jk(a) and Anti-Jk(b)) form 
another important antibody system that can cause severe 
acute and delayed transfusion reactions. Anti-Jk(a) is the 
most commonly implicated antibody in delayed transfu-
sion reactions. Anti-Jk(a) may fall to low or undetectable 
concentrations in the patient’s plasma over time so can be 
difficult to detect.
Laboratory transfusion tests
Blood grouping and antibody screen
Commonly referred to as ‘group and save’, this is the 
most requested test and comprises two parts: ABO and 
RhD grouping, and an antibody screen.
ABO and D grouping Antisera are mixed with the pa-
tient’s red cells; this is known as the forward group. In 
ABO grouping, the patient’s plasma is also mixed with 
known A and B cells: the reverse group. The positive and 
negative patterns of agglutination determine the patients 
ABO and RhD group (see Table 26.4). This can be per-
formed manually or by automated methods but the prin-
ciples remain the same.
Antibody screening This procedure is designed to de-
tect clinically significant alloantibodies to blood group 
systems other than ABO. There are two stages to an anti-
body screen: sensitization and haemagglutination.
The patient’s plasma is incubated at 37 °C with two or 
three red cell samples of known blood group phenotype. 
These samples are always group O to avoid reactions that 
would result from ABO incompatibility. The antibody–
antigen complex formation that occurs is termed sensiti-
zation. In the second stage, anti-human globulin (AHG) 
reagent is added, to encourage cross linking ­between 
sensitized red cells, as most antibodies are of the IgG 
class so cannot directly form cross links. If agglutination 
­occurs, further tests are required to identify the antibody 
or ­antibodies present. This procedure is known as the in-
direct antiglobulin test (IAT).
The patient’s sample is retained and stored in accor-
dance with national guidelines. It can subsequently be 
used in order to crossmatch blood for that patient, as de-
scribed later. It is essential that, if a patient has recently 
been transfused, they are re-tested prior to any further 
transfusion in order to detect any new antibodies they may 
have developed in response to the previous transfusion.
Antibody identification panels
Antibodies that need to be identified are those that can 
cause transfusion reactions or HDN. Following a posi-
tive antibody screen, further tests are done to identify the 
antibody using the same theory as for antibody screening. 
The antibody panel usually contains at least ten ­different 
red cell reagents of known phenotype. There are usu-
ally two sets of red cell reagents in one panel set, one 
of which has been treated with an enzyme that cleaves 
off part of the red cell membrane, as a result of which 
some antigens are lost from the red cell membrane (MNS 
and Duffy systems) and others are exposed in order to 
produce stronger antibody binding (the Rh system). The 
use of both sets of cells is important as the differences 
in reaction for different blood group systems can help 
determine antibody identity, particularly when multiple 
antibodies are present.
Crossmatching (compatibility testing)
Crossmatching is designed to ensure compatibility of do-
nor units with the recipient. The procedure can be ei-
ther non-serological or serological. There are three main 
types of crossmatch:
•	 electronic crossmatch or blood issue (non-­
serological)
•	 immediate spin crossmatch (serological)
•	 full crossmatch (serological).
Electronic crossmatch is the quickest to perform, 
­enabling issue of blood within five minutes. A prerequi-
site is that a group and antibody screen has already been 
performed for that patient. In this non-serological pro-
cess, the laboratory computer system checks for ABO and 
RhD compatibility. For a sample to be suitable for elec-
tronic crossmatching, a number of requirements must be 
met. There are some minor differences between guide-
lines issued by the British Committee for Standards in 
Haematology (BCSH) and the American Association of 
Blood Banks (AABB), but the following elements are gen-
erally considered essential in the UK:
TABLE 26.4  A selection of ABO and D grouping results
Known reagent
Anti-A
Anti-B
Anti-A,B
Anti-D
Anti-D
A cells
B cells
Patients cells/plasma
Cells
Cells
Cells
Cells
Cells
Plasma
Plasma
 
 
−
−
−
+
+
+
+
O Pos
+
−
+
+
+
−
+
A Pos
−
+
+
−
−
+
−
B Neg
+
+
+
−
−
−
−
AB Neg
 
 
Forward group
 
Reverse group
512	
clinical biochemistry
•	 the ABO and RhD grouping procedure must have 
been performed on a fully automated grouping ma-
chine
•	 results must have been transferred to the laboratory 
computer system electronically, with no manual ed-
iting of results
•	 there must be two concordant ABO and RhD re-
cords on file for that patient
•	 no clinically significant antibodies have been detect-
ed presently or historically.
Transfusion laboratories may also adhere to additional 
locally determined rules, for example only donor units 
that have been electronically entered onto the computer 
system (via barcode scanning) being considered suitable 
for electronic issue. Not all laboratories perform elec-
tronic crossmatch, as some may not be equipped with 
automated analysers or do not have a laboratory com-
puter system that is capable of processing the required 
algorithm.
Immediate spin crossmatch is designed principally to 
detect ABO incompatibility. It may be used in an emer-
gency when there is insufficient time to perform a full 
antibody screen. It may also be performed when the cri-
teria for electronic issue are not fully met, for example 
if a sample has been run on an automated analyser that 
has not been able to interpret the group correctly. This 
could be caused by weak expression of anti-A, anti-B or 
RhD. It is also important that there is no record of the 
patient having clinically significant antibodies presently 
or ­historically. This is a manual technique performed 
in tubes: the patient’s plasma and donor red cells are 
­incubated and then centrifuged to check for haemagglu-
tination or haemolysis that would indicate ABO compat-
ibility. Using this technique, it takes 10–15 min for blood 
to be issued from the laboratory.
Full crossmatch is performed if time or equipment 
availability do not permit a sample to be processed on a 
blood grouping analyser, or following automatic process-
ing if the patient is known to have clinically significant 
­antibodies presently or historically. Some laboratories 
may not have adopted the immediate spin or the elec-
tronic crossmatch and therefore continue to use the full 
crossmatch routinely. In this procedure, the patient’s 
plasma is incubated with donor units and checked for 
compatibility using the IAT technique described in the 
previous section. Using this technique, it takes 45 min for 
blood to be issued from the laboratory.
Investigation of suspected transfusion 
reaction
Serious or life-threatening acute reactions are very rare. 
Acute haemolytic transfusion reactions are most com-
monly a consequence of errors in taking or labelling the 
sample, collecting wrong blood from the blood bank, in-
adequate checking of the product at the bedside or labo-
ratory errors. Symptoms, such as the patient having a 
feeling of impending doom, agitation, flushing or pain at 
the venepuncture site or in the abdomen, flank or chest 
can occur after transfusion of only a few drops of blood. 
Clinical signs include fever and hypotension; general-
ized oozing from wounds or puncture sites can occur and 
there may be haemoglobinaemia or haemoglobinuria. 
Life-threatening transfusion reactions can also occur 
with platelet and FFP transfusions, for example owing 
to bacterial contamination or transfusion-related acute 
lung injury.
Following a suspected transfusion reaction, urgent 
blood tests (full blood count, assessment of kidney and 
liver function), along with assessment of the urine for hae-
moglobinuria, should be undertaken. The donor units and 
giving set should be returned to the laboratory, along with 
a fresh blood sample. The blood sample and donor units 
along with the original ‘group and save’ sample are then 
tested retrospectively for compatibility. At this point, it is 
also important to confirm the blood group of any units 
transfused and send the giving set and donor packs for cul-
turing. Blood cultures should be taken if the patient has 
a persistent fever, and a coagulation screen performed to 
exclude developing DIC if the reaction is severe.
Haemolytic disease of the newborn
Haemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) is a condition 
in which the neonatal red cells have a shortened lifespan 
because antibodies of maternal origin have crossed the 
placenta and coated them. These cells are then removed 
by the immune system. The mother will have produced 
the antibodies following fetal–maternal haemorrhage. It 
is not uncommon in pregnancy for small ‘silent’ bleeds 
to occur that are too small for detection. Antibodies that 
cause HDN are of the IgG class. The most common 
cause of HDN is ABO incompatibility, in which cases the 
haemolysis is usually mild. More severe cases of HDN 
can be caused by anti-D, anti-c and anti-K. Anti-K sup-
presses neonatal red cell production as the K antigen is 
one of the first antigens to be expressed on the red cells 
during red cell production.
Standard UK antenatal practice is that samples are 
taken for blood group and antibody screening when 
the patient is booked for antenatal care (8–12 weeks of 
gestation) and again at 28 weeks. If the mother is RhD 
negative, samples are also sent at delivery. Expectant 
mothers who have produced antibodies during preg-
nancy require close monitoring. Depending on when 
the antibody is first detected, BCSH guidelines state 
that grouping and antibody screening should be per-
formed and antibody titre determined every four weeks 
up to the 28th week of pregnancy and then every two 
weeks thereafter. The antibody titre can be used as a 
guide to the potential severity of HDN, with the excep-
tion of anti-K for which there is no quantitative test and 
little correlation between concentration and the severity 
of HDN.
In the UK, the incidence of HDN caused by ­anti-D 
has been reduced following the implementation of na-
tional anti-D prophylaxis programmes for antenatal 
women. Pregnant women who are RhD-negative are 
given prophylactic anti-D sufficient to deal with any 
silent bleeds. Routine prophylaxis can either be given 
as two doses of 500 IU anti-D administered at 28 weeks 
and then 34  weeks of gestation or a single dose of 
	
26  Introduction to haematology and transfusion science	
513
1500 IU administered at 28 weeks. At delivery, an RhD 
negative mother is given more anti-D if the baby is 
RhD positive. The amount they receive depends upon 
the results of a Kleihauer test, which is a slide test for 
the number of fetal cells in the maternal circulation (see 
Fig. 26.21). If any sensitizing events occur during the 
pregnancy, it will be necessary to administer a top-up 
dose of anti-D.
Blood products
Red cells
Red cells are the most common blood product issued by a 
transfusion laboratory. Indications for red cell transfusion 
include active bleeding, acute anaemia caused by trauma or 
surgery, and chronic anaemia secondary to malignancy. For 
surgery in which blood loss is expected, red cells are cross-
matched in advance in accordance with a maximum surgical 
blood ordering schedule (a schedule of the number of red 
cell units routinely crossmatched for each type of elective 
surgical procedure). Red cell concentrates have a maximum 
shelf-life of 35 days and must be stored at 4 ± 2 °C.
Transfusion of emergency group O RhD negative 
blood is an important option in life-threatening situations 
when there is insufficient time to provide crossmatched 
blood. These units must be easily available especially to 
the emergency department and theatres. The criteria for 
the selection of donor units should be determined locally, 
for example negative for the C and E Rh antigens and the 
Kell antigen, low titre of ABO antibodies and cytomega-
lovirus negative.
Platelets
Platelet transfusions are indicated for the prevention and 
treatment of haemorrhage in patients with thrombocyto-
penia or defective platelet function. They are, however, 
contraindicated in post transfusion purpura, thrombotic 
thrombocytopenia purpura and heparin induced thrombo-
cytopenia as they would increase the risk of thrombosis. 
Platelet concentrates can be produced by pooling together 
platelets from whole blood donations or by obtaining 
platelets by apheresis. Platelets must be stored at 22 ± 2 °C 
and have a shelf-life of up to seven days with continuous 
gentle agitation.
Fresh frozen plasma
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) contains all clotting factors found 
in plasma. Indications for its use are limited but it is most 
often used in patients with massive bleeding where clot-
ting factors are being consumed or are diluted owing to the 
­administration of large volumes of red cells or crystalloids. It 
must be stored at < −25 °C and for a maximum of 24 months. 
It is most effective if used within four hours of thawing but 
can be stored at 4 °C post thawing for up to 24 h.
Cryoprecipitate
Cryoprecipitate is a plasma fraction rich in fibronectin, 
fibrinogen, factor VIII and von Willebrand factor. It is 
used particularly in patients who have low plasma fibrino-
gen concentrations such as during massive transfusions 
and in DIC. Like FFP, it must be stored at < −25 °C and 
for a maximum of 24 months.
Factor concentrates
Factor concentrates can be either fractionated or recom-
binant. Fractionated products are produced by pooling 
multiple donations, which increases the risk of viral trans-
mission to the recipient, making recombinant products 
the preferred option. Recombinant factor concentrates 
are used in patients with inherited deficiencies of clot-
ting factors, either prophylactically or during bleeding 
episodes (see p. 509). Prothrombin complex concentrate, 
rich in factors II, VII, IX and X, is used for the emer-
gency correction of warfarin-induced bleeding. Factor 
VII concentrate, although only licensed for use in inher-
ited or acquired haemophilia with significant inhibitors 
or Glanzmann thrombasthenia (a platelet function disor-
der), is being increasingly used if life-threatening bleed-
ing persists despite optimization of laboratory measured 
clotting and platelet parameters.
Risks of transfusion
The incidence of adverse events caused by blood trans-
fusion is low, although the consequences are potentially 
severe. The main adverse risk is that of receiving the in-
correct blood component. Strict procedures are in place 
to ensure vein to vein traceability of all blood products 
and to reduce the risks of misidentification of either the 
patient or donor. The very rare but fatal complication of 
transfusion-associated graft versus host disease, whereby 
immunocompetent donor lymphocytes are infused into 
an immunocompromised patient (from bone marrow 
transplantation or other defects in T cell immunity), is 
prevented by the irradiation of blood products to inac-
tivate any residual white cells. The risk of transmitting 
infections is very small provided that appropriate screen-
ing and selection of donors is in place.
A
B
C
FIGURE  26.21  ■  Kleihauer film. There is a good distinction be-
tween the three cell types: maternal cells (A), fetal cells (B) and 
white cells (C). The presence of RhD positive fetal cells is con-
firmed by flow cytometry.
514	
clinical biochemistry
Regulations
In the UK, blood transfusion laboratories have to com-
ply with a range of specific regulations and standards 
of practice, which are monitored by the Medicines and 
Healthcare Regulatory Authority (MHRA). The key 
standards are incorporated into UK law, making in-
fringement a criminal offence. Adverse incidents asso-
ciated with blood transfusion must be reported to the 
MHRA.
CONCLUSION
•	 The full blood count is the most requested test 
profile in haematology and is a valuable first line 
screening test from which further investigations can 
be generated.
•	 Blood film examination is an essential part of a hae-
matological investigation, as valuable information 
can be obtained from cell morphology.
•	 Prothrombin time, activated partial thromboplastin 
time, thrombin time, D-dimer and fibrinogen mea-
surements are useful screening tests for coagulation 
disorders but should be interpreted within the clini-
cal context.
•	 The blood transfusion laboratory performs a vi-
tal role in the provision of safe and effective blood 
product support.
•	 Antibody identification is an essential procedure in 
the prevention of transfusion reactions and haemo-
lytic disease of the newborn.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We would like to thank our colleagues Rebecca Pleasance, 
Gemma Greenall and Colin Greig, who critically re-
viewed the material in this chapter and made many help-
ful suggestions. Rebecca Pleasance also provided the 
photographs and some of the text used in Figures 26.4 
and 26.11.
Further reading
Bain BJ. Blood cells. 4th revised ed. Chichester: Wiley–Blackwell; 2006.
Bain BJ, Bates I, Laffan MA et al. editors. Dacie and Lewis practical 
haematology. 11th ed. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2012.
British Committee for Standards in Haematology Blood Transfusion 
Task Force. Guidelines for pre-transfusion compatibility procedures 
in blood transfusion laboratories. 2012a. www.bcshguidelines.com/
documents/Compat_Guideline_for_submission_to_TTF_011012.
pdf [Accessed 23 January 2013].
British Committee for Standards in Haematology Blood Transfusion 
Task Force. Guidelines on the investigation and management of acute 
transfusion reactions; 2012b. www.bcshguidelines.com/documents/
ATR_final_version_to_pdf [Accessed 23 January 2013].
Daniels G. Human blood groups. 3rd ed. Chichester: Wiley–Blackwell; 2013.
Hoffbrand AV, Moss P, editors. Essential haematology. 6th ed. Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell; 2011.
Key N, Makris M, O’Shaughnessy D et al. editors. Practical hemostasis 
and thrombosis. Chichester: Wiley–Blackwell; 2009.
Klein HG, Anstee DJ, editors. Mollison’s blood transfusion in clinical 
medicine. 12th ed. Chichester: Wiley–Blackwell; 2011.
Murphy MF, Pamphilon DH, editors. Practical transfusion medicine. 
3rd ed. Chichester: Wiley–Blackwell; 2009.
Provan D, Singer CRJ, Baglin T et  al. Oxford handbook of clinical 
haematology. In: 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2009.
Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL et al. editors. WHO classification 
of tumours of haematopoietic and lymphoid tissues. 4th ed. Geneva: 
WHO; 2008.
515
C H A P T E R  2 7
Biochemical aspects of anaemia
Rebecca Frewin
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  515
THE FORMATION, STRUCTURE AND 
FUNCTION OF THE NORMAL RED 
CELL  515
Formation  515
Structure of the red cell  516
Function of the red cell  517
ANAEMIA  517
ANAEMIAS ASSOCIATED WITH A  
REDUCTION IN RED CELL 
PRODUCTION  517
Iron deficiency anaemia  517
The megaloblastic anaemias resulting from 
vitamin B12 and folate deficiency  520
Anaemias due to reduction in red cell  
production: inherited causes  524
Anaemias associated with reduction  
in red cell production: acquired 
causes  524
ANAEMIAS ASSOCIATED WITH  
INCREASED RED CELL LOSS  524
Bleeding  524
Haemolysis  524
Causes of haemolytic anaemias  525
Inherited haemolytic anaemia  525
Acquired haemolytic  
anaemias  528
DIAGNOSIS OF HAEMOLYSIS  529
Clinical evidence  529
Laboratory investigations  529
CONCLUSION  532
INTRODUCTION
Blood is often considered a liquid organ that acts as the trans-
port system of the body. It is composed of a liquid (plasma) in 
which cells are suspended. There are three types of cells. Red 
cells are the most numerous; they play a vital role in the provi-
sion of oxygen to the organs and peripheral tissues. The white 
cells comprise the phagocytes, granulocytes and monocytes, 
which are mobilized in the blood to sites of infection and in-
flammation where they pass into the tissues to engulf and de-
stroy bacteria and other objects deemed foreign by the body, 
and the lymphocytes which, via the secretion of antibodies 
and cytokines, coordinate defence against acute infection and 
maintain long term immune surveillance. Finally, the plate-
lets, in conjunction with coagulation proteins in the plasma, 
allow prompt and effective haemostasis in the event of injury.
This chapter will focus on the structure and function 
of the red cells, or erythrocytes, and the pathophysiologi-
cal mechanisms underlying the disorders of red cells that 
result in anaemia.
THE FORMATION, STRUCTURE AND 
FUNCTION OF THE NORMAL RED CELL
Formation
The first primitive blood cells develop in the embryo 
during the third week after conception and are seen in 
the yolk sac. These cells migrate to the liver and spleen, 
which become the major sites of blood formation (eryth-
ropoiesis) until after birth. From approximately five 
months’ gestation, erythropoiesis begins to occur in 
bone marrow. This is called medullary erythropoiesis 
(as opposed to extramedullary erythropoiesis, when cells 
are produced in other sites such as the liver and spleen). 
By birth, medullary erythropoiesis is occurring in the 
marrow cavity of nearly every bone in the body. With 
maturity, many of the marrow cavities become replaced 
with fat and, by adulthood, erythropoiesis is limited to 
the axial skeleton (sternum, vertebrae and pelvis only). 
The other sites retain the ability to produce blood cells if 
marrow function is compromised by various pathological 
processes.
Red cells survive for approximately 120  days and 
therefore the bone marrow needs to generate new hae-
mopoietic cells continuously. It is estimated that the av-
erage adult requires synthesis of 10
11 red cells per day. 
Red cells originate from pluripotent uncommitted stem 
cells that are capable of producing any type of blood 
cell. The earliest recognizable committed progenitor for 
erythroid cells is the colony forming unit – granulocyte, 
erythroid, megakaryocyte, macrophage (CFU-GEMM). 
This has a limited self-renewal capacity and may mature 
into the various haemopoietic lineages depending on 
various stimuli within the bone marrow microenviron-
ment. The first unique erythroid progenitor is the burst 
516	
Clinical biochemistry
forming unit – erythroid (BFU-E), from which further 
progeny develop into recognizable erythroid cells (see 
Fig.  27.1). Maturation of the erythroid cells involves 
primarily haemoglobin synthesis, which is vital for the 
subsequent function of the cell, and also condensa-
tion and eventual extrusion of the nucleus, removing 
the ability of the cell to proliferate. This process takes 
approximately seven days and results in the release 
of a ­reticulocyte, an immature red cell slightly larger 
than the mature red cell with a blue tinged cytoplasm 
­owing to residual nuclear material. The reticulocyte 
then ­travels from the marrow to the spleen where the 
residual nuclear remnants are removed, producing the 
mature red cell.
Thus, effective erythropoiesis requires a delicate 
balance between maintaining a pluripotent stem cell 
pool and allowing the development and terminal dif-
ferentiation of the progeny to mature erythroid cells. 
The exact process by which this is achieved has not 
been elucidated but involves many transcription factors 
such as runt-related transcription factor 1 (RUNX1), 
acute myeloid leukaemia 1 ­(AML-1) protein, TEL on-
cogene (ETV6) and mixed lineage leukaemia (MLL) 
protein orchestrating, either alone or in conjunction 
with others, the intricate signalling processes required 
to produce mature erythroid cells. The dysregulation of 
these transcription factors, often via genetic mutations, 
results in a range of haematological malignancies that 
afford scientists a means of studying the role of these 
factors in normal erythropoiesis. GATA-1, with its co-
factor FOG-1 (friend of GATA-1), is one of the most 
important transcription factors involved in the terminal 
differentiation of the erythroid cell. Its name is derived 
from its ability to bind to DNA sites with the consensus 
sequence (AT)GATA(AG) within the promoter regions 
of many of the genes encoding red cell membrane pro-
teins and enzymes.
Erythropoiesis 
is 
the 
production 
of 
mature, 
­haemoglobin-rich, red cells that carry oxygen to the tis-
sues of the body. It is therefore not surprising that hypoxia 
is a major driver of erythropoiesis via the induction of 
hypoxia inducible factor (HIF), a transcription factor piv-
otal to coordinating the body’s response to hypoxia. This 
binds to hypoxia response elements (HREs), resulting in 
the activation of genes for proteins that play a vital role 
in oxygen delivery, such as vascular endothelial growth 
factor (leading to new blood vessel formation) and eryth-
ropoietin (a hormone which stimulates erythropoiesis).
Structure of the red cell
Red cells have a biconcave disc shape and a membrane 
structure that gives them particular strength and de-
formability to allow their passage through capillary net-
works, allowing the effective oxygenation of the tissues. 
The membrane consists of a phospholipid bilayer, with 
charged hydrophilic phosphatidyl groups forming the 
outer and inner surfaces, and a hydrophobic interior. 
Pluripotential
stem cell
CFU-L Common
lymphoid progenitor
cell
CFU-GEMM
Common myeloid
progenitor cell
BFU-E
CFU-E
Red cells
CFU-MEG
Platelets
CFU-GMEo
CFU-GM
CFU-M
Lymphocytes
& natural killer
cells
Monocytes
CFU-G
Neutrophils
CFU-Eo
Eosinophils
CFU-Baso
Basophils
FIGURE  27.1  ■  Schematic representation of haemopoiesis. BFU, burst forming unit; CFU, colony forming unit; E, erythroid; Eo, 
­eosinophil; GEMM, granulocyte, erythroid, monocyte, megakaryocyte; GM, granulocyte, monocyte; L, lymphocyte; M, monocyte; 
MEG, megakaryocyte.
	
27  Biochemical aspects of anaemia	
517
It is stabilized by integral membrane proteins that span 
the lipid bilayer, providing numerous functions, includ-
ing the transmembrane passage of ions and interaction 
with the proteins of the cytoskeleton below. The cyto-
skeletal protein spectrin forms tetramers that aggregate 
into a hexameric scaffolding that lies on the cytoplas-
mic surface of the cell membrane to preserve its shape 
and structure. The ankyrins anchor membrane pro-
teins to spectrin and maintains correct orientation of 
membrane ion channels. Abnormalities in any of these 
proteins result in an alteration of shape and flexibility 
of the red cell with a consequent reduction in survival. 
This is the pathological basis of the inherited haemo-
lytic anaemias, of which the commonest is hereditary 
spherocytosis.
Function of the red cell
The most important function of the red cells is to trans-
port oxygen from the lungs to the tissues and to return 
the carbon dioxide they produce to the lungs. Normal 
adult haemoglobin consists of two α globin chains and 
two β globin chains; a haem prosthetic group is bound 
to each chain. Haem comprises a tetrapyrrole IXα ring 
bound to a single Fe
2+ ion. The binding of a single mole-
cule of oxygen to a haem group results in a change in con-
formation of the haemoglobin molecule that promotes 
further oxygen binding to the other subunits. These 
­allosteric interactions allow for the efficient uptake and 
release of oxygen. In order to achieve this, the red cell 
requires a source of both ATP and reducing power. ATP 
generation is vital to maintain the deformability of the 
membrane and to regulate water and ion exchange. The 
reducing power of the red cell is required both to protect 
against the oxidation of the lipid bilayer and to reduce the 
methaemoglobin that is formed when ferrous iron (Fe
2+) 
is oxidized to its ferric form (Fe
3+) back to functional de-
oxyhaemoglobin. Anaerobic glycolysis is the main path-
way responsible for supplying the cell with both ATP and 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (reduced) (NADH), a 
cofactor for methaemoglobin reductase, the enzyme that 
catalyses the reduction of methaemoglobin to functional 
haemoglobin (see Fig. 27.2).
The pentose phosphate pathway produces nico-
tinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (reduced) 
(NADPH) and pentose sugars. The latter are returned to 
the mainstream of glycolysis if necessary. Reduced nico-
tinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate is essential for 
keeping glutathione in the reduced state, thus enabling 
it to perform its antioxidant functions. These consist 
mainly of eliminating hydrogen peroxide and free radi-
cals and thus preventing oxidation of the red cell mem-
brane or haemoglobin. The Rapoport–Luebering shunt 
is responsible for producing 2,3-diphosphoglycerate 
(2,3-DPG) from the 1,3-diphosphoglycerate that is pro-
duced in anaerobic glycolysis. 2,3-Diphosphoglycerate 
modulates the oxygen affinity of haemoglobin (see 
Chapter 5).
Various non-glycolytic enzymes contribute to red 
cell metabolism in a complementary fashion. Some of 
these are involved in glutathione metabolism as shown 
in Figure  27.2. Others catalyse nucleotide metabolism 
and participate in adenylate salvage pathways. During 
maturation of the reticulocyte, the ribosomal DNA is 
catabolized to its constituent nucleotides by the enzyme 
ribonuclease. The resulting nucleotides of adenine are 
useful to the cell and are processed through appropriate 
salvage pathways. Nucleotides of pyrimidine, however, 
can be harmful and must be eliminated. This is achieved 
through their dephosphorylation by a specific enzyme, 
pyrimidine 5′-nucleotidase, following which the resultant 
nucleosides leave the cell by passive diffusion.
As the red cell matures, it extrudes its nucleus and 
mitochondria, and becomes incapable of protein synthe-
sis. Thus, none of the enzymes contained within the red 
cell can be replaced and the decline in metabolic activity 
results in a more rigid and fragile cell membrane. This 
becomes damaged during its passage through the capil-
laries and the red cell is eventually removed by cells of the 
reticuloendothelial system, particularly the macrophages 
of the spleen.
ANAEMIA
Anaemia is defined as a blood haemoglobin concentra-
tion below that which would be expected for a healthy 
individual of that age or sex. Regardless of its cause, 
the symptoms of anaemia are similar, reflecting the ef-
fects of poor oxygen delivery to tissues. These symptoms 
may often be vague and include tiredness, headaches and 
breathlessness.
Anaemia may be classified on the basis of the size of 
the red cells (microcytic, normocytic and macrocytic). 
This chapter, however, will discuss anaemias using a clas-
sification based on kinetic aspects of red cell production 
as follows:
•	 reduction in red cell production
•	 nutritional deficiencies
•	 inherited causes
•	 acquired causes
•	 increased red cell loss
•	 bleeding
•	 haemolysis (inherited or acquired).
ANAEMIAS ASSOCIATED WITH A 
REDUCTION IN RED CELL PRODUCTION
Iron deficiency anaemia
Iron deficiency anaemia is one of the commonest causes 
of anaemia worldwide and has significant socioeconomic 
consequences. Other haematinics essential for adequate 
erythropoiesis are vitamin B12 and folate.
Iron physiology
Iron plays a vital role in many metabolic processes. It 
is an essential component of both haemoglobin and 
­myoglobin and also plays an important part in elec-
tron transfer and the generation of energy (e.g. in cy-
tochrome c oxidase and catalase). Non-haem iron is 
also important in DNA synthesis as it is essential for 
518	
Clinical biochemistry
GLUCOSE
G6P
NAPD
NAPDH
GSH
GSH
2H+
FDP
G3P
DHAP
F6P
R.5.P
CO2
*Hexokinase
*Phosphoglucose
isomerase
*G6P & 6PG
Dehydrogenases
*Glutathione
reductase
Glutathione
peroxidase
Glutathione
synthetase*
*Phosphofructokinase
*Fructosediphosphate
aldolase
Triosephosphate
isomerase
G3P Dehydrogenase
Diphospho-
glyceromutase
Diphospho-
glycerate phosphatase
Phosphoglyceromutase
*Phosphoglycerate
kinase
Enolase
*Pyruvate kinase
Lactate
dehydrogenase
Pi
ATP
ADP
ATP
ADP
NAD
1,3-DPG
3PG
ATP-ASE
*Adenylate
kinase
2PG
PEP
NADH
2,3-DPG
PYRUVATE
LACTATE
ADP
ATP
ADP
ATP
NADH
NAD
Pi
ADP
(2)
Adenosine
kinase
*Adenosine
deaminase
Nucleoside
phosphorylase
RIBOSE 1-P
RIBOSE 5-P
R 1,5-P2
HYPOXANTHINE
IMP
UMP 
CMP
PRPP
ADENINE
Adenine phosphoribosyl
transferase
Ribosephosphate
pyrophosphokinase
        Phospho-
   ribosyl
transferase
Phospho-
ribomutase
URIDINE
CYTIDINE
Pyrimidine
nucleotidase*
ADENOSINE
INOSINE
AMP
ADP
ATP
PPi
PPi
Pi
Pi
Glycine
γ-Glutamyl-
cysteine
GSH
GSSG
H2O2
H2O
ADP
ATP
γ-Glutamyl-
cysteine*
synthetase
Cysteine
Glutamic
acid
ADP
ATP
H2O
NH3
AMP
ATP
Pi
FIGURE 27.2  ■  Pathways of energy metabolism in human erythrocytes. Glucose 6-phosphate (G6P) may be degraded anaerobically 
to two molecules of lactate via the Embden–Meyerhof (glycolytic) pathway (on the left) or oxidatively via the dehydrogenases of the 
pentose phosphate pathway. Ribose 5-phosphate (R5P) can re-enter anaerobic glycolysis after conversion to fructose 6-phosphate 
(F6P) and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate by enzymes of the terminal pentose phosphate pathway and is also a product of adenosine or 
inosine degradation. 2,3-Diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) may be generated instead of ATP by diversion of triose through the ­Rapoport–
Luebering shunt. Glutathione may be directly synthesized from constituent amino acids, and its cycling from ­oxidized (GSSG) to 
­reduced form (GSH) is dependent on generation of reduced pyridine cofactor (NADPH). Asterisks (*) indicate those ­enzymes found 
to be defective in association with hereditary haemolytic anaemia. Abbreviations: ADP, adenosine diphosphate; AMP,  adenosine 
­monophosphate; ATP, adenosine triphosphate; ATPase, adenosine triphosphatase; CMP, cytidine monophosphate; DHAP, dihydroxy-
acetone phosphate; 1,3-DPG, 1,3-diphospholycerate; 2,3-DPG, 2,3-diphosphoglycerate; FDP, fructose 1,6-­diphosphate; F6P, fructose 
6-­phosphate; G3P, glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate; G6P, glucose 6-phosphate; GSH, reduced glutathione; GSSG, ­oxidized glutathi-
one; IMP, inosine monophosphate; NAD, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (oxidized); NADH, nicotinamide adenine ­dinucleotide 
­(reduced); NADP, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (oxidized); NADPH, nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate 
­(reduced); PEP, phosphoenolpyruvate; 2PG, 2-phosphoglycerate; 3PG, 3-phosphoglycerate; Pi, inorganic phosphate; PPi, inor-
ganic ­pyrophosphate; PRPP, phosphoribosyl pyrophosphate; RIP, ribose 1-phosphate; R1,5-P2, ribose 1,5-diphosphate; R5P, ribose 
5-­phosphate; UMP, uridine monophosphate.
	
27  Biochemical aspects of anaemia	
519
the function of ribonucleotide reductase. Many of these 
roles are aided by the fact that iron may exist in two 
stable oxidized states, as soluble ferrous (Fe
2+) iron and 
as insoluble ferric (Fe
3+) iron.
Iron requirements. The total body content of iron in 
normal adults is 3–4 g (see Table  27.1). Approximately 
two-thirds is contained in haemoglobin and the remain-
der in myoglobin, iron containing enzymes and the re-
ticuloendothelial cells. Approximately 30 mg of iron is 
required per 24 h for haemoglobin in new red cells and 
the majority of this is supplied from the reticuloendothe-
lial macrophages that recycle the iron from senescent red 
cells. However, approximately 1 mg of iron is lost from 
the body every 24 h and needs to be replaced from dietary 
sources. Women of childbearing age have additional 
blood loss from menses or pregnancy, resulting in a fur-
ther 0.5 mg average loss of iron per 24 h. Infants and ado-
lescents require additional iron during periods of rapid 
growth. A normal diet provides approximately 15 mg of 
iron but most is in the form of insoluble iron complexes 
and only 5–10% is absorbed.
Iron absorption. Absorption of iron occurs in the proxi-
mal duodenum. It is aided by the low pH of the hy-
drochloric acid secreted into the gastric lumen and the 
presence of reducing agents such as ascorbic acid, which 
help maintain the iron in the more soluble ferrous form. 
In contrast, other agents such as tannins, phytates and 
phosphates bind the iron within the intestinal lumen, in-
hibiting its absorption.
Although iron has an essential metabolic function, ex-
cess is toxic and therefore it is not surprising that iron 
metabolism is tightly regulated.
Hepcidin plays a critical role in iron metabolism. 
This 25 amino acid peptide is produced predominantly 
in the liver, from an 84 amino acid precursor. Its syn-
thesis is stimulated by iron and inflammation (driven 
by IL-6) and inhibited by iron deficiency, hypoxia (via 
HIF) and ­conditions such as ineffective erythropoi-
esis where the concentration of growth differentiating 
­factor 15  ­(GDF-15) in the developing erythroblasts is 
increased. Hepcidin negatively regulates iron homoeo-
stasis by binding to ferroportin: the resultant hepcidin–
ferroportin complex is phosphorylated, internalized by 
the cell, ubiquitinated and subsequently degraded in the 
lysosomes. Ferroportin is a transmembrane protein that 
functions as a basolateral exporter of iron, playing an 
essential role in the release of iron from macrophages, 
intestinal enterocytes and placental syncytiotropho-
blasts, allowing the uptake and transfer of iron by trans-
ferrin to sites of need. Thus the stimulation of hepcidin 
production results in reduced iron absorption and mobi-
lization (see Fig. 27.3). Genetic haemochromatosis (see 
Chapter 14), where there is significant iron accumula-
tion and deposition in various body tissues resulting in 
cirrhosis, cardiac failure and diabetes, is a consequence 
of a defect in the hepcidin pathway.
Iron transport and storage. Transferrin, a single chain 
polypeptide produced in the liver, acts as the plasma trans-
porter of iron, binding two molecules of ferric iron per 
molecule. The transferrin–iron complex binds to transfer-
rin receptors, cell surface glycoproteins ­consisting of two 
identical 95 kDa subunits linked by a disulphide bridge, 
localized on cells dependent on iron for function, e.g. for 
the production of haemoglobin, myoglobin or iron depen-
dent enzymes. After binding, the complex is internalized 
and degraded, releasing the iron. Ferritin is the primary 
iron storage protein, found in all tissues but especially 
the reticuloendothelial system, with small amounts in the 
plasma. Each molecule of ferritin can store up to 4000 at-
oms of iron and consists of 24 subunits of two different 
types, H and L. Variation in the proportion of H and L 
subunits results in molecular heterogeneity, for example 
heart and red cell ferritin contains more H subunits than 
ferritin from liver and spleen, which are rich in L subunits.
The synthesis of all the proteins involved in iron me-
tabolism is finely controlled at the molecular level by hav-
ing iron response elements (IREs) within their mRNA. 
In iron replete situations, iron response proteins (IRPs), 
present in the cytoplasm of many cells, are non-functional 
by virtue of the binding of an iron–sulphur complex. 
However, when the cell is iron deplete, the IRPs bind to 
IREs to stimulate the gene transcription of proteins that 
enhance iron absorptive capacity.
Causes of iron deficiency anaemia
Iron deficiency is most commonly secondary to blood 
loss, usually from gastrointestinal or menstrual sources. 
In the developing world, hookworm infestation resulting 
in gastrointestinal blood loss is the commonest cause of 
iron deficiency anaemia; the resultant reduced working 
capacity has significant socioeconomic impact. Coeliac 
disease, which is associated with flattening of the duo-
denal mucosal villi with subsequent malabsorption, ac-
counts for 5% of cases of iron deficiency. Other causes 
TABLE 27.1  The normal requirements and body stores of the vitamins and minerals essential 
for erythropoiesis
Vitamin
Dietary sources
Site of absorption
Body stores
Adult daily requirement
Iron
Red meats, fish, poultry, fortified 
cereals, beans, spinach
Duodenum and proximal 
jejunum
3–4 g
Male 1 mg
Female 1.6 mg
Folate
Dark green leafy vegetables, liver, 
dried beans and peas, fortified 
flours and cereals
Duodenum and upper 
jejunum
10 mg
100 μg
B12
Liver, kidney, shellfish, and other 
foodstuffs of animal origin
Distal ileum
2–3 mg
1 μg
520	
Clinical biochemistry
include inadequate dietary iron during periods of rapid 
growth such as puberty.
Clinical consequences of iron deficiency
Iron deficiency causes a hypochromic microcytic anaemia 
(see Chapter 26) with additional clinical features such as 
koilonychia (a spoon-shaped malformation of the nails), 
angular stomatitis, glossitis, alopecia and pica. There are 
concerns that significant iron deficiency in infants results 
in impaired mental development.
Laboratory determination of iron status
Red cell parameters. Iron deficiency is associated with a 
reduction in the red cell mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 
and mean cell haemoglobin concentration (MCHC).
Hypochromic red cells. Some automated analysers al-
low the determination of numbers of hypochromic red 
cells. Counts of >6% are suggestive of iron deficiency.
Serum iron. Measurement of serum iron concentration 
alone provides little useful information of iron status as 
values show considerable variation within normal indi-
viduals. Low concentrations are seen in iron deficiency 
but are also seen in the anaemia of chronic disease and 
after surgery.
Serum ferritin. This parameter provides an accurate 
reflection of iron stores in healthy individuals with nor-
mal concentrations ranging from 15 μg/L to 300 μg/L. 
However, it is an acute phase reactant and its concentra-
tion may therefore be falsely normal in iron deficiency 
with coexistent inflammation.
Serum iron binding capacity, transferrin and transfer-
rin saturation. In the plasma, each molecule of transfer-
rin binds up to two iron ions. Thus, the total iron binding 
capacity (TIBC) of plasma reflects serum transferrin con-
centration. It is raised in iron deficiency and pregnancy. 
Transferrin saturation is a ratio of serum iron concentra-
tion to TIBC expressed as a percentage. A value of <16% 
is suggestive of iron deficiency whereas elevated fasting 
transferrin saturations of >55% in males and >50% in 
females are suggestive of iron overload. In the anaemia of 
chronic disease, both serum iron and TIBC are reduced, 
thus the transferrin saturation is usually normal.
Serum transferrin receptor. As erythroblasts mature, 
cleavage releases the extracellular portion of the transferrin 
receptor into the plasma. The concentration of the trans-
ferrin receptor rises in iron deficiency but not in the anae-
mia of chronic disease. Transferrin receptor concentration 
can be measured by enzyme immunoassay, although the 
assay is only available in a few specialist centres.
Hepcidin. Assays for this protein are under development 
but as yet are poorly standardized. Controversy exists as 
to whether urinary or serum hepcidin measurements are 
superior.
Bone marrow aspiration. At present, staining bone 
marrow aspirates for iron is the ‘gold standard’ for assess-
ing iron deficiency.
The megaloblastic anaemias resulting from 
vitamin B12 and folate deficiency
The megaloblastic anaemias give rise to characteristic 
morphological appearances: the red cells are macro-
cytic and hypersegmented neutrophils are present (see 
Chapter 26). Ineffective erythropoiesis is apparent, mani-
fest in the serum by raised unconjugated bilirubin and 
reduced haptoglobin concentrations and markedly raised 
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) activity. Megaloblastosis 
arises when either drugs or deficiencies of cobalamin or 
folate interfere with DNA synthesis.
Hepcidin
Iron excess
Inflammation
Iron deficiency
Hypoxia
Ineffective
erythropoiesis
Degradation of
ferroportin
receptor
Reduced iron release
from macrophages
Reduced duodenal 
iron absorption
FIGURE 27.3  ■  Factors affecting hepcidin production by the liver and consequent iron absorption and utilization. When hepcidin pro-
duction is stimulated by conditions such as iron excess or inflammation, it binds to and results in the degradation of ferroportin in 
enterocytes and macrophages, preventing the absorption and utilization of iron. Conditions associated with iron deficiency or inef-
fective haemopoiesis inhibit hepcidin production, thereby resulting in iron accumulation.
	
27  Biochemical aspects of anaemia	
521
Folate metabolism
Folates are a group of compounds derived from pteroyl-
glutamic acid (see Fig. 27.4). Excellent dietary sources of 
folates include green leafy vegetables, liver, yeast and nuts 
(see Table 27.1).
Folate requirements. A normal diet in the developed 
world contains about 250 μg of folates per day but <1% 
of this is in the form of folic acid. The principal naturally 
occurring folates are tetrahydrofolate (THF), 5-methyl 
tetrahydrofolate (5-methyl THF) and 10-formyl tetrahy-
drofolate (10-formyl THF), which are polyglutamated. 
Total body folate in the adult is 10 mg, providing suffi-
cient stores for four months given a daily metabolic re-
quirement of 100 μg (see Table 27.1).
Absorption of folate. The majority of folate is absorbed 
in the upper small intestine, where pteroylpolyglutamate 
hydrolase on the mucosal brush border hydrolyses folate 
polyglutamates to the monoglutamate form. They are 
then converted to 5-methyl THF and transported by an 
active carrier mediated mechanism across the enterocytes 
and into the portal blood.
Within the plasma, one third of 5-methyl THF is 
loosely bound to albumin whilst the remainder is un-
bound. It is taken up by active transport into replicating 
cells. Here the folates play a vital role by acting as co-
enzymes in the transfer of single carbon groups in path-
ways involved in the synthesis of purines, pyrimidines (for 
DNA and RNA synthesis) and methionine (for methyl 
donor reactions) (see Table 27.2).
Causes of folate deficiency
•	 Nutritional.
•	 Malabsorption: diseases of the small intestine, co-
eliac disease, tropical sprue.
•	 Excessive utilization or loss: pregnancy, prematu-
rity, haemolytic anaemias, skin conditions, inflam-
matory conditions, haemodialysis.
•	 Antifolate drugs: anticonvulsants, trimethoprim, 
methotrexate.
Features of folate deficiency
Folate deficiency is thought to cause megaloblastic anae-
mia by inhibiting thymidylate synthesis, which is required 
for DNA production. It causes a macrocytic anaemia with 
hypersegmented neutrophils and a megaloblastic bone 
marrow. It may be associated with a pancytopenia. For 
further details on morphology, see Chapter 26.
Laboratory determination of folate status
Both serum and red cell folate concentrations can be 
measured by immunoassay. Serum folate concentration 
is affected by recent dietary intake and may be low after 
only a short period of inadequate diet. Conversely, serum 
folate concentration may rise in vitamin B12 deficiency 
owing to a blockage in the conversion of 5-methyl THF, 
the major circulating form, to THF.
Red cell folate may be a more accurate test of body 
folate status as its concentration is not affected by recent 
diet. However, red cell folate concentration is also re-
duced in vitamin B12 deficiency.
Vitamin B12 metabolism
Structure of vitamin B12. The vitamin B12 (cobalamin) 
molecule is centred on an atom of cobalt; this is the only 
known function of cobalt in humans. The surrounding cor-
rin ring is made up of four pyrrole units in a similar manner 
to porphyrins (see Fig. 27.5), with variations in two substi-
tutions above and below the ring giving rise to the various 
forms of the vitamin. Vitamin B12 is mainly contained within 
the mitochondria in the 5′­-deoxyadenosyl form, where it 
plays a role in the conversion of l-methylmalonyl-CoA to 
succinyl-CoA. The other main form, methylcobalamin, is 
found within the cytoplasm and plasma where it is a cofac­
tor for the conversion of homocysteine to methionine, a 
vital part of the pathway that creates a universal methyl 
­donor (see Fig. 27.6).
Source of vitamin B12. Vitamin B12 is synthesized only by 
microorganisms and the only source for humans is food 
of animal origin. Liver is the richest source of vitamin 
B12, but it is present in almost all animal products, includ-
ing milk. No vegetable food source contains significant 
amounts of vitamin B12 unless contaminated by bacteria 
(see Table 27.1).
Vitamin B12 requirements. An adult human requires 
only 1 μg of vitamin B12 per 24 h and has stores of 2–3 mg. 
Thus, it can take 3–4 years for vitamin B12 deficiency to 
develop (see Table 27.1).
Absorption of vitamin B12. Dietary vitamin B12 is bound 
to food proteins and must be freed by gastric acid. The 
parietal cells of the stomach secrete the glycoprotein 
­intrinsic factor (IF), which combines with ­vitamin B12 to 
form a complex, which resists proteolytic digestion. The 
vitamin B12–IF complex passes through the small intes-
tine until it binds to cubilin, a surface receptor on the en-
terocytes of the terminal ileum, where it is internalized. 
The enterocytes of the ileum have a limited ­capacity to 
absorb vitamin B12 because of a limited number of recep-
tor sites; about half of a dose of 1 μg of vitamin B12 will 
be absorbed, the proportion falling markedly with higher 
doses. The enterocytes have a refractory period of about 
6 h before they can absorb any more vitamin B12.
Within the enterocyte, the vitamin B12 is liberated and, 
after binding to the β-globulin carrier transcobalamin II 
(TCII), is released into the blood. The TCII–vitamin B12 
complex is termed ‘holotranscobalamin’. Transcobalamin 
II readily releases the vitamin B12 to the bone marrow and 
other tissues, and, for this reason, holotranscobalamin 
is also described as ‘active B12’. Other transcobalamins 
also exist; transcobalamin I and III derive mainly from 
specific granules found in neutrophils and bind vitamin 
B12 tightly, in contrast to TCII, and do not release it into 
the tissues. Congenital TCII deficiency can occur, the 
­affected infant presenting with megaloblastic anaemia a 
few weeks after birth.
522	
Clinical biochemistry
CH2
HN
H2N
OH
10
9
1
N
N
CH
4
8
5
6
7
2
3
N
CH2
CH2
COOH
O
C
CH
COOH
CH2
HN
H2N
OH
N
CH2
N
CH2
CH2
COOH
O
C
CH
COOH
H
N
N
N
CH2
HN
H2N
OH
N
CH2
N
CH2
CH2
CO OH
O
C
CH
COOH
H
N
N
N
H
H
n
CH2
HN
H2N
OH
N
CH2
N
CH2
CH2
CO OH
O
C
CH
COOH
H
N
N
N
H
n
CH3
CH2
HN
H2N
OH
N
CH2
N
CH2
CH2
CO OH
O
C
CH
COOH
H
N
N
N
H
n
CHO
Pteroyl glutamic acid
Dihydropteroyl glutamic acid
(Dihydrofolate)
Tetrahydropteroyl glutamic acid
(Tetrahydrofolate)
5-methyl tetrahydrofolate
10-formyl tetrahydrofolate
 Pteridine
para-aminobenzoic acid
Glutamic acid
N
N
H
H
H
H
H
FIGURE 27.4  ■  Pteroylglutamic acid and derivatives. The nitrogen atoms in the 5 and 10 positions are the sites involved in single carbon 
transfer reactions. Tetrahydrofolate and its 5-methyl and 10-formyl derivatives are shown as polyglutamates.
	
27  Biochemical aspects of anaemia	
523
Causes of vitamin B12 deficiency
•	 Nutritional: this is rare and is only seen in very strict 
vegans.
•	 Malabsorption: the commonest cause of vitamin 
B12 malabsorption is the autoimmune condition, 
pernicious anaemia, where gastric atrophy de-
velops secondary to an inflammatory infiltrate. 
Autoantibodies to gastric parietal cells are seen in 
90% of individuals with the condition and 50% de-
velop IF autoantibodies, which either prevent vita-
min B12–IF complex formation (binding antibodies) 
or the subsequent attachment of the vitamin B12 to 
the enterocyte mucosa (blocking antibodies).
•	 Gastric causes: such as total or partial gastrectomy.
•	 Intestinal causes: ileal resection and diseases of the 
terminal ileum such as Crohn disease or tropical 
sprue prevent vitamin B12 absorption. Deficiency is 
also associated with intestinal blind loop syndrome 
(because of metabolism of the vitamin B12 by the 
overgrowth of intestinal bacteria) and fish tape-
worm (Diphyllobothrium latum), which binds cobala-
min, preventing its absorption.
•	 Acquired: prolonged nitrous oxide exposure oxidiz-
es methylcobalamin to an inactive state and results 
in functional vitamin B12 deficiency. This has been 
seen in dentists and anaesthetists. Metformin may 
be associated with low serum vitamin B12 concentra-
tions. The exact mechanism for this is unknown but 
it has been postulated to be caused by metformin 
interfering with the calcium dependent channels re-
sponsible for the ileal absorption of the vitamin.
Features of vitamin B12 deficiency
Vitamin B12 is a coenzyme in the interconversion of the 
different forms of folate (see Fig. 27.6), so its deficiency 
results in a megaloblastic anaemia identical to that seen 
in folate deficiency. Deficiency may also result in neu-
rological symptoms (e.g. peripheral neuropathy, dys-
function of the posterior columns of the spinal cord and 
sometimes psychotic illnesses and dementia). The pre-
cise mechanism for this has not been elucidated but may 
be linked with impaired conversion of homocysteine to 
methionine, resulting in either reduced availability of 
S-adenosylmethionine impairing sphingomyelin synthe-
sis or in the toxic accumulation of the homocysteine me-
tabolite S-adenosylhomocysteine.
Laboratory determination of vitamin B12 status
Serum vitamin B12. This is usually measured by au-
tomated immunoassay. Normal concentrations are 
160–1000 ng/L. A low concentration is not specific for 
vitamin B12 deficiency and may be found in one-third of 
patients with folate deficiency and in normal pregnancy. 
TABLE 27.2  Reactions in which pteroylglutamate 
acid derivatives are involved
Folate derivative  
involved as:
Reaction
Single carbon donor
 
10-formyl tetrahydrofolate 
(THF)
Purine synthesis
5,10-methylene THF
Thymine synthesis
5,10-methylene THF
Synthesis of glycine from 
CO2 and NH4
+
5-methyl THF
Homocysteine → 
methionine
Single carbon acceptor
 
THF (forms 5,10-methylene 
THF)
Serine → glycine
THF (forms 5-formimino 
THF)
Breakdown of histidine
C
CH3
CH3
C
Co
CH
N
N
N
N
FIGURE 27.5  ■ The corrin ring surrounding an atom of cobalt that 
forms the core of cobalamin. The other two ligands to cobalt 
(above and below the plane of the corrin ring), and substituents 
on the pyrrole units, are not shown.
DNA
Deoxythymidine
monophosphate
Dihydrofolate
polyglutamate
5, 10–methylene THF
polyglutamate
THF
polyglutamate
THF
Methionine
Homocysteine
Methyl THF
Vitamin B12
Deoxyuridine
monophosphate
FIGURE 27.6  ■ The link between folate and vitamin B12 deficiency 
in megaloblastic anaemia. 5,10-Methylene tetrahydrofolate 
polyglutamate is required for a rate-limiting step in DNA syn-
thesis, the conversion of deoxyuridine monophosphate to de-
oxythymidine monophosphate. Vitamin B12 is required in one 
of the reactions converting the main circulating form of folate, 
5-methyl THF, to 5,10-methylene THF.
524	
Clinical biochemistry
Measurement holotranscobalamin (TCII - bound vitamin 
B12, or ‘active B12’) may be a more sensitive and specific in-
dicator of physiologically relevant vitamin B12 deficiency.
Serum methylmalonate and homocysteine. Vitamin 
B12 deficiency results in the elevation of methylmalo-
nate and homocysteine concentrations (see Fig.  27.6). 
However, concentrations of both compounds fluctuate 
and may be raised in renal impairment, smoking and 
(on single occasions) in up to 30% of normal volunteers, 
making definition of a specific cut-off level difficult.
Deoxyuridine suppression test. The conversion of de-
oxyuridine monophosphate (dUMP) to deoxythymidine 
monophosphate (dTMP) during DNA synthesis is by 
methyl group transfer, facilitated by both vitamin B12 and 
folate. The other source of dTMP is via phosphoryla-
tion of deoxythymidine, catalysed by thymidine kinase, 
which is subject to feedback inhibition by its product, 
dTMP. Normal marrow, pre-incubated with dUMP, suc-
cessfully converts this to dTMP, and incorporates less 
subsequently added tritiated thymidine into DNA. If the 
marrow is deficient in either vitamin B12 or folate, methyl 
group transfer is reduced, so the cells have greater capac-
ity to incorporate tritiated thymidine into DNA follow-
ing pre-incubation with dUMP.
Antibody tests. Tests for the presence of antibodies to 
gastric parietal cells are positive in 90% of patients with 
pernicious anaemia; however, this test is not specific as 
it is also positive in around 15% of healthy elderly peo-
ple. The presence of IF antibodies is more specific but is 
found in only 50% of patients with pernicious anaemia.
Schilling test. This test, which measured the 24-h uri-
nary recovery of vitamin B12 following an oral radiola-
belled dose of the vitamin, is now obsolete.
Anaemias due to reduction in red cell 
­production: inherited causes
Inherited disorders of haemoglobin synthesis, such as 
sickle cell anaemia, result in ineffective erythropoiesis 
and a microcytic anaemia. These disorders are covered 
in Chapter 29.
Other inherited disorders of red cell production are 
rare and usually present in infancy. Fanconi anaemia is 
an autosomal recessively inherited disorder of a group of 
DNA repair proteins. Patients have various somatic de-
formities, a pancytopenia and markedly increased risk of 
both solid and haematological malignancies. Diamond–
Blackfan syndrome is associated with an anaemia second-
ary to a reticulocytopenia and carries an increased risk of 
acute myeloid leukaemia.
Anaemias associated with reduction in red 
cell production: acquired causes
Anaemia of chronic disease
Chronic diseases are often associated with an elevation of 
proinflammatory cytokines such as TNF-α and IL-6. These 
cytokines are potent inducers of hepcidin, which acts to in-
hibit intestinal iron absorption and the release of iron from 
macrophages. Thus iron studies in chronic diseases reveal a 
low serum iron and iron binding capacity with a raised fer-
ritin. The anaemia of chronic disease is usually normocytic, 
but in approximately 20% of cases, is microcytic.
Aplastic anaemia
Stem cell failure can be caused by toxins affecting cell 
production. This may be predictable dose dependent tox-
icity, such as following exposure to high dose irradiation, 
cytotoxic drugs and benzene. Rarely, the aplasia occurs as 
an idiosyncratic reaction to drugs such as non-steroidal 
anti–inflammatories and chloramphenicol, or as a reaction 
to viruses such as hepatitis, which is probably immune 
mediated. It is sometimes associated with an acquired 
defect in the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor, 
which plays an important role in the attachment of a 
number of cell surface antigens, protecting the cells from 
complement mediated premature destruction. This rare 
disorder is called paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria 
(PNH) (see p. 529).
Myelodysplasia
The myelodysplastic syndromes are a heterogenous 
group of disorders where there is ineffective haemopoie-
sis, resulting in progressive multilineage cytopenia and an 
increased propensity to transform to an acute leukaemia. 
The incidence of these conditions rises with age, with 
median onset in the seventh decade.
Malignant infiltration of the bone marrow
Infiltration of the marrow causes loss of normal haemopoi-
etic tissue. This gives rise to a characteristic leukoerythro-
blastic appearance on a blood film. Immature white cells, 
nucleated red cells and red cells with a teardrop shape 
appear and the platelet count falls. Leukoerythroblastic 
anaemia is a characteristic finding when a malignancy has 
metastasized to the marrow. It also occurs in myelofibro-
sis, where there is an increase in reticulin fibres in the 
bone marrow and splenomegaly.
ANAEMIAS ASSOCIATED WITH INCREASED  
RED CELL LOSS
Bleeding
Acute bleeding, from any source, results in a reticulocy-
tosis and thus, the anaemia may be normocytic or even 
macrocytic if the reticulocyte count is high, as these cells 
are larger than mature red cells. With time, iron stores 
become diminished and a microcytic anaemia develops.
Haemolysis
Haemolysis may be defined as the premature destruction 
of red cells, that is, the shortening of their normal life 
span of approximately 120 days. The destruction of the 
	
27  Biochemical aspects of anaemia	
525
red cells may be effected by the macrophages in the re-
ticuloendothelial system, for example in the spleen, liver 
or bone marrow; such destruction is said to be extravascu-
lar. Alternatively, destruction of red cells may take place 
within the circulation, i.e. intravascular haemolysis. Often 
there is a combination of both mechanisms. Normally, 
the bone marrow responds to the anaemia by increasing 
red cell production, and where this balances the loss of 
red cells, there is said to be a compensated haemolytic 
state. If the rate of the destruction exceeds the capacity of 
the marrow’s compensatory increase in erythropoiesis, a 
haemolytic anaemia ensues.
Thus, haemolytic anaemias are usually characterized 
by a triad of pathological features:
•	 increased red cell destruction resulting in anaemia
•	 increased 
red 
cell 
production 
resulting 
in 
reticulocytosis
•	 increased haemoglobin catabolism resulting in jaun-
dice.
Laboratory features of haemolysis
In extravascular haemolysis, the haem moiety released 
from haemoglobin as a consequence of increased red 
cell destruction is broken down to protoporphyrin, with 
the liberation of the iron, which enters the plasma pool 
and is bound to transferrin, increasing its saturation. 
Protoporphyrin is metabolized to carbon monoxide 
and biliverdin, which is subsequently further reduced to 
bilirubin. An increased plasma unconjugated bilirubin 
concentration to > ~50 μmol/L results in jaundice. As un-
conjugated bilirubin is bound to albumin, it is not excreted 
in the urine, but there is increased urinary excretion of its 
metabolic end-product, urobilinogen (see Chapter 13).
In contrast, in intravascular haemolysis, there is re-
lease of haemoglobin into the plasma (haemoglobinae-
mia) and, when the renal threshold for haemoglobin is 
exceeded, haemoglobin is excreted in the urine (haemo-
globinuria). Some of the haemoglobin in the glomerular 
filtrate is reabsorbed and degraded by the proximal tubu-
lar cells, with the iron released being deposited as haemo-
siderin. As the tubular cells desquamate, the presence of 
the intracellular haemosiderin iron can be detected in the 
urinary sediment by Perls reaction, which is positive for 
up to six weeks after the episode of intravascular haemol-
ysis. The loss of iron may be sufficiently great to result 
in overt iron deficiency anaemia, in contrast to the iron 
accumulation seen in extravascular haemolysis.
Free haemoglobin in the plasma readily dissociates 
from its tetrameric structure to dimeric units consisting 
of α- and β-subunits. The haemoglobin α chain binds 
readily to the β chains of haptoglobin, a glycoprotein 
produced by the liver. The haemoglobin–haptoglobin 
complex is rapidly cleared by the reticuloendothelial sys-
tem. In chronic haemolytic states, there is an increased 
removal of haptoglobin at a rate that exceeds the syn-
thetic capacity of the liver, resulting in low or undetect-
able plasma haptoglobin concentrations. The return to a 
normal concentration takes approximately one week fol-
lowing cessation of the haemolytic process.
Any free plasma haem resulting from haemolysis 
forms complexes with either haemopexin or albumin. 
The haem–haemopexin complex is taken up and me-
tabolized by the liver, resulting in a decrease in plasma 
haemopexin concentration. The haem–albumin complex 
may be oxidized to methaemalbumin, which has a charac-
teristic absorption spectrum and gives a brownish colour 
to the patient’s plasma. Acute kidney injury is often seen 
in intravascular haemolysis. Studies have revealed that 
haem is directly toxic to renal tubular cells and may form 
intratubular casts with Tamm–Horsfall protein. The mi-
tochondria of renal cells appear particularly susceptible 
to haem-mediated damage, with resultant impaired mi-
tochondrial oxygen consumption and autophagocytosis. 
The kidney protects itself during intravascular haemoly-
sis by inducing haemoxygenase-1 and ferritin production, 
which act to degrade the haem and bind any resultant free 
iron, respectively (see Fig. 27.7).
Causes of haemolytic anaemias
The disorders that cause haemolysis form a diverse 
group. Some of them are very common, for example 
sickle cell anaemia and thalassaemia, which affect mil-
lions worldwide, while some are very rare, for example 
aldolase deficiency, with only a few families reported in 
the world literature. The clinical features are equally 
diverse, varying from little or no clinically evident hae-
molysis as, for example, with hereditary elliptocytosis, to 
life-threatening acute intravascular haemolysis associ-
ated with Plasmodium falciparum malaria (blackwater fe-
ver). Clinical manifestations other than haemolysis may 
complicate the situation further; for example, sickle cell 
anaemia is associated with vaso-occlusive episodes that 
may result in life-threatening problems such as pulmo-
nary crises, while some of the inherited deficiencies of 
enzymes such as triose phosphate isomerase and phos-
phoglycerate kinase are associated with severe neuro-
logical disease.
A classification of haemolytic disorders based on the 
site of haemolysis would identify very few disorders caus-
ing only intravascular haemolysis, as the vast majority are 
associated with predominantly extravascular haemolysis. 
Therefore, the best classification of haemolytic disorders 
is based on whether the haemolysis is inherited or ac-
quired, as summarized in Box 27.1.
Inherited haemolytic anaemia
It is convenient to consider inherited red cell defects un-
der three headings: membrane defects, enzymes defects 
and haemoglobinopathies. The haemoglobinopathies are 
considered further in Chapter 29.
Membrane defects
The commonest haemolytic anaemia caused by a mem-
brane defect is hereditary spherocytosis. It is usually 
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, result-
ing in haemolysis of varying severity; the majority of 
patients have a mild anaemia, although severe hae-
molysis resulting in neonatal kernicterus has been re-
ported. It is characterized by spherocytic, osmotically 
fragile cells and in most cases is caused by a defect 
526	
Clinical biochemistry
in the ankyrin–spectrin complex, although defects in 
other membrane proteins can also cause the condition. 
Extravascular haemolysis occurs predominantly in the 
spleen because of the poor deformability of the cells. 
Splenectomy is sometimes considered in patients, as 
prolongation of the red cell life span results in amelio-
ration of the clinical features.
Hereditary elliptocytosis is a more heterogeneous 
disorder characterized by large numbers of elliptically 
shaped red cells in the peripheral blood. It is caused by 
defects in the spectrin tetramers (see p. 517). There is 
an increased incidence in West Africa, possibly because 
of protection from infection by Plasmodium falciparum; 
in vitro studies have demonstrated reduced ability of this 
organism to parasitize red cells with the defects seen in 
hereditary elliptocytosis.
Hereditary stomatocytosis (HS) is rare and is associ-
ated with the appearance of ‘mouth like’ red cells on blood 
film. These cells are leaky to cations: hence the condition 
is associated with pseudohyperkalaemia. Splenectomy 
should be avoided, owing to the risk of thrombosis in 
these individuals. The variant termed dehydrated HS, or 
hereditary xerocytosis, may be associated with perinatal 
ascites, which resolves spontaneously within the first year 
of life.
Enzyme defects
These may be grouped under three headings:
•	 disorders of the pentose phosphate pathway and re-
lated enzymes of glutathione metabolism
•	 disorders of anaerobic glycolysis
•	 disorders of nucleotide metabolism.
Disorders of the pentose phosphate pathway and 
related enzymes of glutathione metabolism. The 
pentose phosphate shunt provides the reducing power 
of the red cell in the form of NADPH, which maintains 
glutathione in the reduced form (GSH) via the closely 
linked glutathione pathway. The GSH protects the red 
cells from oxidative damage; inadequate supplies result 
in peroxidation of the red cell membrane, denaturation 
of haemoglobin and its precipitation as Heinz bodies, 
resulting in reduced cell deformability and intravascular 
haemolysis.
The commonest disorder of the pentose phosphate 
pathway is a defect of the enzyme glucose 6-phosphate 
dehydrogenase (G6PD), affecting 400 million peo-
ple worldwide. The gene for the enzyme is located on 
the  X  chromosome. The wild type is G6PD(B). More 
than 300 variants have been described with differences 
in maximum enzyme activity and/or gene expression. 
The best known of these affects people of African ori-
gin, G6PD(A-), or from Mediterranean countries, 
G6PD(Med). Most individuals with G6PD deficiency 
are asymptomatic but liable to have acute haemolytic 
crises under oxidative stress from certain drugs (see 
Table 27.3), ingestion of fava beans or acute infection. 
Favism has been described in Mediterranean countries 
since classical times.
The cause of the haemolysis is a failure to produce 
enough GSH to protect the red cell membrane from 
Red cell
Free Haemoglobin
Reticuloendothelial
system
Liver
Extravascular haemolysis
Biliary tract
Faeces
Urine
Kidney
Unconjugated bilirubin
Urobilinogen
Haptoglobin
Haemopexin
Albumin
Haemoglobinuria
Haemosiderinuria
Intravascular haemolysis
Haem
Globin
Methaemalbumin
FIGURE 27.7  ■ The pathway of haemoglobin metabolism in haemolytic anaemias. Haemoglobin is liberated from the breakdown of 
the red cells and becomes bound to haptoglobin. Any free haem binds to haemopexin. Both scavenger proteins are taken up by 
macrophages within the reticuloendothelial system. When these plasma proteins are consumed, the haem may be either free in the 
plasma or bound to albumin.
	
27  Biochemical aspects of anaemia	
527
BOX 27.1	
Classification of haemolytic disorders
Congenital
Red cell membrane defects
•	 Hereditary spherocytosis
•	 Hereditary elliptocytosis
•	 Acanthocytosis in abetalipoproteinaemia
•	 Hereditary stomatocytosis
•	 Rhnull disease
Red cell enzyme defects
•	 Disorders of pentose phosphate pathway and related 
­enzymes of glutathione metabolism
•	 Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase
•	 Glutamylcysteine synthetase
•	 Glutathione synthetase
•	 Glutathione reductase
•	 Disorders of anaerobic glycolysis
•	 Pyruvate kinase
•	 Hexokinase
•	 Phosphoglucose isomerase
•	 Phosphofructokinase
•	 Triose phosphate isomerase
•	 Phosphoglycerate kinase
•	 Disorders of nucleotide metabolism
•	 Pyrimidine 5′-nucleotidase deficiency
•	 Adenosine deaminase hyperactivity
•	 Adenosine triphosphatase deficiency
•	 Adenylate kinase deficiency
Haemoglobinopathies
•	 Globin chain synthesis, i.e. thalassaemias
•	 Globin chain structure
Acquired
Immune haemolytic anaemias
•	 Incompatible blood transfusion
•	 Haemolytic disease of the newborn
•	 Autoimmune (warm reacting antibody)
•	 Idiopathic
•	 Infection, e.g. Mycoplasma pneumoniae
•	 Lymphoproliferative disorders
•	 Other malignant disorders
•	 Immunodeficiency states
•	 Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and other auto-
immune disorders
•	 Drugs
•	 Autoimmune (cold reacting antibody)
•	 Cold haemagglutinin disease (idiopathic or secondary)
•	 Paroxysmal cold haemoglobinuria
Non-immune haemolytic anaemia
•	 Infections
•	 Protozoal, e.g. malaria, toxoplasmosis, leishmaniasis
•	 Bacterial, e.g. clostridial infection, bartonellosis
•	 Traumatic and microangiopathic disorders
•	 Prosthetic cardiac valves
•	 Haemolytic uraemic syndrome
•	 Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura
•	 Disseminated intravascular coagulation
•	 Hypertension, including pregnancy-associated hyper­
tension
•	 March haemoglobinuria
•	 Thermal injury
•	 Chemical agents
•	 Oxidant drugs (see Table 27.3)
•	 Non-oxidant agents, e.g. water, copper
•	 Venoms
•	 Disorders of the red cell membrane
•	 Vitamin E deficiency in neonates
•	 Spur cell anaemia in chronic liver disease
•	 Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria
TABLE 27.3  Drugs and chemicals associated with significant haemolysis in subjects with 
G6PD-deficiency
Drugs
Definite association
Possible association
Doubtful association
Antimalarials
Primaquine
Pamaquine
Pentaquine
Chloroquine
Quinacrine
Quinine
Sulfonamides
Sulfanilamide
Sulfacetamide
Sulfapyridine
Sulfamethoxazole
Sulfamethoxypyridazine
Sulfadimidine
Sulfoxone
Sulfadiazine
Sulfamerazine
Sulfisoxazole
Sulfones
Thiazolesulfone
Diaminodiaphenylsulfone (dapsone)
 
 
Nitrofurans
Nitrofurantoin
 
 
Antipyretic analgesics
Acetanilid
 
Aminopyrine
Paracetamol 
(acetaminophen)
Phenacetin
Aspirin
Others
Nalidixic acid
Naphthalene
Niridazole
Phenylhydrazine
Toluidine blue
Trinitrotoluene (TNT)
Methylthioninium chloride
Phenazopyridine
Chloramphenicol
Vitamin K analogues
4-aminosalicylic acid (PAS)
l-DOPA
Vitamin C
Dimercaprol
Doxorubicin
Probenecid
528	
Clinical biochemistry
oxidative stress. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase is 
the first and most important enzyme in the pentose phos-
phate pathway that generates the NADPH that is required 
for glutathione reduction. Normal in vivo flux uses only a 
small percentage of the maximum enzyme capacity. This 
explains why G6PD variants with low residual activities 
are compatible with almost normal function of the red 
cell. Only under oxidative stress is the protective capac-
ity overwhelmed, leading to predominantly extravascular 
haemolysis.
In a relatively small number of sporadic cases, the 
G6PD variant is functionally so abnormal that there is 
chronic extravascular haemolysis even without any addi-
tional oxidative stress.
Disorders of anaerobic glycolysis. Deficiencies of 
the  glycolytic enzymes hexokinase (HK), phosphoglu-
cose isomerase (PGI), phosphofructokinase (PFK), aldol-
ase (ALD), triose phosphate isomerase, phosphoglycerate 
kinase (PGK), enolase and pyruvate kinase (PK) have all 
been reported in association with chronic haemolytic 
anaemia. Almost all cases reported are inherited in an 
autosomal recessive mode except for PGK deficiency, 
which is X-linked. All are relatively rare; the ­commonest 
in this group is PK deficiency, which has a prevalence 
of ~1:20 000.
Because the glycolytic pathway is mainly concerned 
with the generation of ATP, it has been proposed that the 
primary pathogenic defect is low red cell ATP concentra-
tion causing rigidity of the red cells. However, the ex-
pected reduction in ATP concentration is not a constant 
finding. This may be partly explained by the presence of 
increased numbers of reticulocytes, which have higher 
concentrations of ATP, and/or the preferential destruc-
tion of the most metabolically affected red cells, giving a 
distorted picture of the concentration of the ATP at the 
time of investigation. It is likely, however, that a number 
of different factors contribute to the haemolytic process 
depending on the various metabolic abnormalities result-
ing from the enzyme deficiency.
Disorders of nucleotide metabolism. The most im-
portant abnormalities of nucleotide metabolism that 
are clearly associated with chronic haemolytic anaemia 
are deficiency of pyrimidine 5′-nucleotidase (P5N) and 
hyperactivity of adenosine deaminase (ADA).
The mechanisms of haemolysis in these conditions 
have not been established, although some interesting 
hypotheses have been proposed as logical explanations 
of the biochemical findings. In patients who are homo-
zygous for P5N deficiency, there is an accumulation of 
pyrimidine nucleotides in the red cells. This could affect 
the metabolism of the cells by competing with adenine 
nucleotides, which are the normal cofactors of a number 
of important enzyme reactions, and by interfering with 
the function of the pentose phosphate pathway.
In some cases of ADA hyperactivity, there is a low red 
cell concentration of ATP. It has been hypothesized that 
this leads to depletion of adenosine through irreversible 
deamination, so that insufficient adenosine is available 
for the salvage pathway via adenosine kinase to replenish 
normal losses from the adenine nucleotide pool.
Acquired haemolytic anaemias
The acquired haemolytic anaemias can be divided into 
two main groups:
•	 immune haemolytic anaemias, where the produc-
tion of antibodies mediates red cell destruction
•	 non-immune haemolytic anaemias, which are of nu-
merous diverse causes.
Immune haemolytic anaemias
These may be caused by autoantibodies produced against 
epitopes on the surface of the patient’s own normal red 
cells or by the development of alloantibodies, antibod-
ies produced by the patient against foreign antigens in-
troduced through blood transfusions or neoantigens that 
develop on red cells during drug induced haemolysis.
The autoimmune haemolytic anaemias are character-
ized by a positive Coombs test, which detects antibod-
ies, with or without complement, bound to the surface of 
the red cell. These antibodies are often directed against 
the rhesus antigen system; they may be of any immuno-
globulin subclass and display different thermal activities, 
hence the term ‘warm’ and ‘cold’ acting antibodies. The 
resulting haemolysis is usually extravascular in nature 
because of the ability of the autoantibody to fix comple-
ment, allowing opsonization and subsequent uptake by 
the macrophages of the spleen and liver. However, some 
autoantibodies produced are able to activate the comple-
ment pathway through to cell lysis, resulting in a more 
severe intravascular haemolysis.
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemias may occur without 
an obvious underlying cause (primary autoimmune hae-
molytic anaemia) or may be secondary to other condi-
tions such as lymphoma, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia 
and autoimmune diseases including systemic lupus ery-
thematosus and rheumatoid arthritis.
Non-immune haemolytic anaemias
The main causes of non-immune haemolysis are infec-
tions, traumatic and microangiopathic disorders, chemi-
cal and physical agents and acquired disorders of the red 
cell membrane.
Infections. The most important infection associated with 
haemolytic anaemia is Plasmodium falciparum, in which 
both extravascular haemolysis, from destruction of para-
sitized erythrocytes in the reticuloendothelial system, and 
intravascular haemolysis, when the parasites break out of 
cells, are seen. Rarely, the latter may be extreme enough 
to produce the dramatic picture known as blackwater fe-
ver, with severe intravascular haemolysis associated with 
a high percentage of parasitized erythrocytes, haemoglo-
binuria and acute kidney injury.
Other protozoal and bacterial infections that can be 
associated with haemolysis are listed in Box 27.1.
Traumatic and microangiopathic disorders. The com-
mon mechanism in these conditions is contact between 
red cells and an abnormal surface in the circulation. 
Cardiac prosthetic valves and intracardiac patch repairs 
	
27  Biochemical aspects of anaemia	
529
have been associated with haemolytic anaemia, which is 
intravascular, though usually mild.
Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia is a term used 
to describe a variety of conditions in which there is in-
creased fibrin deposition in the microcirculation. This 
results in increased red cell fragmentation either directly 
by damage to red cells by fibrin strands or indirectly 
by the stress imposed by other cells flowing past cells 
trapped on fibrin strands. The end-result is intravascu-
lar haemolysis. Such conditions include haemolytic urae-
mic syndrome, which is seen mainly in childhood and in 
which renal failure is a prominent feature, and throm-
botic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP), which is associ-
ated with the diagnostic pentad of various neurological 
signs, red cell fragmentation, thrombocytopenia, purpura 
and renal failure. In haemolytic anaemia associated with 
hypertension (including pregnancy-associated hyperten-
sion), there is little fibrin deposition and it is postulated 
that there is increased fragmentation of red cells trapped 
at the endothelial surface as a result of the shearing stress 
of the flow of arterial blood. March haemoglobinuria is a 
rare and benign condition in which there is red cell de-
struction in the feet caused by mechanical trauma from 
walking or running over long distances.
Acquired disorders of the red cell membrane. 
Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria (PNH) is a 
rare acquired disorder of the red cell membrane. It is 
associated with an acquired somatic mutation in the 
PIGA gene on the X chromosome. This encodes the 
enzyme complex phosphatidylinositol N-acetyl-aminyl-
transferase subunit A (PIGA), which plays a pivotal 
role in the biosynthesis of glycosylphosphatidylino-
sitol (GPI) anchors. These are responsible for the at-
tachment of a large number of surface antigens to the 
cell membrane, including proteins that protect the cell 
membrane from complement-mediated attack. Thus 
GPI anchor deficiency renders the red cells susceptible 
to complement mediated cell lysis and intravascular 
haemolysis ensues. The condition is associated with the 
clinical triad of intravascular haemolysis, bone marrow 
failure and thrombosis.
Zieve syndrome is an uncommon disorder seen in al-
coholics, in which intravascular haemolysis is possibly a 
consequence of changes in the lipid composition of the 
cell membrane. Vitamin E deficiency in neonates results 
in the loss of the protective antioxidant effect of this vita-
min and an oxidative haemolysis ensues.
DIAGNOSIS OF HAEMOLYSIS
The search for evidence supporting the presence and 
cause of haemolysis can be considered in terms of clinical 
evidence and the results of laboratory investigations.
Clinical evidence
The clinical history should pay particular attention to the 
onset of jaundice and to any precipitating factors. The 
colour of the urine may suggest the presence of haemo-
globinuria, suggesting intravascular haemolysis. Anaemia 
is often asymptomatic, either because of its mild degree 
or because of its chronicity. However, severe symptom-
atic anaemia is likely to be of recent onset and suggests an 
acquired aetiology. The general medical history, includ-
ing previous surgery, is important but particular atten-
tion should be paid to travel, drug history and exposure 
to chemicals at work or recreation.
A family history may help to establish an inheritance 
pattern. The majority of families with congenital non-
spherocytic haemolytic anaemias caused by enzymopa-
thies show an autosomal recessive transmission, while 
most non-spherocytic anaemias with unstable haemo-
globin or red cell membrane defects show an autosomal 
dominant pattern. The most important exceptions are 
the X-linked deficiencies of G6PD and PGK. In these, 
the affected individuals are hemizygous males or, very 
infrequently, homozygous females. The vast majority of 
heterozygous females are clinically unaffected and diffi-
cult to detect.
General physical examination provides additional in-
formation. In thalassaemia major, frontal bossing and 
prominence of the maxillae produce a characteristic facial 
appearance (see p. 553). Splenomegaly is often a promi-
nent finding, particularly in the congenital haemolytic 
anaemias.
Laboratory investigations
These should be directed to answering two basic ques-
tions: is there any haemolysis and if so, what is the mech-
anism and cause?
Laboratory investigations for the presence of 
haemolysis
Red cell morphology. In haemolytic anaemias, there is a 
varying degree of anaemia accompanied by a reticulocyto-
sis. The underlying cause of haemolysis may be suggested 
by the presence of specific morphological abnormalities 
(see Chapter 26), for example, spherocytes in both heredi-
tary spherocytosis and autoimmune haemolytic anaemia, 
and red cell fragmentation in microangiopathic haemolytic 
anaemia. Heinz bodies, which are composed of denatured 
haemoglobin, are seen in G6PD deficiency, and some 
unstable haemoglobins, formed after exposure to oxidant 
drugs and chemicals, are revealed using the supravital stain 
crystal violet. Haemoglobin H inclusions (seen in α thal-
assaemia) can be demonstrated using brilliant cresyl blue. 
Excessive basophilic stippling, indicating the presence of 
undegraded RNA, suggests a block in the catabolism of 
RNA during reticulocyte maturation and is a constant 
finding in pyrimidine 5′-nucleotidase deficiency.
Total and unconjugated bilirubin. Haem breakdown 
results in the release of hydrophobic unconjugated bili-
rubin that is transported, bound to albumin, to the liver 
where it is conjugated. Therefore, haemolysis results in an 
increase in plasma unconjugated bilirubin concentration.
Haptoglobin. Any free haemoglobin released from red 
cell breakdown complexes with haptoglobin and is then 
cleared by the reticuloendothelial system. A decrease in 
530	
Clinical biochemistry
the plasma haptoglobin concentration occurs when the 
daily haemoglobin turnover is doubled, irrespective of 
whether the haemolysis is extravascular or intravascular. 
Haptoglobin is more rapidly depleted in intravascular 
haemolysis. However, congenital ahaptoglobinaemia is 
seen in 2% of the Caucasian population and concentra-
tions may also be lowered in megaloblastic anaemia (be-
cause of ineffective erythropoiesis) and in liver disease. 
Haptoglobin is an acute phase protein, its concentration 
rising in many inflammatory conditions, in pregnancy 
and during use of oral contraceptives and corticosteroids. 
Under these circumstances, a normal haptoglobin con-
centration does not exclude haemolysis.
Haemopexin. Haemopexin binds free haem in plasma 
and in severe intravascular haemolysis, when haptoglo-
bin is depleted, plasma haemopexin falls to very low con-
centrations or becomes undetectable. However, in mild 
haemolysis, plasma haptoglobin concentration may be re-
duced or undetectable but plasma haemopexin concentra-
tion normal or only slightly reduced. Low concentrations 
of haemopexin may be found in renal or liver disease with-
out any evidence of haemolysis and high concentrations 
are seen in diabetes mellitus, infection or carcinoma. This 
assay is only available at a few specialized centres.
Methaemalbumin. This is found in plasma when hap-
toglobin is depleted in the more severe intravascular 
haemolytic anaemias. It may be detected by the Schumm 
test: methaemalbumin reduced by the addition of ammo-
nium sulfide shows an intense absorption band in the 
green spectrum.
Free haemoglobin. Free haemoglobin does not appear 
in the plasma until all available haptoglobin has been 
depleted, so it may be undetectable in mild degrees of 
haemolysis. Therefore, an increased plasma free hae-
moglobin concentration indicates a significant degree 
of intravascular haemolysis, provided that the possibility 
of in vitro lysis of red cells during red cell sampling or 
processing has been excluded. Free haemoglobin in the 
urine (haemoglobinuria) is also a good indicator of intra-
vascular haemolysis. False positives may occur owing to 
haematuria (intact red cells in urine) or myoglobinuria, 
which must be excluded.
Haemosiderinuria. After glomerular filtration, some 
free haemoglobin is absorbed by renal tubular cells 
and then broken down. The released iron is deposited 
as insoluble haemosiderin and is ultimately excreted in 
the urine when desquamation of the tubular cell occurs. 
Haemosiderin can be demonstrated within these cells by 
staining a cytospin preparation of the urine by the Perls 
technique. Haemosiderinuria can be detected for several 
weeks after a haemolytic episode, even when there has 
not been overt haemoglobinuria. Thus, the demonstra-
tion of intracellular haemosiderin in the urine is a good 
sign of mild intravascular haemolysis.
Red cell survival. This can be measured using radio-
labelled (usually with 
51Cr) autologous red cells. Daily 
measurements can allow for the calculation of red cell 
survival, usually combined with surface counting over the 
liver and spleen to estimate the relative contribution of 
each reticuloendothelial organ to the red cell destruction. 
If uptake of radiolabelled red cells is seen predominantly 
in the spleen, removal of this organ should ameliorate 
the haemolysis. This test is performed only in specialist 
centres.
Laboratory investigations for the cause of 
haemolysis
After the diagnosis of haemolysis has been made, further 
investigations are required to establish the precise cause 
of the reduced red cell survival. These should be directed 
along a logical pathway to avoid requests for inappropri-
ate tests.
Coombs test (direct antiglobulin test). This is used to 
detect the presence of red cells coated with immunoglob-
ulin or complement, which is the hallmark of immune 
haemolysis. The test can be modified to allow the detec-
tion of specific immunoglobulin subclasses or comple-
ment fractions by the use of specific antisera.
Tests for abnormal haemoglobin. The screening tests 
for haemoglobinopathy may be described under three 
main headings, indicating the main haemoglobin prop-
erty being investigated:
•	 structural abnormalities, e.g. electrophoresis, iso-
electric focusing, high performance liquid chroma-
tography
•	 functional abnormalities, e.g. sickling test, demon-
stration of Heinz bodies
•	 unbalanced haemoglobin synthesis, e.g. quantita-
tion of haemoglobin A2 and haemoglobin F.
The detailed investigation of haemoglobinopathies is 
discussed in Chapter 29.
Osmotic fragility tests. These tests are no longer rec-
ommended in the routine assessment of haemolytic 
anaemias, having been replaced by flow cytometry tech-
niques (see below). They are based on spectrophotomet-
ric ­assessment of the lysis of red cells after incubation in 
water or hypotonic saline for variable periods of time. 
Normal red cells, as a consequence of their biconcave 
shape, have an ability to take up more water before they 
lyse. Spherocytes, because of their high volume to sur-
face area, have a very limited ability to take in water and 
thus lyse more readily. Conversely, cells with a reduced 
volume to surface area ratio, such as the cells in thalassae-
mia or iron deficiency, and reticulocytes, are relatively 
resistant to lysis. The tests are usually normal in enzyme 
defects apart from a tail of reduced fragility from the re-
ticulocytes. A normal osmotic fragility does not exclude a 
diagnosis of hereditary spherocytosis as it may be normal 
in 10–20% of cases.
The autohaemolysis test. This measures the sponta-
neous haemolysis of blood incubated at 37 °C for 24 h. 
It is a useful screening test in cases of suspected hae-
molytic anaemia if the blood film is not morphologi-
cally suggestive of hereditary spherocytosis. If the test 
	
27  Biochemical aspects of anaemia	
531
is ­entirely normal, then an intrinsic red cell defect is 
unlikely. Correction of the autohaemolysis by the addi-
tion of glucose (as an energy source) suggests a mem-
brane defect, as these are associated with increased 
glucose consumption because of the increased cation 
leak through the membrane. In enzyme defects, the ad-
dition of glucose has no effect as the cells cannot use 
this energy source.
Flow cytometry. The use of the eosin 5-maleimide 
(EMA) binding test is now the recommended first-line 
investigation for the diagnosis of hereditary spherocy-
tosis, where there is no family history or the blood film 
appearances are atypical. Eosin 5-maleimide binds to 
band 3 protein (so named on the basis of its electrophoretic 
mobility). This protein interacts with both ankyrin and 
protein 4.2 and, in turn, with the spectrin cytoskeleton, 
which is disrupted in hereditary spherocytosis, resulting 
in a decreased flow cytometric fluorescence signal. The 
test has a high level of specificity (99.1%) and sensitivity 
(92.7%) and can be performed rapidly.
Flow cytometry has also become the gold standard 
for the diagnosis of PNH, replacing the acid haemoly-
sis (Ham) test. It uses fluorescent-labelled monoclonal 
­antibodies to detect various GPI-anchored surface anti-
gens, principally CD55 (decay accelerating factor) and 
CD59 (membrane inhibitor of reactive lysis), whose 
­absence on the surface of red cells is compatible with a 
diagnosis of PNH.
Tests for enzyme deficiencies
It is useful for laboratories to be able to screen for the 
common red cell enzyme deficiencies, such G6PD and 
PK, and to indicate where the defect lies in the less com-
mon disorders, but further detailed investigations are 
best performed in specialist laboratories. It is impor-
tant that leukocytes and platelets are removed from the 
samples as they generally have higher enzyme concentra-
tions than the red cells. Also, it should be remembered 
that reticulocytes have increased concentrations of many 
‘age-dependent’ enzymes, particularly HK, PK, ALD 
and pyrimidine 5′-nucleotidase. Therefore, if possible 
all samples should be tested either alongside a control 
sample with a similar reticulocyte count or the activity of 
the enzyme under investigation compared with that of a 
second ‘age-dependent’ enzyme.
Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase. Screening tests 
for this enzyme deficiency depend on the inability of the 
cells to convert an oxidized substrate, such as NADP, to a 
reduced form that fluoresces under long wavelength UV 
light. Red cells with <20% of normal G6PD activity do 
not fluoresce. Problems in interpreting this test are com-
mon, particularly in heterozygous women and affected 
males with G6PD(A-) deficiency and reticulocytosis. In 
the latter situation, the presence of increased numbers 
of reticulocytes, which contain increased amounts of 
G6PD(A-), may give false negative results. Thus nega-
tive results do not always exclude enzyme deficiency, 
while positive results should be confirmed by quantita-
tive assay.
Pyrimidine 5′-nucleotidase. Screening for this de-
ficiency is based on the different spectrophotometric 
­properties of cytidine nucleotides (pyrimidine nucleo-
tides), which absorb maximally in acidic solutions at 
280 nm, whilst adenine and guanine (purine nucleotides) 
and uridine absorb at 260 nm. Normally, >96% of nucle-
otides in red cells are purine analogues, but this falls to 
<50% in cases of pyrimidine 5′-nucleotidase deficiency, 
where the pyrimidine nucleotides accumulate, causing 
the absorbance ratio to fall.
Red cell metabolites. 2,3-Diphosphoglycerate (2,3-
DPG), ATP and GSH are present in red cells in suf-
ficiently high concentrations (millimolar) to be readily 
measurable by spectrophotometric techniques in most 
laboratories, providing valuable information on red 
cell enzymopathies. An increase in 2,3-DPG occurs in 
most anaemias. Furthermore, hypoxaemia, alkalosis and 
­hyperphosphataemia all lead to increases in 2,3-DPG, ir-
respective of anaemia. A low concentration of 2,3-DPG 
is a useful indicator of an enzymopathy early in the gly-
colytic pathway. Hexokinase, PFK and PGI deficiencies 
have been frequently, but not invariably, associated with 
low concentrations of this metabolite. Extremely low 
2,3-DPG concentrations have also been reported in a 
case of complete diphosphoglyceromutase deficiency, 
in which there is a high haemoglobin concentration be-
cause of an increased oxygen affinity in the absence of 
haemolysis.
A moderate reduction in GSH concentration has 
been reported in several patients with congenital non-­
spherocytic haemolytic anaemia including G6PD defi-
ciency. However, very low concentrations of GSH could 
also be an indication of deficiency in either of the two 
enzymes of GSH biosynthesis: glutathione synthetase 
and γ-glutamylcysteine synthetase. In both enzymopa-
thies, some patients have neurological disease in addition 
to the haemolytic anaemia, which is exacerbated by oxi-
dative stress. For unknown reasons, high concentrations 
of GSH are present as an epiphenomenon in pyrimidine 
5′-nucleotidase deficiency and several syndromes of dys-
erythropoietic anaemia and ineffective erythropoiesis. 
Neonates have higher red cell of GSH concentrations 
than adults.
Glycolytic intermediates. The in  vivo concentrations 
of glycolytic intermediates are probably the best avail-
able measure of the functional status of the glycolytic 
enzymes. Theoretically, when a given enzyme is func-
tionally defective, it should cause a metabolic block lead-
ing to an accumulation of its precursor metabolites and 
a relative reduction in the concentration of those after 
it. However, this is not always seen for various reasons, 
including the increased activity of the enzymes in reticu-
locytes, but measurement of the glycolytic metabolites 
may still provide a useful screening test for a metabolic 
block in some circumstances. For example, PK deficiency 
may be suspected because of relatively high concentra-
tions of metabolites preceding the PK step, i.e. phospho-
enolpyruvate, 2-phosphoglycerate, 3-phosphoglycerate 
and 2,3-DPG.
532	
Clinical biochemistry
CONCLUSION
In the accurate assessment of a patient presenting with 
anaemia, the clinical history plays a vital role in dis-
tinguishing between congenital and acquired causes. 
This is further supplemented by utilizing the following 
investigations:
•	 examination of blood film morphology
•	 serum ferritin, vitamin B12 and folate concen­tations
•	 coombs test and reticulocyte count
•	 haemoglobin electrophoresis.
This strategy should result in a specific diagno-
sis for the majority of individuals, with only a mi-
nority (<5% in the UK) requiring more specialized 
investigations.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author is deeply indebted to Dr Pamela A. Gover, 
who prepared the chapter on Biochemical aspects of 
anaemia for earlier editions of this book.
Further reading
Hoffbrand AV, Moss P, editors. Essential haematology. 6th ed. Oxford: 
Wiley-Blackwell; 2011. 
A simple overview of clinical haematology for students.
Hoffbrand AV, Catovsky D, Tuddenham EGD et  al. Postgraduate 
haematology. 6th ed Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell; 2011. 
The main UK reference text for senior clinicians working in haematology.
Bain BJ, Bates I, Laffan MA et al. editors. Dacie and Lewis practical 
haematology. 11th ed. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2012. 
A practical guide to laboratory procedures and techniques.
533
C H A P T E R  2 8
The porphyrias: inherited disorders 
of haem synthesis
Michael N. Badminton  •  George H. Elder
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW  533
Biochemistry of haem synthesis  533
Overview of the porphyrias  534
Molecular genetics of the porphyrias  534
PORPHYRIAS PRESENTING WITH ACUTE  
ATTACKS  538
The autosomal dominant acute porphyrias  538
Rare forms of acute porphyria  542
THE CUTANEOUS PORPHYRIAS  542
Bullous porphyrias  542
Erythropoietic protoporphyria and X-linked 
dominant protoporphyria  546
SECONDARY DISORDERS OF PORPHYRIN 
METABOLISM  547
CONCLUSION  548
INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW
The porphyrias are a group of eight metabolic disorders 
that result from inherited or acquired functional abnor-
malities of enzymes of the haem biosynthetic pathway 
(Table 28.1 and see Fig. 28.1, below). No disease has yet 
been associated with defects in the 5-aminolaevulinic acid 
(ALA) synthase-1 (ALAS1) gene that encodes the ubiqui-
tous isoform of ALAS, the first enzyme of the pathway. 
However, gain of function mutations in the erythroid-
specific ALAS (ALAS2) gene cause X-linked dominant 
protoporphyria (XLDPP), whereas loss of function 
causes X-linked sideroblastic anaemia.
The principal clinical features of the porphyrias are neu-
rovisceral or cutaneous, or both. This chapter ­approaches 
the subject from a practical perspective, describing how 
and why patients present, how they are diagnosed and 
how patients and their families should be managed. A list 
of frequently used abbreviations is provided in Box 28.1.
Biochemistry of haem synthesis
Haem is essential for life and is synthesized in all cells, 
although the major sources are bone marrow (80%) 
and liver (15%). Haemoproteins include haemoglobin 
and myoglobin, which are the most abundant; the mi-
tochondrial respiratory cytochromes; enzymes such as 
catalase and tryptophan pyrrolase, and the cytochrome 
P450 enzymes that are components of many essen-
tial metabolic processes, including the metabolism of 
xenobiotics.
The haem synthetic pathway comprises eight 
steps, each catalysed by a specific enzyme, of which 
the first and last three are mitochondrial and the re-
mainder ­cytosolic (Fig. 28.1). The first enzyme, ALAS, 
catalyses the ­condensation of succinyl-CoA and glycine 
into 5-­aminolaevulinic acid and is the rate-controlling 
step in all cells. Regulation of ALAS1 in the liver and 
other ­non-erythroid tissues is via inhibition by haem, the 
end product of the pathway, a characteristic that underlies 
both the pathogenesis and treatment of acute attacks of 
porphyria. In erythroid cells, regulation of haem ­synthesis 
is iron dependent. The second step is the synthesis of por-
phobilinogen (PBG), a watersoluble, colourless mono-
pyrrole, catalysed by ALA dehydratase. The third step 
is the polymerization of four molecules of PBG to form 
the colourless linear tetrapyrrole, 1-­hydroxymethylbilane 
(HMB), by the enzyme hydroxymethylbilane synthase 
(HMBS, also known as PBG deaminase). This linear 
molecule is cyclized into the tetrapyrrole ring structure, 
uroporphyrinogen III, by the enzyme uroporphyrinogen 
III synthase.
The porphyrinogens are colourless, non-fluorescent, 
unstable compounds, which rapidly oxidize to their 
red-purple porphyrin equivalents. Porphyrins absorb 
light, are fluorescent and therefore photosensitizing. 
These properties also make them relatively straightfor-
ward to measure in the clinical biochemistry laboratory. 
Uroporphyrinogen III, which is hydrophilic by virtue 
of its eight carboxy groups, is converted to coporphy-
rinogen III by uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase, which 
­catalyses the sequential removal of four carboxyl resi-
dues. Two further carboxyl groups are removed in an 
oxygen-dependent 
dehydrogenation-decarboxylation 
reaction catalysed by the enzyme coproporphyrinogen 
oxidase (CPOX) to form protoporphyrinogen, which is 
then oxidized to protoporphyrin IX by protoporphy-
rinogen oxidase (PPOX). Progressive decarboxylation 
makes these precursors and the corresponding porphy-
rins increasingly hydrophobic, which determines their 
534	
Clinical biochemistry
routes of excretion (see Fig. 28.2). The final step in the 
pathway is insertion of ferrous iron (Fe
2+) into proto-
porphyrin to form haem, catalysed by ferrochelatase 
(FECH). In the absence of iron, other divalent cat-
ions, such as zinc, may be inserted. Although only the 
III isomer can progress through the pathway to form 
protoporphyrin IX and haem, HMB may spontane-
ously cyclize into the uroporphyrinogen I isomer. This 
forms a substrate for uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase 
(UROD) and may be converted to coproporphyrino-
gen I, but is not metabolized further. Adult reference 
ranges for porphyrins and their precursors are shown 
in Table 28.2.
Overview of the porphyrias
Clinically manifest porphyria is always associated 
with detectable overproduction of haem precur-
sors. Each enzyme deficiency, and the increase in 
­activity in XLDPP, gives rise to a specific pattern of 
­overproduction, which defines the corresponding dis-
ease (Table  28.3). Three clinical manifestations may 
occur: acute neurovisceral attacks, skin lesions or both. 
Acute attacks of porphyria are always accompanied by 
overproduction of ALA and, in all but ALA dehydratase 
deficiency porphyria (ADP), of PBG. Porphyrias caus-
ing skin lesions are characterized by overproduction of 
porphyrins. Four of the eight porphyrias can present 
with acute neurovisceral attacks: the very rare autoso-
mal recessive ADP and the three autosomal dominant 
acute porphyrias, acute intermittent porphyria (AIP), 
hereditary coproporphyria (HCP) and variegate por-
phyria (VP). Hereditary coproporphyria and VP can 
present with skin photosensitivity or acute attacks, or 
both. In the other four porphyrias, two types of photo-
sensitization may occur: accumulation of hydrophobic 
free protoporphyrin in erythropoietic protoporphyria 
(EPP) and XLDPP is associated with acute photosen-
sitivity, while accumulation of the more water-soluble 
porphyrins in porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) and con-
genital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) leads to fragile 
skin and bullae.
Molecular genetics of the porphyrias
All the porphyrias, apart from the sporadic form of PCT, 
are single gene disorders that are inherited in autosomal 
dominant, recessive or X-linked patterns (see Table 28.1). 
Characteristics and chromosomal locations of individual 
genes are shown in Table 28.4. The HMBS and UROS 
genes are alternatively spliced to produce erythroid and 
ubiquitous isoforms. Disease-specific mutations that 
abolish or markedly decrease enzyme activity have now 
been identified in the genes for all the autosomal domi-
nant porphyrias (Human Gene Mutation Database: www.
hgmd.org). In most countries, mutational analysis has re-
vealed extensive allelic heterogeneity, with large numbers 
of mutations identified in each gene, most of which are 
present in only one or a few families. The main excep-
tions are the W198X HMBS mutation in Sweden and the 
R59W PPOX mutation in South Africa. In both coun-
tries, these mutations have been multiplied by founder 
effects and account for the high prevalence of AIP in 
Sweden and of VP among individuals of Afrikaans ances-
try in South Africa. The proportion of different types of 
mutation varies little between the diseases, with missense, 
nonsense, splice site and frameshift mutations contribut-
ing to the overall heterogeneity. Large deletions appear 
TABLE 28.1  Overview of the porphyrias indicating inheritance, prevalence and main clinical 
presentation
Disorder
Enzyme
Inheritance
Prevalence (overt 
disease)
Clinical presentation
Acute porphyrias
ALA dehydratase deficiency 
porphyria (ADP)
ALA dehydratase (ALAD)
AR
Unknown
Acute neurovisceral attacks
Acute intermittent 
porphyria (AIP)
Hydroxymethyl-bilane 
synthase (HMBS)
a,b
AD
1–2:100 000
Acute neurovisceral attacks
Hereditary coproporphyria 
(HCP)
Coproporphyrinogen 
oxidase (CPOX)
b
AD
<1:250 000
Bullous photosensitivity/acute 
neurovisceral attacks
Variegate porphyria (VP)
Protoporphyrinogen 
oxidase (PPOX)
b
AD
1:250 000
Bullous photosensitivity/acute 
neurovisceral attacks
Non-acute porphyrias
Congenital erythropoietic 
porphyria (CEP)
Uroporphyrinogen 
synthase (UROS)
AR
<1:10
6
Bullous photosensitivity
Porphyria cutanea tarda 
(PCT)
Uroporphyrinogen 
decarboxylase (UROD)
AD
c
1:25 000 (20% 
familial)
Bullous photosensitivity
Erythropoietic 
protoporphyria (EPP)
Ferrochelatase (FECH)
AR
1:100 000
Acute photosensitivity
X-linked dominant 
protoporphyria (XLDPP)
ALA synthase-2
X linked
Unknown
Acute photosensitivity
AR, autosomal recessive; AD, autosomal dominant.
aAlso known as PBG deaminase.
bEnzyme activities are half normal.
cIn about 20% of patients.
Mitochondria
Cytoplasm
ALA
synthase
ALA
Dehydratase (ADP)
Glycine
+
Succinyl-CoA
ALA (×2)
O
OH
O
NH2
V
M
M
M
M
V
N
N
N
N
Fe
++
Fe2+
V
M
M
V
M
M
P
P
V
V
M
M
M
M
P
P
NH
HN
NH
HN
A
H
P
P
P
P
P
A
A
A
A
HO
P
P
P
P
A
A
A
A
P
P
P
P
M
M
M
M
M
M
M
P
P
P
P
M
P
P
P
P
A
A
A
A
NH
NH
HN
HN
PBG (×4)
P
P
HAEM
Ferrochelatase (EPP)
Protoporphyrinogen
oxidase (VP)
Uroporphyrinogen
synthase (CEP)
Spontaneous
Uroporphyrinogen
decarboxylase (PCT, HEP)
Protoporphyrin IX
Uroporphyrinogen III
Uroporphyrinogen I
Protoporphyrinogen IX
Coproporphyrinogen III
Coproporphyrinogen I
HMB synthase
(AIP)
HMB
N
NH
N
HN
Coproporphyrinogen
oxidase (HCP)
N
NH
HN
NH
HN
NH
HN
NH
HN
NH
HN
NH
HN
NH
HN
NH
HN
H2N
FIGURE 28.1  ■ The haem biosynthetic pathway. The side chains are denoted by: A, acetic acid; M, methyl; P, propionic acid; V, vinyl. For 
other abbreviations, see Box 28.1.
BOX 28.1	
Abbreviations used for porphyrias, and metabolites and enzymes of the haem pathway
ADP
ALA dehydratase deficiency porphyria
HEP
Hepatoerythropoietic porphyria
AIP
Acute intermittent porphyria
HMB
Hydroxymethylbilane
ALA
5-Aminolaevulinic acid
HMBS
Hydroxymethylbilane synthase
ALAD
ALA dehydratase
PBG
Porphobilinogen
ALAS
ALA synthase
PBG-D
Porphobilinogen deaminase
CEP
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria
PCT
Porphyria cutanea tarda
CPOX
Coproporphyrinogen oxidase
PPOX
Protoporphyrinogen oxidase
EPP
Erythropoietic protoporphyria
UROD
Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase
FECH
Ferrochelatase
UROS
Uroporphyrinogen synthase
HCP
Hereditary coproporphyria
VP
Variegate porphyria
XLDPP
X-linked dominant protoporphyria
536	
Clinical biochemistry
Wavelength (nm)
5
120
100
80
60
40
20
0
200
160
120
80
40
0
600
610
620
630
640
650
570
590
610
630
650
Wavelength (nm)
Free proto
Zinc proto
Fluorescence units
Fluorescence units
A
B
C
D
E
F
CIII
D
CI
CIII
CI
5
10
15
20
10
15
20
CI
D
CIII
U
H
He
Pe
C
Di
5
5
10
15
20
10
15
20
I
FIGURE 28.2  ■  Examples of key laboratory findings that allow the porphyrias to be distinguished biochemically. (A) Plasma porphy-
rin fluorescence scans showing the three distinct emission peaks at 620 nm (AIP, CEP, PCT, HCP), 626 nm (VP) and 631 nm (EPP). A 
negative plasma scan (lower line) is also shown. (B) Fluorescence emission scan of whole blood allows zinc chelated protopor-
phyrin (proto) (increased in anaemia and lead poisoning) to be distinguished from free protoporphyrin, which is increased in EPP. 
Markedly increased zinc chelated and free protoporphyrins are characteristic for XLDPP. The lower line indicates a normal scan. 
High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis of faecal porphyrins allows three porphyrias with a plasma fluorescence 
emission peak at 620 nm to be distinguished (faecal porphyrin excretion is normal in AIP). (C) Normal faecal porphyrin HPLC trace 
indicating predominantly coproporphyrin (CI) isomer and dicarboxylic (D) porphyrins (protoporphyrin, pemptoporphyrin, deutero-
porphyrin). (D) Faecal porphyrin pattern found in HCP indicating increased coproporphyrin, which is almost entirely the III isomer. 
(E) Faecal porphyrin trace seen in CEP indicating increased coproporphyrin isomer I. (F) Faecal porphyrin pattern seen in PCT 
patients indicating the increased excretion of partially decarboxylated intermediates; heptacarboxylic (H), hexacarboxylic (He) and 
pentacarboxylic (Pe) porphyrins as well as isocoproporphyrin (I) and dehydroisocoproporphyrin (Di), which are pathognomonic 
for PCT. U, uroporphyrin.
	
28  The porphyrias: inherited disorders of haem synthesis	
537
to be uncommon. Perhaps not surprisingly in view of the 
large number of different mutations, no clinically use-
ful genotype-phenotype correlation has yet been identi-
fied in any autosomal dominant porphyria. With current 
methods of analysis, the sensitivity of mutation identifica-
tion is over 95% in AIP and VP.
Incomplete penetrance is an important feature of all 
the autosomal dominant porphyrias; only a proportion 
of those who inherit a disease-specific mutation develop 
the disease. In this chapter, the terms latent or presymp-
tomatic will be used to describe individuals who have in-
herited a porphyria gene but at the time of investigation 
have not had symptoms. Estimates of penetrance for the 
autosomal dominant acute porphyrias derived from fam-
ily studies range from 10% to 40% and are influenced 
by age and rigour of phenotype definition. In the UK, 
about 80% of adults identified by family studies as car-
rying a gene for an acute porphyria never have an acute 
attack severe enough to require hospitalization. This 
figure is consistent with the observation that about 30% 
of patients with AIP present without a family history 
of the disease, yet family studies almost always reveal 
TABLE 28.2  Adult reference ranges for 
­porphyrins and their precursors
Specimen
Metabolite
Reference range
Urine
5-Aminolaevulinic acid
<3.8 μmol/mmol 
creatinine
Porphobilinogen
<1.5 μmol/mmol 
creatinine
Total porphyrin
<40 nmol/mmol 
creatinine
 
Uroporphyrin
<40%
 
Coproporphyrin I
5–40%
 
Coproporphyrin III
40–80%
Faeces
Total porphyrin
10–200 nmol/g 
dry weight
 
Coproporphyrin I
5–43%
 
Coproporphyrin III
5–37%
 
Copro I/III ratio
0.3–1.4
 
Dicarboxylic porphyrin
a
10–85%
Erythrocytes
Total porphyrin
0.4–1.7 μmol/L 
erythrocytes
aMainly protoporphyrin but includes pempto-, deutero- and 
mesoporphyrins, which are the products of bacterial action on 
protoporphyrin.
TABLE 28.3  The main biochemical findings in symptomatic porphyria
Porphyria
Urine
Faecal porphyrins
Plasma porphyrins
a
Erythrocyte porphyrins
Acute porphyrias
ADP
ALA, coproporphyrin
Normal
Normal
Protoporphyrin (zinc)
AIP
ALA, PBG, 
uroporphyrin
Normal or slight increase in 
normal porphyrin pattern
615–620 nm
Normal
HCP
ALA, PBG, 
coproporphyrin III
Coproporphyrin III (isomer III:I 
ratio >1.4)
615–620 nm
Normal
VP
ALA, PBG, 
coproporphyrin III
Protoporphyrin > coproporphyrin III
624–627 nm
Normal
Non-acute porphyrias
CEP
Uroporphyrin I, 
coproporphyrin I
Coproporphyrin I
615–620 nm
Protoporphyrin 
(zinc and free), 
uroporphyrin I
PCT
Uroporphyrin (I and 
III), heptacarboxylic 
porphyrin
Isocoproporphyrin, 
heptacarboxylic
615–620 nm
Normal
EPP
Normal
Increased protoporphyrin in 40%
626–634 nm
Protoporphyrin (free)
XLDPP
Normal
Protoporphyrin may be increased 
626–634 nm
Protoporphyrin (zinc 
and free)
Porphyrin analyses on random urine, faeces and EDTA-preserved blood allow the individual porphyrias to be distinguished. Individual urine 
and faecal porphyrins are separated and measured by high-performance liquid chromatography with fluorescence detection. Note that 
EPP cannot be diagnosed by urine porphyrin analysis alone.
aEmission maximum of plasma fluorescence peak (for examples, see Fig. 28.2).
TABLE 28.4  The molecular genetics of the porphyrias
Disorder
Gene
Chromosome
Gene size (kb)
Exons
cDNA (codons)
ADP
ALAD
9q34
13
13
330
XLDPP
ALAS2
Xp11.21
35
11
550
AIP
HMBS
11q24.1–24.2
10
15
U: 361
E: 344
CEP
UROS
10q25.2–26.3
34
10
U: 265
E: 265
PCT
UROD
1p34
  3
10
367
HCP
CPOX
3q12
14
7
354
VP
PPOX
1q21–23
  5
13
477
EPP
FECH
18q21.3
45
11
423
U, ubiquitous; E, erythroid.
538	
Clinical biochemistry
latent porphyria in their families, de novo ­mutation 
being uncommon. Studies of blood donors suggest that the 
gene for AIP may be present in about 0.06% of the gen-
eral population. The low clinical penetrance of the acute 
porphyrias probably reflects a combination of envi-
ronmental (see below) and genetic influences. The lat-
ter have not been identified but are likely to be at loci 
distant from the disease gene. Factors that determine 
clinical penetrance in familial PCT are described on 
page 544.
Clinical penetrance of the autosomal recessive por-
phyrias, ADP, CEP and EPP is close to 100%, although 
age at first presentation may be variable. They also show 
extensive allelic heterogeneity, with most patients whose 
parents are not consanguineous being compound het-
erozygotes. Other features of their genetics, and those of 
XLDPP, are discussed later in this chapter.
PORPHYRIAS PRESENTING WITH ACUTE 
ATTACKS
The autosomal dominant acute porphyrias
AIP, HCP and VP are autosomal dominant conditions 
that put the patient at risk of acute neurovisceral attacks, 
which may be life-threatening. In VP and HCP, skin le-
sions, indistinguishable from those of PCT, may occur 
either independently or in combination with acute at-
tacks. In the UK, acute attacks of porphyria are estimated 
to affect about nine per million of the population, most 
of whom have AIP. Symptomatic VP is approximately 
half as common as AIP. HCP is the rarest of these acute 
porphyrias.
Pathophysiology of acute attacks
Acute neurovisceral attacks occur when hepatic haem 
synthesis is induced in the presence of deficient HMBS 
activity, resulting in an accumulation of the haem pre-
cursors ALA and PBG. In AIP, this is a primary defi-
ciency, but in VP and HCP, it has been proposed that 
the deficiency is secondary to inhibition of HMBS by 
other metabolites in the haem pathway. The exact cause 
of neuronal damage has not been fully established, but 
current evidence from liver transplantation suggests that 
it is due to a hepatic neurotoxin, probably ALA. The 
neurological lesions comprise axonal degeneration and 
patchy demyelination of peripheral neurons with chro-
matolysis of anterior horn cells, brain stem nuclei and 
ganglia of the autonomic nervous system. There may 
also be diffuse neuronal loss and gliosis of the CNS. The 
result is damage to autonomic, motor and CNS neurons, 
giving rise to the characteristic clinical presentation, de-
scribed below.
Clinical presentation of acute attacks
Acute attacks of porphyria are extremely rare before pu-
berty and unusual after the menopause, having a peak 
occurrence in the third and fourth decades. Women are 
more frequently affected than men. In most patients, an 
attack will cease once the diagnosis has been made, appro-
priate treatment given and likely precipitants removed. 
However, particularly when there is delay in establishing 
the diagnosis, prolonged and very severe, life-threatening 
and sometimes fatal acute attacks may occur. Commonly 
ascribed precipitants include prescribed and illicit drugs, 
alcohol (particularly binge drinking), systemic infection 
and dieting either alone or in combination. In women, 
attacks may be related to the menstrual cycle, usually the 
luteal phase. However, in some cases no obvious aetio­
logy is found.
An acute attack of porphyria normally starts with 
continuous abdominal pain, which becomes progres-
sively more severe and is associated with nausea, vom-
iting and constipation. The patient may also complain 
of pain in the lower back, buttocks and inner thighs. 
The abdominal pain is typically diffuse, with no local-
izing signs or evidence of an acute abdomen on ex-
amination. The severity of pain appears out of keeping 
with the physical signs and often requires the admin-
istration of large parenteral doses of opiates. In the 
absence of an obvious cause, this may trigger concerns 
about opiate dependence among clinical staff who have 
no previous experience of the condition. Diminishing 
pain, particularly where no treatment has been given, 
does not always herald the end of an acute attack, and 
patients should be carefully monitored for the devel-
opment of neuropathy. The autonomic neuropathy 
that results in the gastrointestinal symptoms also gives 
rise to tachycardia and hypertension in approximately 
two-thirds of patients. Patients frequently become de-
hydrated during an acute attack and may also develop 
hyponatraemia, which may worsen if inappropriate 
volumes of hypotonic intravenous fluid are infused. 
Plasma sodium concentration can fall quickly to ex-
tremely low values, precipitating convulsions, which 
occur in about 5% of patients. Seizures may also occur 
as a neurological manifestation of the acute attack, and 
present a particularly difficult management problem 
as many antiepileptic drugs are implicated as a cause 
of acute attacks. Rhabdomyolysis, which may lead to 
renal failure, is a recognized but rare complication of 
an acute attack.
Severe and untreated attacks can result in a predomi-
nantly motor peripheral neuropathy. In most cases, this 
is a symmetrical distal neuropathy resulting in wrist and 
foot drop, but occasionally there is progression to a fla­
ccid paresis resembling Guillain–Barré syndrome and 
requiring prolonged ventilatory support. Prognosis for 
full recovery is excellent when attacks can be treated and 
halted. However, patients who require ventilatory sup-
port frequently experience a difficult recovery period, 
characterized by recurrent relapses triggered by the 
requirement for multiple prescribed drugs and compli-
cations such as infection. A small number of patients 
experience sensory changes such as dysaesthesia or hypo-
aesthesia in a similar distribution to the motor neuropa-
thy. Other neurological signs reported include cranial 
nerve involvement including the optic nerve, which can 
lead to blindness.
The CNS is frequently involved. Acute mental changes 
are common and include anxiety, insomnia, confusion, 
	
28  The porphyrias: inherited disorders of haem synthesis	
539
hallucinations and paranoia, which resolve completely 
following the acute attack. There is no evidence that any 
form of chronic psychiatric illness is associated with any 
of the acute porphyrias. Less common CNS features are 
cerebellar syndrome, pyramidal signs, transient cortical 
blindness and altered consciousness.
Most patients have only one or a few attacks, with a 
major attack often being followed by two or three mi-
nor ones before full remission. However, about 5% of 
AIP patients suffer from frequent acute attacks, which in 
women may be premenstrual, and which may continue 
for several years (see p. 541). Obvious triggers are usu-
ally not found and the repeated admissions to hospital can 
severely affect the quality of life, particularly if patients 
have young families. Repeated admissions and high opi-
ate requirement may also lead medical staff who are un-
familiar with the condition to question the diagnosis and 
the patient’s motives.
Chronic complications
Some patients develop a chronic pain syndrome. Pain is 
usually in the peripheries, often constant and may be trig-
gered by minor stimuli. The cause of this is unknown; 
management is particularly difficult since it is important 
to avoid addictive analgesics. Treatment with haem argin-
ate (see p. 540) is usually of no benefit.
Studies from several countries have demonstrated an 
increased risk of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) in the 
absence of chronic liver disease in patients with an acute 
hepatic porphyria even when this is clinically latent. The 
risk is particularly high in Sweden, where a recent study 
found a standardized increased risk ratio of 64 for AIP 
gene carriers aged over 54 years and recommended that 
AIP patients over the age of 50 years should be screened 
annually for HCC by ultrasound examination. The ben-
efit from screening in other countries has yet to be as-
sessed. It has also been suggested that all HCC patients 
in whom no obvious cause is found should be screened 
for acute porphyria.
Renal impairment has been described as a compli-
cation of AIP, affecting particularly those patients who 
have previously suffered acute attacks. Hypertension is 
also common in these patients, but in many, the ­decline 
in renal function precedes the onset of hypertension, 
which may also be a consequence of the porphyria. 
Renal biopsies have shown glomerular sclerosis and 
­interstitial fibrosis, but no evidence of inflammation or 
immunodeposits. A proportion of patients may prog-
ress to end-stage renal failure, requiring dialysis and/
or renal transplantation. Patients who have had active 
disease should therefore have their renal function and 
blood pressure monitored regularly, and antihyperten-
sive therapy should be instituted in an attempt to limit 
progression of renal impairment.
Diagnosis of acute porphyria
Diagnosis of an acute attack in a newly presenting pa-
tient requires the demonstration of increased excre-
tion of urinary PBG in a fresh, random sample of urine 
that has been protected from light. An assay capable of 
quantitative or semiquantitative measurement of PBG 
should ideally be available in all acute hospitals. In 
practice, many non-specialist units use rapid qualitative 
screening tests, particularly out of hours, which have 
low sensitivity and poor specificity. All positive screen-
ing tests should be confirmed by a specific quantitative 
method with expression of results in relation to creatinine 
to correct for urine concentration. If urine PBG and ALA 
concentrations are normal during the early phase of an acute 
illness, all acute porphyrias, including ADP, are excluded as 
a cause of that illness. However, both PBG and ALA may 
return to within normal limits within a few days after the 
onset of symptoms in VP and HCP, and negative findings 
should be interpreted with caution when there has been 
a delay in collecting samples. However, in both these dis-
orders, urinary and faecal porphyrins remain elevated for 
a prolonged period. Conversely, urinary PBG excretion 
usually remains elevated for many months or even years 
after an acute attack in AIP, and an increased PBG does 
not necessarily indicate an acute attack unless a marked 
increase from baseline can be shown to coincide with 
symptoms. Management of a clinically diagnosed acute 
attack should be started immediately, without waiting for 
confirmation of a positive screening test or determination 
of the type of acute porphyria.
Establishment of the type of acute porphyria requires 
analysis of plasma and faecal porphyrins (see Table 28.3; 
Fig. 28.2). Faecal porphyrin analysis is essential to dis-
tinguish HCP, in which coproporphyrin III accounts for 
most of the increased faecal porphyrin excretion, from 
AIP, in which faecal porphyrin excretion is normal or 
only slightly increased without any change in the copro-
porphyrin isomer ratio. Variegate porphyria can easily 
be identified by demonstrating a characteristic plasma 
porphyrin fluorescence emission peak at 625–628 nm. 
Enzyme analyses and genetic studies are not required 
for the diagnosis of new cases of clinically overt por-
phyria. Their use in family studies is detailed later in 
the chapter.
Laboratory monitoring of patients during and after 
acute attacks by regular measurement of porphyrin pre-
cursors is rarely indicated; treatment should be guided by 
clinical assessment. The one exception is where a severe 
attack has progressed to flaccid paresis and clinical assess-
ment is difficult. In these circumstances, weekly moni-
toring may provide useful information on whether the 
condition is stable or deteriorating.
Management of an acute attack
Supportive treatment. As soon as the acute attack is con-
firmed, drugs or other recognized precipitants should be 
withdrawn. Safe and effective management of symptoms 
and complications, with support from an expert centre, 
is essential to minimize the stress; effective pain relief is 
a major component. This invariably requires opiates, and 
support from a specialist pain team can be very helpful as 
very high doses may be required. A phenothiazine may 
be used for anxiety and restlessness, and to decrease the 
opiate requirements. Antiemetics should be prescribed 
for nausea and vomiting. Adequate fluid and energy 
intake should be ensured, if necessary by intravenous ­ 
540	
Clinical biochemistry
infusions of 0.9% sodium chloride containing a minimum 
of 5% dextrose, with regular monitoring of electrolyte 
status in view of the risk of hyponatraemia. Where drug 
treatment of precipitants such as infection, coexisting 
conditions or other features of an acute attack, such as 
hypertension, tachycardia or convulsions, are required, 
care should be taken to select medications that are con-
sidered safe. Information on drug safety is continually 
under review and safe drug lists are likely to change 
regularly (see Welsh Medicines Information Centre: 
www.wmic.wales.nhs.uk). Where no safe alternative is 
on the list, an expert centre should be consulted for fur-
ther advice on patient management. Information about 
specialist centres offering support in Europe is available 
from the European Porphyria Network (EPNET): www.
porphyria-europe.org.
Specific treatment. Specific treatment is aimed at sup-
pressing hepatic haem precursor production by admin-
istering intravenous haem, which binds to albumin and 
is transported to the liver, where it downregulates ALAS 
activity. Treatment is effective if given early, preferably 
within the first 24–48 h. It will not reverse established 
neuropathy due to axonal degeneration. Within Europe, 
haem is available as haem arginate (Normosang
® Orphan 
Europe) and is provided as a concentrated stock solu-
tion (25 mg/mL), which should be diluted immediately 
before use in 100 mL 0.9% saline and administered at a 
dose of 3 mg/kg body weight in a single intravenous in-
fusion over at least 30 min on each of four consecutive 
days. As there is no evidence for toxicity, it is practical 
in most adults to infuse the entire contents of the vial 
for each dose. However, in smaller patients it may be 
possible to obtain two doses from each vial, limiting the 
overall cost of treatment. The main side-effect of therapy 
is thrombophlebitis at the site of infusion. This can be 
minimized by careful flushing of the infusion site with 
normal saline, and re-siting the i.v. cannula after each 
infusion. Alternatively, the haem can be diluted in 20% 
human serum albumin, which has proved to be effective 
in preventing thrombophlebitis, particularly in patients 
who require regular haem arginate infusions. Lyophilized 
haem (Panhematin
®, Abbott) for intravenous infusion is 
available in the USA, but is less stable than haem argin-
ate, and has more potential side-effects, including throm-
bocytopenia and coagulopathy.
With the advent of intravenous haem therapy, car-
bohydrate loading, which also decreases hepatic ALAS1 
activity, is no longer indicated as a specific treatment un-
less haem is unavailable or there is a delay in obtaining it. 
High-dose carbohydrate (300–500 g glucose/24 h) should 
be given intravenously via a central venous catheter.
Preventing acute attacks
All patients should be advised about avoiding factors that 
increase the risk of an acute attack. These include drugs, 
alcohol and fasting or dieting, particularly diets in which 
carbohydrate is avoided completely. Weight reducing 
diets should be undertaken under the supervision of a 
dietitian. Patients should also be encouraged to register 
with an organization such as the MedicAlert Foundation, 
which provides jewellery inscribed with appropriate in-
formation in case of emergencies. It is helpful to provide 
patients with written information explaining the disorder 
and, where applicable, they should be provided with de-
tails of existing patient support groups (e.g. the British 
Porphyria Association: www.porphyria.org.uk). They 
should also be offered the opportunity to see a clinician 
with a special interest in porphyria on at least one occa-
sion. Patients in remission (i.e. those who have had an 
acute attack) should be followed-up annually, preferably 
at a specialist centre or in conjunction with one. Local 
follow-up is also important in order to ensure contact 
with clinical services should admission be required. 
Through such shared care arrangements, most interven-
ing problems can be managed successfully through cor-
respondence or over the telephone.
Severely affected patients
A minority of patients with acute porphyria suffer from 
repeated acute attacks, occasionally as often as every 
3–4 weeks. The majority are women with AIP in their 
20s and 30s and their management can present a major 
challenge to clinicians and the acute medical services. A 
careful history should be taken to ascertain any obvious 
provoking factor, such as smoking, alcohol, drugs or stage 
of the menstrual cycle. An individualized management 
protocol should be drawn up by the local physician with 
help from a recognized national porphyria service; these 
operate in many European countries, including the UK, 
where the National Acute Porphyria Service (NAPS) 
has been commissioned specifically to support the man-
agement of patients with active porphyria. The patient 
should be encouraged to seek early medical intervention 
as prompt treatment may abort an acute attack, limiting 
the length of inpatient stay. This is best achieved by rapid 
direct access to inpatient facilities and the support of a 
clinical team who knows the patient and is experienced in 
dealing with the treatment of acute attacks.
When attacks appear to be associated with the luteal 
phase of the menstrual cycle, they may be reduced in fre-
quency and/or severity by suppression of ovulation using 
gonadotrophin releasing hormone agonists. If this succeeds 
and is to be continued for longer than six months, mea-
sures to prevent osteoporosis become essential. Oestrogen 
supplementation, preferably in the form of patches, is tol-
erated by some patients, and diminishes any menopausal 
symptoms, but carries a small risk of provoking further at-
tacks. Progestogens should not be used and most women 
will therefore require regular endometrial monitoring un-
der the supervision of a gynaecologist. Adequate vitamin D 
and calcium intake should be ensured, by supplementation 
if required. Bisphosphonates have also been used in this 
situation to reduce the risk of osteoporosis.
Regular infusion of haem arginate reduces the fre-
quency and severity of acute attacks in many patients. 
The minimum effective dose frequency, varying between 
monthly and weekly single infusions, should be estab-
lished for each individual patient. There is no typical 
regimen. Where this treatment is being considered, it is 
often helpful to contact an expert porphyria centre to dis-
cuss the individual details with a clinician with experience 
	
28  The porphyrias: inherited disorders of haem synthesis	
541
of its use. An indwelling central venous line is invariably 
required, although the specific type of line used should be 
dictated by local expertise and patient choice. Dilution of 
haem arginate in albumin solutions may reduce the need 
to replace blocked venous catheters.
Where these measures fail to control the attacks with 
resulting repeated life-threatening crises, problems with 
central venous access arise, progressive renal dysfunction 
occurs or quality of life is assessed as very poor, patients 
should be considered for liver transplantation, which is 
curative. Careful counselling and assessment is required, 
preferably in centres with experience with orthotopic liver 
transplantation (OLT) for this indication. Referral should 
ideally be before any chronic damage becomes irrevers-
ible. Liver transplantation has also confirmed that over-
production of haem precursors by the liver is central to 
the pathogenesis of acute attacks. This evidence has sup-
ported a project to develop gene therapy using a recombi-
nant viral vector targeting the liver as a treatment for AIP.
Recurrent acute abdominal pain should not automati-
cally be ascribed to the porphyria, particularly if the pa-
tient reports that the pain is not the same as previously 
experienced. Other conditions should be considered, as 
failure to diagnose these can have serious, possibly fatal 
consequences. In this situation, measuring urine PBG 
and/or ALA may be helpful in patients with VP or HCP. 
In AIP patients, a baseline measurement is required to aid 
interpretation of later results.
Chronic pain, which may be neuropathic, is a common 
problem in patients who have suffered regular acute at-
tacks. Pain may be in the abdomen, limbs or lower back 
and may, in some cases, be present almost continuously. 
Although there may be an initial response to haem argin-
ate, suppression of ovulation or other methods used to 
manage recurrent acute attacks, this is rarely sustained. 
Opiates are not a long-term solution in view of the risk of 
dependence, and should not be prescribed between acute 
attacks. Analgesia with a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drug can, in some cases, be successful, and some patients 
may benefit from medication used to treat neuropathic 
pain such as gabapentin or pregabalin. Detailed discus-
sion with the patient to explain that these symptoms are 
not due to an acute attack can be reassuring.
Managing asymptomatic relatives of patients
Once the diagnosis of a specific type of acute porphyria 
has been established in a new patient, screening should 
be offered to family members, so that those found to be 
affected, most of whom will have latent porphyria, can be 
offered specific advice as to how to limit the risk of suf-
fering an acute attack.
Family studies. Metabolite measurements are highly 
specific but are almost always normal before puberty and 
have low sensitivity in adults (Table 28.5). Enzyme mea-
surements are more sensitive but their sensitivity and 
specificity are limited by the overlap between activities 
in disease and in normal subjects. They have now largely 
been replaced by mutation detection by DNA analysis, 
which is specific and 100% sensitive if the mutation 
that causes porphyria in the family under investigation 
is known. It is essential, therefore, that children, and 
those family members whose specific porphyrin bio-
chemistry is normal, be offered gene testing. Enzyme 
measurements, for example erythrocyte HMBS assay for 
­detection of latent AIP, and gene tracking using intra-
genic single nucleotide polymorphisms, may be useful in 
the few families in which a disease-specific mutation can-
not be identified.
Safe prescribing
Prescription drugs are an established precipitant of 
acute attacks and, even in known porphyria patients, 
careless prescribing has induced acute attacks or made 
evolving ones worse. It is therefore essential to provide 
information concerning the safe use of prescription 
medication to both those affected and their clinicians. 
A recent initiative in Europe has resulted in a review 
of the available evidence on a significant proportion 
of the current pharmacopoeia and provided an overall 
assessment of safety for individual drugs (www.drugs-
porphyria.org).
Drugs can be classified into three broad groups, based 
on clinical experience, experimental evidence and an un-
derstanding of their metabolism and excretion. These are: 
Not Porphyrinogenic (safe); Porphyrinogenic (unsafe); and Of 
Uncertain Safety (i.e. should be used with caution), which 
the European system subclassifies into three groups: 
Probably Not Porphyrinogenic, Possibly Porphyrinogenic and 
Probably Porphyrinogenic. In the first instance, clinicians 
should be encouraged to prescribe from a list of drugs that 
are known to be safe and to avoid those that are definitely 
unsafe. However, no drug should be seen as completely 
unusable as there may be clinical situations where a safe 
alternative is either unsuitable or not available. In these 
circumstances, an assessment of benefit versus risk should 
be made, taking into account the severity of the medical 
condition and porphyria activity. Support from a national 
centre with expertise in managing porphyria, and access 
to the most up-to-date drugs information, should also be 
obtained. If an unsafe drug has to be prescribed, urine 
PBG should be measured before starting, and at regular 
intervals during treatment.
TABLE 28.5  Screening asymptomatic relatives for latent acute porphyria
Porphyria
Screening method
Age range (years)
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
AIP
Urinary PBG >1.5 μmol/mmol
Age ≥15
43
100
HCP
Faecal coproporphyrin III/I molar isomer ratio >1.4
Age ≥7
64
100
VP
Plasma porphyrin fluorescence peak at 624–626 nm
Age ≥15
62
100
AIP, HCP, VP
Detection of known mutation by DNA analysis
All ages
100
100
542	
Clinical biochemistry
Specific situations
Pregnancy. Although acute attacks do occur during 
pregnancy, there does not appear to be a significantly in-
creased risk and most patients tolerate pregnancy, deliv-
ery and the puerperium without any adverse consequence. 
However, it is usually recommended that pregnancy 
should be delayed until patients have been free of severe 
acute attacks for a year. Patients should not be allowed to 
experience prolonged periods of stress and fasting during 
labour. Effective pain relief, including spinal or epidural 
anaesthesia, should be administered and, where neces-
sary, intravenous fluids containing glucose should be used 
to prevent the development of a catabolic state. Where an 
acute attack does occur during pregnancy, haem prepara-
tions have been used and there have been no reports of 
any adverse effects.
Anaesthesia. General anaesthesia can be safely under-
taken in porphyria patients, provided care is taken to se-
lect drugs that are known to be safe. General measures 
to reduce stress and limit periods of fasting should also 
be instituted, and postoperative complications, such as 
infection treated aggressively with drugs chosen from 
the safe list. Regional and dental anaesthesia using local 
anaesthetics have been safely undertaken in many acute 
porphyria patients without problem.
Rare forms of acute porphyria
ALA dehydratase deficiency porphyria
5-Aminolaevulinic acid dehydratase deficiency porphyria 
(ADP) is an autosomal recessive acute porphyria, pre-
senting with neurovisceral symptoms, that results from 
deficient ALAD activity; the biochemistry is character-
ized by marked increases in the plasma concentration and 
urinary excretion of ALA. The prevalence cannot be ac-
curately assessed, but is extremely low with fewer than 
ten cases reported worldwide to date, and, as yet, none 
from the UK.
In addition to the very elevated plasma and urinary 
ALA, other biochemical features include a normal or 
slightly increased urine PBG, markedly elevated urine 
coproporphyrin excretion, normal faecal porphyrin and 
increased erythrocyte protoporphyrin. Confirmation of 
the diagnosis requires exclusion of lead poisoning, which 
gives rise to similar biochemical features, and demonstra-
tion of decreased ALAD activity in erythroid and non-
erythroid cells that is not reversed by addition of excess 
zinc and a sulfhydryl group reducing agent. Mutational 
analysis may also be helpful in confirming the diagnosis, 
and may be required for genetic counselling.
Clinical presentation is variable with reported ages of 
presentation from birth through to 63 years. The pre-
dominant presentation is with acute attacks of abdomi-
nal pain and neuropathy that resemble those seen in the 
autosomal dominant acute porphyrias, and similarly may 
be triggered by factors such as prescribed drugs that in-
duce ALAS activity. Heterozygote carriers are asymp-
tomatic, but may be at increased risk from the effects of 
environmental toxins, such as lead, that inhibit ALAD ac-
tivity. Treatment with hematin and glucose has not been 
effective in all cases. Liver transplantation in a patient 
with ADP did not protect the patient from further acute 
attacks, nor correct the biochemical abnormalities. The 
marked enzyme deficiency in other tissues, particularly 
nervous tissue, probably contributes to the poor clinical 
outcome in this autosomal recessive condition.
Homozygous acute porphyrias
Homozygosity for null mutations of haem biosynthetic 
genes is lethal in early embryonic development. However, 
very rare so-called homozygous variants of all the auto-
somal dominant acute porphyrias have been reported, in 
which patients are homozygous or compound heterozy-
gous for mutations that have some residual activity. All 
present in childhood and have other phenotypic differ-
ences from their (heterozygous) autosomal dominant 
counterparts.
Homozygous AIP is clinically the most severe of these 
variants and is usually associated with a progressive leu-
kodystrophy. Both homozygous HCP and homozygous 
VP present with skin lesions in childhood with, in the 
latter, clinodactyly (curving of the little finger towards 
the ring finger) and sometimes other abnormalities, in-
cluding short stature and neurological defects. Acute at-
tacks have been reported in homozygous HCP but not 
homozygous VP. Missense mutations in exon 6 of the 
CPOX gene cause harderoporphyria, a relatively benign 
condition characterized by neonatal jaundice, persistent 
mild haemolytic anaemia, skin lesions and excretion of 
the tricarboxylic porphyrin, harderoporphyrin, in fae-
ces. All these variants can be distinguished from their 
(heterozygous) autosomal dominant counterparts by 
demonstrating very low activity of the relevant enzyme 
and by mutational analysis. Erythrocyte protoporphyrin 
concentrations are also increased in all these conditions 
and this may serve as a useful initial diagnostic indica-
tor. With the exception of harderoporphyria, porphyrin 
excretion patterns in the homozygous acute porphyrias 
are indistinguishable from those of the autosomal domi-
nant forms.
THE CUTANEOUS PORPHYRIAS
Bullous porphyrias
The bullous porphyrias all give rise to identical skin le-
sions, and so cannot be distinguished with certainty on 
clinical grounds alone. Although patients with CEP or 
hepatoerythropoietic porphyria (HEP, see p. 545) tend 
to present in infancy or childhood, and those with PCT, 
VP or HCP in adulthood, exceptions do occur: occasion-
ally PCT presents in early childhood, while the skin le-
sions of late onset CEP may first appear in adults and 
be mistaken for PCT. Biochemical investigation is essen-
tial for accurate diagnosis (see Table 28.3). It is impor-
tant to distinguish between the disorders in view of the 
differences in prognosis, treatment and susceptibility to 
acute attacks. In addition, clinically identical skin lesions, 
termed pseudoporphyria, can occur in the absence of any 
disturbance of porphyrin metabolism as a consequence of 
	
28  The porphyrias: inherited disorders of haem synthesis	
543
drug reactions, prolonged use of sun beds and in associa-
tion with long-term haemodialysis.
Pathophysiology of skin lesions
Porphyrin-induced photosensitivity results from the 
absorption of visible light at the surface of the skin. 
Porphyrins enter the dermis from the plasma and in-
teract with light of 400–410 nm wavelength, which 
is capable of penetrating to the level of the dermis 
and basement membrane. This photoactivation of the 
porphyrin ring gives rise to an unstable, excited-state 
­molecule, which can release energy as light or react 
with oxygen by resonance energy transfer to form a sin-
glet oxygen species or superoxide anion. These reactive 
oxygen species cause cellular damage via reactions with 
lipids, proteins and DNA, resulting in complement ac-
tivation, degranulation of mast cells and damage to the 
dermis and basement membrane. This process gives rise 
to the characteristic features evident on histopathology: 
perivascular accumulation of amorphous hyaline mate-
rial involving the small vessels of the dermis. This PAS-
positive material includes deposits of immunoglobulin 
and complement and appears to emanate from the walls 
and lumens of the blood vessels. Bullae occur where the 
epidermis splits from chronically damaged, thickened 
basement membrane and forms a roof for a pocket of 
clear fluid. The dermal papillae are distorted and flat-
tened by the accumulated amorphous hyaline material 
and the floors of the bullae have a characteristic fes-
tooned appearance.
Skin symptoms and signs
The skin lesions may occur in any sun-exposed area, most 
frequently the backs of the hands, the forearms, the face 
and the feet, particularly when open sandals are worn. 
Fragile skin that tears following minor mechanical stress 
is the commonest feature. Injury can occur in response 
to everyday household activities, and patients frequently 
wear gloves to avoid damaging their skin. Vesicles and 
bullae filled with clear fluid are commonly present, as 
are small white spots or milia (Fig. 28.3). Haemorrhagic 
bullae are uncommon. Bullae rupture easily and form 
crusted lesions that heal slowly, resulting in chronic scar-
ring of the skin and areas of depigmentation. Secondary 
infection of open lesions may occur, which worsens the 
scarring and in severe cases, may result in photomuti-
lation and disfiguration. Other features include hyper-
trichosis, usually on the forehead and temples; this is 
particularly noticeable and troubling in women. Less 
common clinical features include hyper- or hypopig-
mentary changes, onycholysis, conjunctival damage and 
scarring alopecia. Because of the chronic nature of the 
conditions, the relationship to sunlight is not always rec-
ognized by the patient.
Biochemical features and diagnostic approach
Each of the bullous porphyrias has a characteris-
tic pattern of porphyrin excretion during active dis-
ease that allows the conditions to be distinguished (see 
Table 28.3). Ideally, samples of urine, faeces and EDTA-
anticoagulated blood should be sent for full porphyrin 
analysis on all patients. However, the single most useful 
analysis in patients with active skin lesions is a plasma 
porphyrin fluorescence emission scan, which, if nor-
mal, excludes active cutaneous porphyria (see Fig. 28.2). 
Many dermatologists now follow this approach and will 
send the other samples required for diagnosis only if the 
plasma porphyrin screen is abnormal. However, it is es-
sential that the plasma scan be undertaken in a fluorom-
eter that is sufficiently sensitive, which requires it to be 
fitted with a red-sensitive photomultiplier. An increased 
plasma porphyrin fluorescence emission peak with a 
maximum at 624–627 nm is diagnostic for VP. However, 
it does not necessarily indicate active porphyria, as posi-
tive plasma scans are found in approximately 60% of 
adults with latent VP and in most of those in remission. 
An emission maximum at 615–620 nm is consistent with 
skin lesions caused by porphyria but does not distinguish 
between PCT, CEP or HCP. However, these conditions 
can be unequivocally differentiated by urinary and faecal 
porphyrin analyses.
FIGURE 28.3  ■ The skin lesions associated with bullous photosen-
sitivity. (A) Chronic scarring due to skin fragility, partially healed 
erosions from ruptured bullae and milia on the back of the hand. 
(B) A typical clear fluid-filled blister on the sun-exposed back of 
the hand.
A
B
544	
Clinical biochemistry
Individual disorders
Porphyria cutanea tarda. Porphyria cutanea tarda 
(PCT) is the commonest of the porphyrias, with a 
prevalence of approximately 1:25 000. It results from 
partial deficiency of the enzyme uroporphyrinogen de-
carboxylase (UROD) in the liver and is characterized 
biochemically by overproduction of uroporphyrin, 7-, 
6- and 5-carboxyl porphyrins and isocoproporphyrin. 
In many patients, there is evidence for underlying liver 
cell damage, and biochemical tests of liver function are 
often abnormal. Histopathological examination usually 
reveals only minor abnormalities: mild fatty infiltration 
with some hepatocyte necrosis and periportal inflamma-
tion. Cirrhosis is present in fewer than 20% of patients, 
but when it does occur, it carries a much greater risk of 
hepatocellular carcinoma than does comparable cirrhosis 
without PCT.
The majority of patients in the UK (80%) have sporadic 
or type I PCT, in which UROD deficiency is restricted to 
the liver. Most of the remaining 20% have familial or type 
II PCT, in which UROD deficiency is present in all tis-
sues and is inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. 
As with other autosomal dominant porphyrias, the clinical 
penetrance of familial PCT is low, with symptoms in fewer 
than 10% of those who inherit the condition. Porphyria 
cutanea tarda may also be caused by exposure to various 
halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons as in the outbreak of 
hexachlorobenzene poisoning in south-­eastern Turkey in 
the late 1950s.
Whether the patient has familial or sporadic PCT, 
overproduction of sufficient porphyrin to produce symp-
toms appears to require a decrease in hepatic UROD 
activity to well below 50% of normal. This is brought 
about through the reversible inactivation of UROD by 
a porphomethene inhibitor formed from uroporphy-
rinogen by an iron-dependent oxidative mechanism, 
probably catalysed by hepatic cytochrome P450s. Less 
inactivation of UROD is required for symptoms to oc-
cur in familial PCT, where prior enzyme activity is half-
normal and, although there is a wide overlap, patients 
tend to present at a younger age than those with sporadic 
PCT. Other risk factors for both types of PCT include 
alcohol misuse, conditions that increase hepatic iron 
content such as hereditary haemochromatosis, hepato-
tropic viruses (particularly hepatitis C virus, HCV) and 
HIV, and prescribed oestrogens: two or more risk fac-
tors are often present. Most patients have some hepatic 
iron overload but amounts are usually below those in 
overt haemochromatosis. Among patients of northern 
European descent, about 20% are homozygous for the 
haemochromatosis (HFE) gene C282Y mutation, irre-
spective of the type of PCT, but heterozygosity for this 
mutation is a less important risk factor. Prevalences for 
antibodies to HCV range from 8% to 79%, being highest 
in southern Europe and the USA and lowest in northern 
Europe. When PCT develops in HCV, it is usually an 
early manifestation; in contrast, it occurs as a late com-
plication of HIV infection. Conditions less frequently 
associated with PCT include chronic renal disease, dia-
betes mellitus, systemic lupus erythematosus and various 
haematological malignancies.
Clinical management of patients with PCT should 
start with the identification of any predisposing factors 
that can be withdrawn or treated. Newly diagnosed pa-
tients should be investigated for underlying liver disease, 
tested for iron overload by measuring transferrin satu-
ration and HFE genotyping, and screened for hepatitis 
viruses and, if indicated, HIV infection. Where there is 
evidence of chronic liver disease, referral to a hepatolo-
gist is advisable. All patients should be given general ad-
vice about avoidance of sunlight, encouraged to protect 
their hands from trauma by wearing gloves and advised 
to seek early treatment of any infected lesions. In con-
trast to patients with acute porphyrias, patients with PCT 
need not avoid any drugs, apart from antimalarial doses 
of chloroquine and its derivatives.
Two effective treatments for PCT are available. 
Venesection of a unit of blood at one- or two-weekly in-
tervals to deplete hepatic iron stores prevents inactivation 
of hepatic UROD and eventually restores enzyme activ-
ity to basal levels. Treatment should be continued until 
transferrin saturation falls to 16% or less or the patient 
becomes anaemic (haemoglobin less than 120 g/L). Serum 
ferritin concentration is less satisfactory for monitoring, 
as values may be affected by concomitant liver disease. If 
it is used, treatment should continue until the concentra-
tion is 25 μg/L or less. Although resolution of skin lesions 
occurs within 3–9 months, biochemical remission usually 
takes longer as large quantities of porphyrins stored in 
the liver are released and excreted in the urine. Other 
methods used to reduce iron stores include subcutane-
ous desferrioxamine and, in patients with renal failure, 
erythropoietin without iron supplementation. Treatment 
with low-dose chloroquine (125 mg twice weekly) or hy-
droxychloroquine (100 mg twice weekly), which com-
plexes with uroporphyrin and mobilizes it for excretion 
from the liver, is also effective. Larger doses will provoke 
an acute hepatotoxic reaction with systemic symptoms 
and should be avoided. Clinical improvement usually be-
comes evident within 3–4 months and treatment should 
be continued until total urinary porphyrin excretion falls 
to normal. Chloroquine treatment may be combined with 
venesection if response to monotherapy is slow. Choice 
between these two treatments is often determined by lo-
cal preference. There is little evidence that chloroquine 
worsens liver disease, but it is potentially hepatotoxic in 
PCT and should probably be avoided in patients with se-
vere liver disease. Iron depletion should be used for all 
HFE C282Y homozygotes; it is the only effective method 
in renal failure and ensures compliance, but is more ex-
pensive. Both treatments produce prolonged remission 
and, particularly in sporadic PCT, may prevent relapse. 
Nevertheless, long-term management should take into 
account the possibility of relapse, and patients in remis-
sion may benefit from an annual review. Patients with sig-
nificant liver disease, familial haemochromatosis or other 
associated conditions should be managed by an appropri-
ate specialist.
Determination of the type of PCT is best carried out 
by mutational analysis of the UROD gene. However, it is 
not essential for clinical management. Treatment is the 
same for both types, while the low clinical penetrance, 
absence of potentially life-threatening symptoms and 
	
28  The porphyrias: inherited disorders of haem synthesis	
545
availability of effective treatments means that mutational 
analysis for family studies is difficult to justify, except per-
haps for those rare families in which more than one indi-
vidual has overt PCT.
Hepatoerythropoietic porphyria. This is a rare vari-
ant of familial PCT in which patients are homo- or 
heteroallelic for UROD mutations. Uroporphyrinogen 
decarboxylase activity is markedly decreased in all tissues, 
although the liver appears to be the main source of excess 
porphyrins. Skin lesions usually appear in early childhood 
and are identical to those of PCT. They persist and may 
occasionally become as severe and disfiguring as in CEP. 
Other organs are rarely affected; although severe anaemia 
has been described in HEP, most patients have no signifi-
cant haematological abnormalities. Differentiation from 
other early onset porphyrias requires analysis of urinary, 
faecal and erythrocyte porphyrins, with measurement of 
erythrocyte UROD activity and/or mutational analysis 
of the UROD gene. Photoprotection is the only effec-
tive treatment. There is no associated iron overload and 
patients do not respond to phlebotomy or chloroquine. 
For most patients, the disease does not appear to affect 
survival.
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria. Congenital 
erythropoietic porphyria (CEP), or Gunther disease, is 
a rare bullous porphyria, with a UK prevalence of 1 in 3 
million. It is pan-ethnic, although like other autosomal 
recessive conditions prevalence is increased in communi-
ties where consanguinity is common. Marked deficiency 
of UROS results in the accumulation of large amounts of 
uroporphyrin I, formed by non-enzymatic cyclization of 
HMB, and, to a lesser extent, of coproporphyrin I. The 
main source of excess porphyrin production is the bone 
marrow, with less than 1% produced from other tissues. 
The severity of the condition varies from hydrops fetalis, 
resulting from in utero haemolytic anaemia, to the late 
onset forms in which the disease becomes manifest in 
late childhood and young adults. The severity appears to 
correlate with the level of residual enzyme activity, with 
the more marked deficiency resulting in very high plasma 
and red cell porphyrin concentrations, which result in 
two major pathophysiological consequences: marked 
skin photosensitivity and haemolytic anaemia with inef-
fective erythropoiesis and splenomegaly. Most porphyrin 
is ­released from cells destroyed in the bone marrow but 
some comes from red cells sequestrated and destroyed by 
the spleen. The haemolytic anaemia associated with CEP, 
which may be caused by porphyrin-induced damage to 
erythroid cell membranes, further stimulates erythropoi-
esis, increasing porphyrin overproduction.
The majority of patients present soon after birth with 
skin blisters, occasionally in response to phototherapy 
treatment for neonatal hyperbilirubinaemia, and red-
brown staining of their nappies. The skin lesions are more 
severe and extensive than in other bullous porphyrias, and 
progressive damage can lead to photomutilation affecting 
the ears, nose, eyelids and fingers. Porphyrins also accu-
mulate in bone and teeth, causing discolouration, evident 
as erythrodontia – reddish–brown teeth that fluoresce red 
on UV illumination. Bone marrow hyperplasia may lead 
to osteolytic lesions. Other skeletal abnormalities include 
decreased bone density, possibly resulting from low vi-
tamin D due to strict avoidance of sunlight, leading to 
pathological fractures. The hands are frequently severely 
affected with contractures, atrophy and bone resorption 
of the terminal phalanges.
The variable phenotype dictates the treatment ap-
proach, and early on in the course of the disease, mu-
tational analysis of the UROS gene can provide useful 
information as there is some correlation between gen-
otype and phenotype. Homozygosity for a mutation 
present on about 30% of CEP alleles, C73R, carries a 
particularly poor prognosis. Depending on the com-
bination of mutations, this information can be used to 
classify the likely clinical severity as mild, moderate 
or severe and predict likely treatment requirements. 
Mutational analysis may also be required for prenatal 
diagnosis.
As with other cutaneous porphyrias, the mainstay 
of treatment is avoidance of sunlight; special measures 
such as fitting filters to house and car windows may be 
required. Aggressive treatment of any infected skin le-
sions with antibiotics is essential. Regular blood transfu-
sions aimed at maintaining the haematocrit above 33% 
suppresses erythropoiesis and can successfully decrease 
porphyrin production and improve photosensitivity. In 
patients with transfusion-dependent anaemia, it is es-
sential to use desferrioxamine or other iron chelators to 
control iron accumulation, which has been an impor-
tant cause of death in the past. If hypersplenism occurs, 
splenectomy may reduce haemolysis and transfusion 
requirements. Other treatment modalities reported on 
small numbers or individual patients, and shown to be of 
limited benefit, include β-carotene, oral activated char-
coal, plasmasorbent therapy, hydroxyurea and haematin 
infusion. Bone disease can be managed with bisphospho-
nate therapy and vitamin D supplementation where defi-
ciency is evident. Prophylactic vitamin D should also be 
considered.
Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT) has 
been undertaken successfully in more than ten patients 
with CEP, resulting in a marked decrease in porphyrin 
production and photosensitivity in all cases. The main 
limitation is the availability of suitable donors. Use of 
cells from a heterozygous donor does not appear to af-
fect the outcome. The major risks are the morbidity and 
mortality associated with the procedure itself, and bone 
marrow transplantation should therefore be reserved 
for the most severely affected patients. Clinical care for 
patients with CEP should be provided by a multidisci-
plinary team, including a dermatologist, haematologist, 
ophthalmologist and a porphyria expert, in order to assist 
patients and their families make informed decisions about 
this form of treatment.
Gene therapy for the erythropoietic porphyrias, par-
ticularly CEP, is being actively pursued. The success of 
BMT indicates that introduction of active enzyme into 
a sufficient number of deficient cells by ex vivo transfor-
mation should be curative. Gene delivery methodology 
has been successfully developed for other bone mar-
row disorders, for example X-linked severe combined 
immunodeficiency.
546	
Clinical biochemistry
Erythropoietic protoporphyria and X-linked 
dominant protoporphyria
Two clinically indistinguishable porphyrias present with 
acute photosensitivity without skin fragility. In both, the 
photosensitivity results from accumulation of protopor-
phyrin in the skin. The concentration of protoporphy-
rin is also increased in erythrocytes, plasma, liver and 
other tissues. Most patients with this presentation have 
erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP) but about 5% have 
XLDPP.
The excess protoporphyrin is produced mainly or, in 
XLDPP, exclusively by erythroid cells in bone marrow. In 
EPP, protoporphyrin accumulation results from a decrease 
in ferrochelatase (FECH) activity to less than 35% of nor-
mal. Almost all patients are compound heterozygotes for 
one of a large number of FECH mutations that abolish 
or severely decrease FECH activity and a hypomorphic 
allele (FECH IVS3–48C) that has about three-quarters of 
the activity of the normal allele and is present in around 
10% of white Europeans, 30–45% of Asians and <3% of 
Africans. About 3% of patients lack the hypomorphic al-
lele but have FECH mutations on both alleles, at least one 
of which retains some FECH activity. Within families, 
EPP segregates as an autosomal recessive disorder that 
may show pseudo-dominant inheritance in populations 
where the frequency of the hypomorphic allele is high. A 
late onset form of EPP associated with myelodysplasia or 
myeloproliferative disease and caused by acquired somatic 
FECH mutation has also been described.
X-linked dominant protoporphyria is caused by mu-
tations in ALAS2 that disrupt the C-terminal region of 
erythroid ALAS2, thereby increasing its activity and lead-
ing to increased formation of protoporphyrin. Unlike in 
EPP, FECH activity is normal, which enables conversion 
of some of the protoporphyrin that accumulates to zinc- 
protoporphyrin. Families normally show inheritance through 
several generations. This pattern is unusual in EPP and is 
an important indicator of the possible presence of XLDPP. 
As might be expected for a gain in function mutation on an 
X chromosome, both sexes are similarly affected, though 
skewed inactivation of the mutant chromosome may lead 
to mild or no disease in a small number of women.
The diagnosis of both conditions can be established by 
demonstrating an increase in erythrocyte protoporphyrin 
using a method that distinguishes between free protopor-
phyrin and its zinc chelate, which is the predominant form 
in normal and iron-deficient erythrocytes. In EPP, almost 
all the protoporphyrin is in the free form; more than 15% 
of zinc-protoporphyrin in a patient with a markedly in-
creased total protoporphyrin indicates possible XLDPP, 
in which zinc-protoporphyrin forms from 20% to 70% of 
the total (see Fig. 28.2). Mutational analysis of ALAS2 is 
required to confirm a diagnosis of XLDPP. Protoporphyrin 
is increased in plasma in EPP and XLDPP and has a 
fluorescence emission peak at 626–635 nm. Faecal pro-
toporphyrin excretion is increased in about 40% of EPP 
patients, and some of those with XLDPP, but is not spe-
cific for either condition and is of limited value diagnosti-
cally. Protoporphyrin is hydrophobic and is not excreted 
in urine, which therefore cannot be used to diagnose or 
exclude EPP or XLDPP.
Skin symptoms and signs
Both conditions are characterized by life-long acute pho-
tosensitivity with pain and swelling of sun-exposed skin, 
usually becoming evident within the first two years of life. 
Although symptoms typically appear in early childhood, 
diagnosis may be delayed for many years unless there 
is a family history. Patients give a characteristic history 
of burning pain within minutes of exposure to sunlight, 
which may only be relieved by cold water or wet towels. 
There may also be priming phenomena, whereby expo-
sure to sunlight sensitizes the skin, lowering tolerance to 
sunlight on subsequent occasions. The oedema evident 
immediately after exposure has usually resolved by the 
time a doctor sees the child, hence the difficulty in diagno-
sis. With prolonged exposure, an erythematous reaction 
or even blistering can occur. Over time, patients develop 
chronic skin lesions with a waxy, thickened appearance. 
Chronic exposure of the face leads to linear scarring 
of the forehead and cheeks, with furrowing around the 
mouth (Fig.  28.4). Occasionally, marked thickening of 
the skin develops over the joints of the hands and fingers. 
FIGURE 28.4  ■ The skin lesions associated with chronic sunlight 
exposure in erythropoietic protoporphyria. (A) Linear and pitted 
scarring of the forehead. (B) The back of the hands and fingers 
showing marked thickening of the skin with a waxy, lichenoid 
appearance.
A
B
	
28  The porphyrias: inherited disorders of haem synthesis	
547
Severe acute photosensitivity has a serious adverse effect 
on quality of life, sometimes worsened by delayed or in-
correct diagnosis. Childhood can be a particularly diffi-
cult period and adult patients frequently state that they 
do not want to have children if they have to go through a 
similar experience.
Treatment
Avoidance of sunlight is the mainstay of management of 
acute protoporphyrin-induced photosensitivity. Outdoor 
clothing should include full-length garments to cover 
the arms and legs, a wide brimmed hat (or peaked hat 
with a cloth covering the neck), closed shoes and gloves if 
possible. Sunscreen creams must be formulated to block 
wavelengths around 400–420 nm. The most effective are 
those based on titanium dioxide, which acts as a reflec-
tant, and a specially formulated product available in three 
tinted versions (coral, beige and coffee) is available in 
the UK (Tayside Pharmaceuticals, Ninewells, Dundee). 
Where prevention fails, cold compresses and applica-
tion of local corticosteroid creams to the affected area 
can provide symptomatic relief. Antihistamines may also 
provide some relief by reducing the immediate release of 
histamine by mast cells.
Several specific treatments have been proposed, al-
though none has proved to be completely reliable. The 
most promising is narrow-band UV therapy, which in-
duces sunlight tolerance equivalent to a sun protection fac-
tor (SPF) of 8. Effective treatment is limited by availability 
of equipment and the requirement for regular therapy. 
More traditionally, patients should be offered a trial of β-
carotene therapy, which is believed to work by quenching 
oxygen radicals and/or interfering with the absorbance of 
light by protoporphyrin. Efficacy is variable, with a signifi-
cant proportion of patients reporting no benefit. However, 
it is important to ensure an adequate dose of between 
100 and 300 mg/day, sufficient to achieve plasma con-
centrations of 11–15 μmol/L (6–8 mg/L). Hormonal tan-
ning agents based on α-melanocyte stimulating hormone 
(α-MSH) analogues are currently being investigated as a 
treatment and have shown promise in early trials.
Bone marrow transplantation (BMT) has also been 
used successfully in several EPP patients, either to treat 
a coexistent haematological malignancy or to protect a 
transplanted liver from recurrence of protoporphyric 
hepatopathy (see below). Although in most EPP patients, 
the risk of BMT outweighs the benefits, if it becomes 
possible to identify patients with a high risk of protopor-
phyric liver disease, BMT could be used to cure the con-
dition and eliminate the need for liver transplantation.
Chronic complications and their management
Mild microcytic, normochromic anaemia, which is as-
sociated with reduced iron indices, is common in both 
conditions, affecting up to a third of EPP patients. Bone 
marrow studies show scattered sideroblasts and perimito-
chondrial iron accumulation, suggesting defective utiliza-
tion of iron for haem synthesis. Iron therapy is, therefore, 
unlikely to resolve the anaemia and, in some cases, has 
been reported to worsen photosensitivity.
The most serious complication of EPP and XLDPP 
is progressive protoporphyric liver disease, which af-
fects 1–2% of patients and may lead to severe acute liver 
failure. Excess protoporphyrin is excreted via the biliary 
tract and deposits of protoporphyrin are present in the 
hepatocytes of many patients. In a minority, this leads to 
liver damage that, although initially mild as indicated by 
small increases in plasma transaminase activities, will in 
some cases progress to cirrhosis. Further deterioration 
leads to cholestatic jaundice and abdominal pain that may 
be similar to the neurovisceral pain experienced in the 
acute porphyrias. Hypersplenism and the accompanying 
haemolysis stimulate erythropoiesis and, in combination 
with the decreased biliary protoporphyrin excretion, re-
sult in increased red blood cell protoporphyrin concen-
trations and worsening photosensitivity. This fulminant 
or decompensated liver failure is usually fatal unless the 
patient receives a liver transplant. Perioperative risks in-
clude severe phototoxic burns as a result high levels of 
circulating protoporphyrin. This can be reduced by pre-
operative treatments that reduce protoporphyrin concen-
trations; it is essential that the theatre lights be filtered. 
In addition, patients are at risk of neuronal damage lead-
ing to abdominal pain and profound motor neuropathy 
requiring ventilation. Finally, protoporphyric liver dis-
ease can recur in the transplanted liver and, in these cir-
cumstances, bone marrow transplantation to correct the 
metabolic defect and prevent further hepatic damage is 
the only viable option.
There is no reliable way of predicting which patients 
are at risk of severe liver disease, although there appears 
to be an increased risk in patients with XLDPP and those 
with true autosomal recessive EPP (mutations on both 
FECH alleles). All patients should therefore be seen regu-
larly throughout their lives by a porphyria specialist to 
monitor both erythrocyte protoporphyrin concentra-
tions and liver function. Patients in whom liver function 
is found to be abnormal, or whose protoporphyrin con-
centrations are markedly increased, should be referred 
to a hepatologist for full assessment and liver biopsy. At 
this stage, treatment to halt the progressive liver dam-
age caused by the increasing protoporphyrin concentra-
tions should be instituted. This should include avoiding 
alcohol, measures to enhance protoporphyrin excretion 
such as oral cholestyramine, activated charcoal or bile 
acids (ursodeoxycholic or chenodeoxycholic acid). In pa-
tients with incipient liver failure, particularly those await-
ing liver transplantation, this should be combined with 
measures to reduce protoporphyrin production using hy-
pertransfusion or haematin infusion to suppress erythro-
poiesis. Finally, exchange transfusion and plasmapheresis 
can be used to reduce circulating protoporphyrin concen-
trations immediately prior to transplantation.
SECONDARY DISORDERS OF PORPHYRIN 
METABOLISM
Abnormalities of porphyrin production and excretion 
may occur as a secondary manifestation of a large num-
ber of disorders other than the porphyrias (Table 28.6). 
These secondary disturbances of porphyrin metabolism 
548	
Clinical biochemistry
are usually mild, but together are far more common than 
the inherited porphyrias and may cause clinical and di-
agnostic confusion unless recognized for what they are.
Urinary coproporphyrin excretion may be increased 
in any condition that impairs hepatobiliary excretion, by 
ingestion of alcohol and drugs that induce cytochrome 
P450 isoforms, in poisoning by lead, other heavy metals 
and halogenated hydrocarbons, and in many severe ill-
nesses, including infections. In normal individuals, cop-
roporphyrin I predominates in bile, while the III isomer 
is excreted mainly in urine. As biliary excretion declines, 
the proportion of coproporphyrin I increases in urine. In 
alcoholism uncomplicated by liver disease, and in lead 
poisoning, urinary excretion of coproporphyrin III is in-
creased. In Dubin–Johnson syndrome, coproporphyrin I 
comprises 80% or more of the total urinary copropor-
phyrin excretion, which is usually normal or near normal: 
this pattern has been regarded as diagnostic and distinct 
from the patterns found in Rotor syndrome and primary 
biliary cholestasis, which resemble those of other hepato-
biliary disorders.
When total urinary porphyrin alone is measured, sec-
ondary coproporphyrinuria may suggest the presence of a 
porphyria but can readily be distinguished by demonstrat-
ing normal urinary PBG and ALA and faecal porphyrin 
excretion, with measurement of blood lead if increased 
coproporphyrin III or ALA suggests lead poisoning.
Haem is metabolized by the gut flora to protoporphy-
rin and related dicarboxylic porphyrins. Thus, even small 
increases in the haem content of the gut, which may not 
be large enough or occur sufficiently distally in the gut 
to produce a positive test for occult blood, may increase 
the total porphyrin content of faeces. Fractionation by 
HPLC shows that the increase is caused entirely by di-
carboxylic porphyrins. Provided a dietary source of extra 
haem can be excluded, this finding may indicate alimen-
tary tract bleeding of pathological significance.
Erythrocyte porphyrin concentrations are increased in 
iron deficiency, some other anaemias and in lead poison-
ing. In these conditions, the erythrocyte porphyrin is al-
most entirely zinc protoporphyrin and plasma porphyrin 
concentrations are normal. In some patients with iron de-
ficiency, faecal porphyrin content may also be increased 
by gastrointestinal bleeding.
Plasma porphyrin concentrations are increased in 
cholestatic jaundice and in chronic kidney disease. Patients 
on long-term haemodialysis may develop a bullous derma-
tosis on sun-exposed skin that resembles PCT. Since PCT 
is also associated with end-stage kidney disease, and can 
be successfully treated by decreasing hepatic iron stores, 
it is important to distinguish between the two conditions. 
Plasma uroporphyrins and heptacarboxylic porphyrins are 
increased in both, though usually to a greater extent in 
PCT. Faecal isocoproporphyrin is increased only in PCT 
and its measurement is more reliable than plasma porphy-
rin analysis for identifying PCT in such patients.
CONCLUSION
The porphyrias are metabolic diseases characterized bio-
chemically by the excessive production of porphyrins and 
their precursors as a result of defects in the enzymes lead-
ing to haem synthesis. Decreased haem synthesis leads to 
increased activity of the rate-limiting enzyme, 5-aminolae-
vulinic acid synthetase and accumulation of the substances 
involved in the pathway before the block. Porphyrias 
can be classified as acute (characterized by attacks of a 
predominantly neurovisceral nature) and chronic (char-
acterized by photosensitivity). Some exhibit both char-
acteristics. They can be distinguished by the pattern of 
porphyrin excretion, which is unique to each condition.
Further reading
Anderson KE, Sassa S, Bishop DF et al. Disorders of heme biosynthesis: 
X-linked sideroblastic anemia and the porphyrias. In: Scriver CR, 
Beaudet AL, Sly WS et  al. editors. The metabolic and molecular 
basis of inherited disease. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2001. 
p. 2961–3062. 
A complete and readable chapter on the porphyrias in the definitive 
textbook on inherited metabolic disease.
Badminton MN, Whatley SD, Deacon AC et al. The porphyrias and 
other disorders of porphyrin metabolism. In: Burtis CA, Ashwood ER, 
TABLE 28.6  Secondary disorders of porphyrin metabolism
Porphyrin abnormalities
Condition
Differentiation from porphyria
Increased coproporphyrin I  
and III in urine
Hepatobiliary dysfunction
Chronic liver disease
Alcohol, drugs
Severe illness, infections
Normal urinary PBG/ALA
Normal plasma porphyrin
Normal faecal porphyrins
Increased dicarboxylic  
porphyrins in faeces
Increased haem in gut: diet or  
bleeding
Normal faecal coproporphyrin
Normal plasma and erythrocyte 
porphyrin
Normal urine porphyrins
Increased erythrocyte zinc 
protoporphyrin
Iron deficiency
Haemolytic and other anaemias
Lead poisoning
Normal or slightly increased 
erythrocyte free
protoporphyrin
Normal plasma porphyrin
Increased urinary ALA and 
coproporphyrin III
Lead poisoning
PBG normal or increased much less 
than ALA
Increased blood lead
Increased plasma porphyrin
Chronic renal failure (particularly  
long-term haemodialysis)
Cholestatic jaundice
Normal faecal porphyrins
	
28  The porphyrias: inherited disorders of haem synthesis	
549
Bruns DE, editors. Tietz textbook of clinical chemistry and 
molecular diagnostics. 5th ed. St Louis: Elsevier Saunders; 2012. 
p. 1031–55. 
This chapter, in a well known clinical chemistry textbook, has an emphasis 
on laboratory methodology.
Deacon AC, Elder GH. ACP Best Practice No. 165: front line tests for 
the investigation of suspected Porphyria. J Clin Pathol 2001;54:500–7. 
Detailed information on laboratory methodology used for investigation of 
porphyria in non-specialist laboratories.
Desnick RJ, Astrin KH. Congenital erythropoietic porphyria: advances 
in pathogenesis and treatment. Br J Haematol 2002;117:779–95. 
Review of CEP with a detailed section on molecular genetics, genotype 
phenotype correlations and treatment.
Deybach JC, Puy H. Hepatocellular carcinoma without cirrhosis: think 
acute hepatic porphyrias and vice versa. J Intern Med 2011;269:521–4. 
Overview of knowledge and understanding of the current situation 
regarding this complication of the acute porphyria, particularly AIP.
Gouya L, Martin-Schmitt C, Robreau A-M et  al. Contribution of a 
common single-nucleotide polymorphism to the genetic predisposition 
for erythropoietic protoporphyria. Am J Hum Genet 2006;78:2–14. 
Description of the molecular mechanism underlying penetrance in EPP, 
the contribution and phylogenetic origin of this polymorphism and its 
contribution in different population groups.
Hift RJ, Meissner PN. An analysis of 112 acute porphyric attacks in 
Cape Town, South Africa: evidence that acute intermittent porphyria 
and variegate porphyria differ in susceptibility and severity. Medicine 
(Baltimore) 2005;84:48–60. 
A clinical description and detailed evaluation of acute attacks from first 
hand experience.
Hift RJ, Peters TJ, Meissner PN. A review of the clinical presentation, 
natural history and inheritance of variegate porphyria: its 
implausibility as the source of the ‘Royal Malady’. J Clin Pathol 
2012;65:200–5. 
Authoritative review of the evidence for this historical diagnosis based on 
extensive experience of variegate porphyria in South Africa.
Meyer UA, Schuurmans MM, Lindberg RL. Acute porphyrias: 
pathogenesis of neurological manifestations. Semin Liver Dis 
1998;18:43–52. 
Critical review of the experimental data for the various hypotheses for 
neurological dysfunction in the acute porphyrias and the information from 
experiments in the mouse model for AIP.
Puy H, Gouya L, Deybach J-C. Porphyrias. Lancet 2010;375:924–37. 
Recent comprehensive review from one of the leading porphyria centres 
in Europe.
Sarkany RP. The management of porphyria cutanea tarda. Clin Exp 
Dermatol 2001;26:225–32. 
Useful review of the treatment options for patients with PCT.
Stein P, Badminton M, Barth J et  al. Best practice guidelines in 
the management of patients with inherted porphyria and their 
complications. Ann Clin Biochem 2013;50:217–23. 
Consensus view on managing acute attacks of porphyria written by the 
clinicians providing the national clinical service for severe acute porphyria 
in the UK.
Whatley SD, Badminton M. The role of genetic testing in the 
management of patients with inherited porphyria and their families. 
Ann Clin Biochem 2013;50:204–16. 
Review dealing with the role of genetics in managing porphyria.
Whatley SD, Ducamp S, Gouya L et  al. C-Terminal deletions in 
the ALAS2 gene lead to gain of function and cause a previously 
undefined 
type 
of 
human 
porphyria, 
X-linked 
dominant 
protoporphyria, without anemia or iron overload. Am J Hum Genet 
2008;83:408–14. 
First description and characterization of this new porphyria.
Internet resources
British Porphyria Association. www.porphyria.org.uk.
British patient support group website with links to other patient 
associations.
Cardiff Porphyria Service. www.cardiff-porphyria.org.uk.
Website of the authors’ department with information about their services 
and a link to annually updated safe drug list.
The European Porphyria Network (EPNET). www.porphyria-europe.org.
Website with details of specialist porphyria centres in Europe, information 
for patients in 12 different languages, information on diagnosis and 
treatment and regularly updated information on safe prescribing in the 
acute porphyrias.
University of Cape Town Porphyria Service. www.porphyria.uct.ac.za.
Website of an expert group dealing with all porphyrias, with 
information for patients and professionals. Particularly useful section on 
patient management.
550
C H A P T E R  2 9
The haemoglobinopathies
David C. Rees  •   Roopen Arya
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  550
The structure and function of  
haemoglobin  550
The genetic control of haemoglobin  
synthesis  551
THE THALASSAEMIAS  552
α Thalassaemia  552
β Thalassaemia  553
STRUCTURAL HAEMOGLOBIN VARIANTS  554
Sickle cell anaemia  555
Other structural haemoglobin  
variants  556
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS OF 
HAEMOGLOBINOPATHIES  557
CONCLUSION  559
INTRODUCTION
Since the discovery of its central role in oxygen trans-
port in the 19th century, haemoglobin has proved to 
be a source of fascination to scientists and physicians 
alike, and is arguably the most widely studied protein 
in man. Its principal disorders, the thalassaemias and 
sickle cell disease, quantitative and qualitative defects 
of synthesis, respectively, are among the most common 
serious inherited diseases in man and have been pivotal 
in efforts to understand the molecular basis of human 
diseases.
It is estimated that about 7% of the world’s popula-
tion carry the mutation for at least one type of hae-
moglobinopathy, and that 400 000 babies are born 
each year with a severe form. Approximately 230 000 
babies are born each year with sickle cell disease in 
sub-Saharan Africa, and 120 000 are born with severe 
thalassaemia in southern and South-East Asia. There is 
good epidemiological and experimental evidence that 
the extraordinarily high frequency of haemoglobin-
opathies and their geographical distribution are due 
to the relative protection that they provide against 
­malaria and its serious complications. This principally 
involves improved survival and reproductive success for 
heterozygotes compared with the normal population, 
which outweighs the reduced reproductive success of 
homozygotes. Thalassaemia reaches polymorphic fre-
quencies (>1%) in nearly all populations, except those 
of northern Europe, northern Asia and the indigenous 
peoples of Australia, the Americas and the Arctic. The 
common abnormal haemoglobins have more limited 
distributions (Fig. 29.1).
Since there is considerable overlap in the world distri-
bution of thalassaemias as well as the common structural 
haemoglobin variants, co-inheritance of more than one 
haemoglobin abnormality is common. This generates an 
extremely diverse range of clinical phenotypes.
The structure and function of haemoglobin
Haemoglobin is a tetramer comprising two α and two β 
globin chains (α2β2). One molecule of haem, which con-
tains iron and can bind to oxygen, is attached to each 
globin chain, lying in a hydrophobic cleft. The amino 
acid sequence of this haem pocket shows marked ­homology 
between different animal species, suggesting a specific 
and important function. Through its iron atom, each 
haem group is capable of binding one molecule of oxy-
gen. The reversible binding of oxygen to haemoglobin 
is allosteric, giving rise to the characteristic shape of the 
oxygen dissociation curve (Fig.  29.2). On binding 
­oxygen, conformational changes occur in both individual 
globin chains and the tetrameric structure of haemoglo-
bin. The predominant change is closure of the gap be-
tween the two β-chains. The site at which this occurs is of 
critical functional importance. 2,3-Diphosphoglycerate 
(2,­3-DPG), the principal regulator of oxygen affinity in 
red cells, binds to this part of the haemoglobin molecule. 
This serves to separate the two β-chains, favouring the de-
oxygenated conformation and thereby reducing the oxygen 
affinity of haemoglobin. The observation that oxygen affin-
ity is often reduced in anaemic patients is explained by the 
adaptive increase in intracellular 2,3-DPG concentration. 
This enhances oxygen delivery to the tissues and is one 
of the important reasons why patients frequently tolerate 
chronic anaemia with very few symptoms. Conversely, 
the higher oxygen affinity of fetal blood necessary to 
maintain adequate maternal–fetal oxygen transport is, in 
large measure, due to the lower affinity of 2,3-DPG for 
fetal haemoglobin (HbF).
The other main physiological influence on haemoglo-
bin oxygen affinity is the Bohr effect. First recognized 
at the turn of the century through the effect of carbon 
dioxide on lowering the oxygen affinity of whole blood, it 
is now known to reflect the sensitivity of oxygen binding 
by haemoglobin to changes in blood pH. An increase in 
	
29  The haemoglobinopathies	
551
hydrogen ion concentration stabilizes the ­deoxygenated 
conformation of the haemoglobin molecule, and so physio-
logical acidosis leads to a reduction in the oxygen affinity. 
If acidosis is sustained, this effect may be counterbalanced 
by the reduction in intracellular 2,3-DPG concentration 
due to modulation of red cell glycolysis. Several inherited 
variants of haemoglobin have been described that stabi-
lize the molecule in either the oxy or deoxy conforma-
tion. In some cases, the interaction with 2,3-DPG or the 
Bohr effect is modified.
A further factor affecting haemoglobin function is 
temperature. An increase in temperature reduces oxy-
gen affinity, whereas a fall increases it. As the human is 
normally isothermic, this is usually of little consequence 
in terms of physiological adaptation, though during ex-
ercise, when oxygen consumption is increased, a raised 
temperature in the muscles together with an increase in 
hydrogen ion concentration favours release of oxygen by 
haemoglobin. Extreme hypothermia has many adverse 
consequences, including increased haemoglobin oxygen 
affinity causing reduced oxygen delivery to tissues.
The genetic control of haemoglobin synthesis
Human globins are encoded by the α and β gene clus-
ters located on chromosomes 16 and 11, respectively (see 
Fig. 29.3). The α-like genes include an embryonic gene 
(ζ) and two adult genes (α1 and α2). The β-like genes com-
prise an embryonic gene (ε), duplicated fetal (γ) and adult 
(β and δ) genes. Expression of these genes is developmen-
tally regulated during fetal life. The array of α- and β-like 
genes on their respective chromosomes reflects the order 
in which they are expressed. The control of the switch 
from embryonic, to fetal and then to adult globin syn-
thesis, seems to be controlled by the interaction between 
several transcription factors, the locus control regions 
upstream of the gene cluster and the promoter regions of 
the individual genes.
Normally, the synthesis of α- and β-like chains is care-
fully balanced to avoid the accumulation of free globin 
chains, although it is not clear how this balance is main-
tained. In the thalassaemias, where this balance is severely 
disturbed, the excess of one type of globin chain is central 
to the pathophysiology.
The switch in globin synthesis during development 
has important implications for clinical expression of the 
haemoglobinopathies. Complete failure of α-chain syn-
thesis, which, since the α genes are duplicated on each 
chromosome, occurs only when there is loss of function 
involving all four α genes, becomes evident early in fe-
tal life. By contrast, even if there is little or no normal 
β-chain synthesis, the effects will not be manifest until 
the switch from fetal γ to adult β gene expression is com-
pleted after birth. This switch is gradual, and abnormali-
ties of β globin synthesis rarely result in clinical problems 
HbC
HbS
HbE
FIGURE 29.1  ■  Primary geographic dis-
tribution of haemoglobins (Hb) S, C 
and E.
FIGURE  29.2  ■ The oxygen dissociation curves of normal (AA) 
and sickle (SS) haemoglobin (Hb).
552	
Clinical biochemistry
before three months of age. Reversing this switch, and 
reactivating fetal haemoglobin is also potentially curative 
for diseases caused by mutations of the β globin genes.
THE THALASSAEMIAS
The thalassaemias are one of the commonest human au-
tosomal recessive disorders, with approximately 120 000 
severely affected individuals born annually worldwide. 
The most common and clinically significant forms are α 
and β thalassaemia and the β thalassaemia-like structural 
variant, haemoglobin E. These may be further subdivided 
according to whether there is no output of globin (α0 or 
β0 thalassaemia) or some preservation of globin chain 
synthesis (α+ and β+ thalassaemia). In the case of α thal-
assaemia, this is complicated further by the duplication of 
expressed α genes. α Thalassaemia is clinically ­significant 
only when three or four α globin genes are lost. The 
clinical consequences of thalassaemia in the homozygous 
(or compound heterozygous) state may be understood 
in terms of the imbalance in globin chain synthesis that 
results from absent or reduced synthesis of either α or 
β globin. Unpaired α or β globin chains are toxic, and 
damage the developing red cell, causing it to die whilst 
still in the marrow, which is characteristic of thalassaemia 
and called ineffective erythropoiesis. Heterozygotes are 
unaffected clinically, and manifest the condition as slight 
anaemia with reduced red cell size and haemoglobin con-
tent. Increasing globin chain imbalance, as occurs in ho-
mozygous and compound heterozygous states, results in 
more marked anaemia and bone marrow expansion, with 
corresponding development of symptoms.
A characteristic of thalassaemia syndromes is their 
marked phenotypic heterogeneity. For over 20 years now, 
the molecular basis of thalassaemia has been studied 
and understood in great detail. The number of mutations 
identified as causing thalassaemia is large and continues 
to grow. However, in most populations, a small range of 
5–10 different thalassaemia mutations accounts for about 
90% of the mutant alleles found in that particular area.
α Thalassaemia
Though particularly common in South-East Asia, where 
carrier rates may reach 50%, α thalassaemia is widely 
distributed in all major populations apart from northern 
Europeans (see Fig. 29.1). The pathophysiological effects 
of α thalassaemia reflect the degree of impairment in α 
globin production (see Table 29.1). The majority of cases 
are due to deletions involving one or both α globin genes.
Haemoglobin Bart’s hydrops fetalis is the most severe 
form of α thalassaemia, where all four α genes are af-
fected, abolishing or severely diminished α chain synthesis. 
Like genes
Like genes
Haemoglobins
Developmental
period
Embryonic
Portland
Fetal
Adult
Kilobases
FIGURE 29.3  ■  Organization of the human globin gene cluster and developmental changes in haemoglobin.
TABLE 29.1  The α thalassaemia syndromes
Phenotype
Number of  
functional α genes
Genotypea
%Hb Bart’s  
at birth
HbH inclusions
Normal
4
αα/αα
0
None
α Thalassaemia trait (minor)
3
−α/αα
0–2
None
 
2
−α/−α or −−/αα
2–8
Occasional
HbH disease
1
−−/−α
10–40
Numerous
Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis
0
−−/−−
80
Present in some cases
a−α, denotes loss of function of one α gene on a chromosome, i.e. α+ thalassaemia.
−−, denotes loss of function of both α genes on a chromosome, i.e. α0 thalassaemia.
	
29  The haemoglobinopathies	
553
The disease becomes manifest in fetal life. With the fail-
ure of normal production of fetal haemoglobin (α2 γ2), 
surplus fetal γ-chains combine to form tetramers (γ4) rec-
ognized electrophoretically as haemoglobin Bart’s. The 
fetus is only able to survive at all in utero because of the 
presence of increased amounts of the embryonic haemo-
globin Hb Portland (ζ2γ2). Haemoglobin Bart’s possesses 
markedly increased oxygen affinity and is ineffective as 
an oxygen transporter. In an attempt to compensate for 
impaired tissue oxygen delivery, there is erythroblastosis 
with extramedullary haemopoiesis, leading to hepatic and 
splenic enlargement. Severe functional anaemia leads to 
tissue hypoxia, increased capillary permeability, and car-
diac failure, which lead ultimately to fetal hydrops and 
death in utero or stillbirth in late pregnancy.
Haemoglobin H disease occurs when there is loss of 
function of three out of four α genes. There is sufficient 
residual α-chain synthesis to allow production of some 
normal fetal and adult haemoglobin, and fetal develop-
ment is generally normal. A variable amount (10–40%) 
of Hb Bart’s is detectable at birth. After birth, the excess 
β-chains form tetramers detectable electrophoretically 
as the fast variant haemoglobin H (β4). Haemoglobin H 
(HbH) precipitates within red cells with the formation 
of inclusion bodies leading to shortened red cell survival. 
Staining of these inclusions with the redox dye brilliant 
cresyl blue serves as a useful diagnostic test. The clinical 
effects of HbH disease vary considerably. Most patients 
have a mild to moderate haemolytic anaemia, which may 
be exacerbated during pregnancy or parvovirus B19 in-
fection, accompanied by splenomegaly. Growth and 
development are usually normal. As in other congenital 
haemolytic anaemias, there is an increased tendency to 
form pigment gallstones.
It follows that Hb Bart’s hydrops fetalis and HbH dis-
ease occur only when at least one parent carries the α0 
genotype (–/αα). This provides an explanation for the ob-
servation that these disorders occur primarily in southern 
China, South-East Asia and the eastern Mediterranean 
where α0 thalassaemia is prevalent, and are not seen in 
other parts of the world, for example Africa and India, 
where α0 thalassaemia is very rare.
Individuals in whom one or two α genes are dysfunc-
tional are clinically unaffected, although they show thal-
assaemic red cell indices and traces of Hb Bart’s at birth 
(see Table 29.1). This form of α thalassaemia trait is very 
common in most populations, with a 3.7 kb deletion ac-
counting for most cases. Non-deletional forms of α thal-
assaemia are increasingly recognized as DNA analysis 
becomes more widespread and sophisticated.
β Thalassaemia
β Thalassaemia is prevalent throughout tropical and 
North Africa, the Mediterranean, Middle East and large 
parts of south and South-East Asia, including India 
(see Fig. 29.1). In some parts of the world, for example 
Cyprus, the heterozygote (carrier) frequency may reach 
15%. Over 300 different mutations of the β globin gene 
or its promoter are known to cause β thalassaemia, the 
majority being single nucleotide substitutions (point 
mutations) or small deletions. Geographically, these 
segregate non-randomly, so that four or five specific mu-
tations account for the majority of β thalassaemia genes 
in individual ethnic or geographic groups. Each mutation 
typically occurs on a single β globin gene haplotype, sug-
gesting that in most instances individual β thalassaemia 
mutations have arisen historically on a single occasion.
Though both α and β thalassaemia share reduced glo-
bin chain synthesis, the pathogenesis of anaemia in se-
vere forms of these conditions is distinct. In severe forms 
of β thalassaemia (β thalassaemia major), there is severe 
impairment or absence of β-chain production. As a con-
sequence, excess α-chains accumulate and precipitate in 
red cell precursors leading to their destruction within 
the bone marrow. There is also a degree of shortened 
red cell survival, although ineffective erythropoiesis pre-
dominates. Red cells containing fetal haemoglobin (HbF) 
survive preferentially since there is less globin chain im-
balance. The anaemia produces tissue hypoxia, which 
stimulates erythropoietin production and massive expan-
sion of erythropoiesis in the bone marrow and extramed-
ullary sites.
If untreated, β thalassaemia major leads to severe 
anaemia, failure to thrive, impaired growth and bony 
distortion, with death in early childhood. As a result of 
the expansion in erythropoiesis, there are bone deformi-
ties and enlargement of the liver and spleen. Medullary 
expansion of the facial bones and skull gives rise to a 
characteristic ‘thalassaemic’ facies, splaying of the teeth 
and frontal bossing. With the advent of effective therapy, 
this picture is now seldom seen in the developed world. 
The treatment of β thalassaemia major comprises regu-
lar blood transfusion to maintain the haemoglobin above 
95 g/L. At this level of haemoglobin, bony deformity and 
hypersplenism due to anaemia are minimized. Leukocyte-
depleted blood should be used to prevent alloimmuniza-
tion against white cell antigens. The blood should be 
matched for an extended range of blood groups, includ-
ing ABO, Rh and Kell, to reduce the frequency of alloan-
tibody formation.
An inevitable complication of multiple red cell trans-
fusions is iron accumulation. If untreated, this leads to 
iron deposition throughout the body, which may cause 
endocrine dysfunction with diabetes, hypogonadotrophic 
hypogonadism and hypoparathyroidism, and, ultimately, 
death due to cardiac failure and liver damage. This may be 
prevented by the use of iron chelators. Desferrioxamine, 
which increases both urinary and faecal iron excretion, 
is administered parenterally, usually by continuous over-
night subcutaneous infusion, since it is ineffective orally. 
Ascorbic acid may enhance urinary iron excretion when 
given with desferrioxamine. The clinical efficacy of des-
ferrioxamine is limited by its subcutaneous route of ad-
ministration, and two oral iron chelators are currently 
licensed for use. Deferiprone is probably less effective 
than desferrioxamine at removing hepatic iron, but may 
be particularly effective at removing cardiac iron, and can 
be used in combination with desferrioxamine. Side-effects 
include arthropathy and unpredictable neutropenia, and 
weekly full blood count monitoring is recommended 
for those taking it. Deferasirox is a newer oral chelator 
with similar efficacy to desferrioxamine and a good safety 
profile. The degree of iron overload and the efficacy of 
554	
Clinical biochemistry
chelation can be monitored by measuring serum ferritin 
concentration, liver biopsy to quantitate iron and non-­
invasive measurements using magnetic resonance ­imaging 
(MRI) and the superconducting quantum interference 
device (SQUID). Cardiac and hepatic MRI using T2* 
and R2 protocols are increasingly used. Accurate quanti-
tation of the volume of transfused blood is also valuable 
in assessing the degree of iron overload.
With adequate transfusion and chelation therapy, most 
children with β thalassaemia major attain normal growth 
and sexual development and survive well into adult life. 
Allogeneic bone marrow transplantation from human 
leukocyte antigen (HLA)-matched siblings has been used 
with considerable success for treatment of β thalassaemia 
major. The best results, with disease-free survival rates 
of up to 95%, have been obtained in younger children 
with little or no evidence of end-organ damage due to 
iron overload. Trials of gene therapy are taking place in 
France and the USA, with one patient to date success-
fully rendered transfusion-independent, although with 
one cell clone predominating, owing to the inadvertent 
activation of a potential oncogene.
As in other thalassaemia syndromes, there is consider-
able heterogeneity in the clinical expression of β globin 
gene mutations. Much of this heterogeneity is unex-
plained, but two factors have been identified: first, the 
extent to which β globin production is impaired, which 
reflects the nature of the underlying gene mutation, and 
second, co-inheritance of other interacting genetic de-
terminants that modify clinical severity. Mutations that 
severely disrupt or abolish β globin synthesis (β0 thalassae-
mia) include those that prevent normal splicing of mRNA 
(splice junction or cryptic splice site mutations) or gen-
erate a non-functional mRNA by premature translation 
termination (nonsense mutations), and small nucleotide 
deletions or insertions that result in the normal triplet 
­genetic code being read out of frame (frameshift mutations). 
Other mutations, for example those of the β globin chain 
promoter, which alter the level of gene expression (tran-
scriptional mutations), usually result in reduced rather 
than absent β globin synthesis (β+ or β++ thalassaemia). 
Among the independent genetic factors that ameliorate 
the clinical effects of β thalassaemia are co-inheritance of 
α thalassaemia, which partially redresses the imbalance in 
globin chain synthesis and therefore results in less inef-
fective erythropoiesis, and hereditary persistence of fe-
tal haemoglobin (HPFH). HPFH can be directly linked 
to the β globin cluster, and its causes include large de-
letions and point mutations in the promoter regions of 
the γ globin genes. Three other major loci which control 
HbF concentrations have now been identified: the Xmn1 
polymorphism in promoter region of the Gγ globin genes, 
the HMIP locus on chromosome 6q23.3 and BCL11A on 
chromosome 2. These factors account for some cases of 
the clinical syndrome thalassemia intermedia, in which 
there is a variable degree of anaemia, without dependence 
on regular blood transfusions (Box 29.1).
The heterozygous (carrier) state for β thalassaemia 
(β thalassaemia trait) is usually harmless. Some of the 
phenotype characteristics of β thalassaemia heterozygotes 
are shown in Table 29.2. Most individuals have slightly 
reduced haemoglobin concentrations and an elevated red 
cell count. A raised HbA2 (α2δ2) concentration is an impor-
tant diagnostic marker and distinguishes β thalassaemia 
trait from α thalassaemia, in which the HbA2 is normal or 
low. This presumably reflects a higher output from the δ 
globin gene, which normally plays a minor role in adult 
haemoglobin synthesis (normal HbA2 <3.2%) in the face 
of reduced β globin production. Similarly, HbF concen-
trations are frequently slightly raised in β thalassaemia 
heterozygotes. Rarely, dominant β thalassaemia occurs.
STRUCTURAL HAEMOGLOBIN VARIANTS
Over 700 qualitative variants have been identified, in which 
the haemoglobin molecule is structurally, and in some cases 
functionally, altered. These arise from diverse molecular 
defects, most commonly single amino acid substitutions, 
but also insertion or deletion of amino acids and polypep-
tide fusion as a result of recombination between globin 
genes, for example haemoglobin Lepore. The most com-
mon structural variants are haemoglobins S, C, DPunjab and 
E, which each affect many millions of people worldwide.
TABLE 29.2  The β thalassaemia syndromes
Genotype
 
Heterozygote
 
 
Homozygote
 
MCH and MCVa
% HbA2
% HbF
% HbA
% HbF
Clinical status
β0
Reduced
Raised
<4
0
>94
Thalassaemia major
β+
Reduced
Raised
<4
5–50
50–90
Thalassaemia major
β++
Slightly reduced
Raised or 
borderline
<2
50–90
10–50
Thalassaemia 
intermedia
aMCH, mean cell haemoglobin; MCV, mean cell volume.
BOX 29.1	
Causes of β thalassaemia intermedia
Homozygous β thalassaemia
•	 Homozygous β++ thalassaemia
•	 Compound heterozygote β+/β++ thalassaemia
•	 Co-inheritance of α thalassaemia
•	 Co-inheritance of factors promoting increased HbF 
synthesis
Heterozygous β thalassaemia
•	 Co-inheritance of triplicated α globin genes (ααα/αα 
or ααα/ααα)
•	 Dominant β thalassaemia
δβ Thalassaemia
•	 Homozygous δβ thalassaemia
•	 Heterozygous δβ thalassaemia/β thalassaemia
	
29  The haemoglobinopathies	
555
Sickle cell anaemia
Sickle cell anaemia (HbSS), caused by homozygous in-
heritance of structurally abnormal haemoglobin, is one 
of the commonest genetic disorders with an estimated 60 
million carriers worldwide and 230 000 affected infants 
born annually in Africa alone. The prototypic molecu-
lar disease, it was the first human disorder to be under-
stood at a molecular level. The landmark discovery of 
sickle haemoglobin (HbS) more than half a century ago 
by Pauling and Itano, was succeeded by demonstration 
of the underlying single amino acid substitution and the 
gene mutation responsible. Sickle haemoglobin polym-
erizes on deoxygenation to produce long molecules that 
damage and distort the red cell, producing the classic 
sickle-shaped erythrocytes that give the disease its name. 
The resulting microvascular occlusion and shortened red 
cell survival combine to produce a clinical syndrome that 
comprises anaemia, vaso-occlusion, vasculopathy, hae-
molysis, inflammation, hypercoagulability, organ damage 
and susceptibility to infection due to hyposplenism.
A single base change (CAG→CTG) in the sixth codon 
of the β globin gene determines the substitution of valine 
for glutamic acid, which results in the structural variant 
sickle haemoglobin S. While the sickle mutation occurs 
predominantly in those of African origin, with smaller 
numbers affected in the countries of the Mediterranean 
littoral, Saudi Arabia and India, population migration has 
resulted in its spread globally. The allele frequency of βs 
is thought to be high because of protection against the 
complications of severe malaria in the heterozygous state, 
as described earlier for thalassaemia mutations.
Although HbSS is the commonest cause of sickle cell 
disease, this condition occurs with other genotypes, in 
which there is co-inheritance of a different β globin mu-
tation. The most important of these compound hetero-
zygous states are: HbSC disease, HbSβ+ thalassaemia and 
HbSβ0thalassaemia, although about 15 different geno-
types have been identified as causing sickle cell disease. 
Among sickling disorders, HbSS and Sβ0 thalassaemia 
are the more severe clinically, with a greater degree of 
anaemia (haemoglobin 60–80 g/L) and more severe organ 
damage. While HbSC and Sβ+ thalassaemia are perceived 
as milder genotypes than HbSS, there is considerable 
overlap and some types of end-organ damage, particu-
larly proliferative retinopathy, occur more frequently, 
particularly in HbSC disease. Other genetic factors that 
may influence disease expression include co-inheritance 
of α+ thalassaemia and high fetal haemoglobin (HbF) 
­levels, both of which may ameliorate the severity of sickle 
cell disease.
The primary pathophysiological event in sickling is 
intracellular polymerization of deoxy HbS. The β6 valine 
substitution alters the surface charge of haemoglobin, 
resulting in interaction between haemoglobin tetramers 
and the formation of 14-stranded polymers. These are 
then ordered into parallel arrays of fibre bundles, which 
can be visualized by electron microscopy. The formation 
of polymer fibres (or gelation) is affected by four main 
variables: oxygen tension, HbS concentration, tempera-
ture and the presence of non-sickling haemoglobins. The 
mean corpuscular haemoglobin concentration (MCHC) 
has a profound effect on the kinetics of sickling through 
its effect on the delay period between deoxygenation and 
polymerization. Small increases in haemoglobin concen-
tration, as occur with cellular dehydration, may therefore 
act as a trigger for the sickling process.
Polymer formation is accompanied by several changes 
in the membrane of sickle erythrocytes, making them 
less deformable, increasingly fragile and leaky to cations. 
These changes are thought to result not only from inter-
actions between sickle haemoglobin and the membrane 
but also from oxidative damage caused by free radicals, 
concentrations of which have been shown to be increased 
in these cells. These membrane changes are initially re-
versible but become increasingly pronounced as the cell 
undergoes repeated cycles of sickling and unsickling, cul-
minating in an irreversibly sickled cell (ISC). The per-
centage of ISCs has been used as a marker for the sickling 
process but correlates poorly with the clinical condition 
of the patient. Red cell membrane phospholipids are ab-
normally distributed in these cells, with the normal in-
ner leaflet amino-phospholipids being rearranged on the 
outer leaflet of the lipid bilayer. Cation homoeostasis is 
also disordered, with potassium loss exceeding sodium 
gain, resulting in cellular dehydration and increased 
concentration of intracellular haemoglobin. This is ac-
companied by an up to four-fold increase in intracellu-
lar calcium. There is increased intravascular haemolysis, 
leading to a high plasma concentration of free haemo-
globin, which binds nitric oxide avidly and results in a 
functional nitric oxide deficiency; this is implicated in the 
development of vasculopathy, which contributes to the 
complications of pulmonary hypertension, priapism and 
cerebrovascular disease. Other pathological processes in-
clude hypercoagulability, inflammation, oxidative stress 
and reperfusion injury, all of which contribute to the mul-
tisystem nature of the disease.
The polymerization of HbS and associated membrane 
changes cause a marked decrease in the ability of these 
cells to flow through the microvascular circulation, re-
sulting in compromised oxygen delivery and setting up a 
vicious circle of worsening vaso-occlusion. There is also 
evidence of increased adherence of these red cells to vas-
cular endothelium, which would increase deoxygenation 
and obstruct the flow of other red and white cells through 
the microvasculature.
The clinical manifestations of sickle cell disease are 
protean and include both acute and chronic complica-
tions. The majority of symptoms are attributable to the 
effects of vascular occlusion, since the anaemia is usually 
well tolerated. Sickle cell disease is a multisystem disease. 
Acute episodes or ‘crises’ can take several forms, includ-
ing pain or severe anaemia; acute worsening of anaemia 
can be due to splenic or hepatic sequestration, or tran-
sient erythroid hypoplasia secondary to parvovirus B19 
infection. The most common symptom is acute, severe 
pain, which may be preceded by infection, dehydration 
and cold exposure, though often no particular trigger is 
identified. Vaso-occlusion, which commonly involves the 
bones, results in avascular necrosis of the bone marrow 
with associated inflammation and increased intramedul-
lary pressure. This results in painful swelling of the hands 
and feet (dactylitis) in early infancy. In older children and 
556	
Clinical biochemistry
adults, the juxta-articular areas of long bones, flat bones 
like the ribs and pelvis and the vertebral column are most 
commonly affected. The management of acute pain is 
supportive, ensuring adequate analgesia, hydration and 
oxygenation. Other acute complications include pria-
pism, retinal artery occlusion and sudden death.
Sickle cell patients are at increased risk of bacterial in-
fection due largely to loss of splenic function and, histori-
cally, overwhelming pneumococcal sepsis has been the 
major cause of early mortality. In developed countries, 
this risk has been significantly reduced by the introduc-
tion of pneumococcal prophylaxis in the form of pneu-
mococcal vaccines and daily oral penicillin. The major 
cause of mortality after early childhood is the acute chest 
syndrome, which results from a combination of infection, 
infarction and fat embolism in the lungs, and is character-
ized by fever, severe chest pain, dyspnoea and pulmonary 
infiltrates. This complication needs prompt and vigorous 
management including oxygenation, hydration, intrave-
nous antibiotics and blood transfusion. Increasing num-
bers of patients in developed countries are surviving to 
late middle and old age, and progressive multi-organ fail-
ure, particularly involving the kidneys, is an increasingly 
common form of death. From a very early age, most chil-
dren with SCD display a number of renal abnormalities, 
including glomerular hyperfiltration and nephrogenic 
diabetes insipidus. Many go on to develop significant 
­albuminuria in later childhood, with progressive renal 
failure contributing to death in about 30% of adults.
Stroke due to occlusion of the large cerebral vessels 
affects about 11% of patients by the age of 20, with the 
highest incidence between the ages of two and five years. 
Without treatment, there is a high rate of recurrence. 
Long-term transfusion significantly reduces the risk 
of a further stroke but carries with it the necessity for 
iron chelation to prevent siderosis. Transcranial Doppler 
scanning identifies children with early vasculopathy who 
are at high risk of stroke. Regular blood transfusion of 
children with such cerebral vasculopathy has been shown 
to be an effective form of primary stroke prevention, both 
in clinical trials and practice.
Pulmonary hypertension affects up to 5% of adults 
with sickle cell disease, and is thought to be associated 
with an increased risk of premature death. Increased rates 
of haemolysis have been linked to the pathology, and it 
may be part of a more general vasculopathy.
Chronic organ damage due to sickling may take several 
forms. Ischaemic damage to the bones and joints results 
in progressive destruction which, in the case of avascular 
necrosis of the hip, may lead to severe disability. Chronic 
restrictive lung disease may follow recurrent episodes of 
infection and infarction. As in other chronic haemolytic 
states, gallstones are common and found in nearly one-
third of young adults with sickle cell disease. Proliferative 
retinopathy can result in bleeding, retinal detachment 
and blindness. Stasis and occlusion of the small vessels in 
the lower limbs may cause leg ulceration.
The prognosis for patients with sickle cell disease in 
developed countries has been transformed by early diag-
nosis, improved supportive care and, most importantly, 
prophylaxis against pneumococcal infection. At least 
85% of HbSS patients and 95% of HbSC patients in the 
USA now survive to 20 years and 50% of patients survive 
beyond the fifth decade. Relatively little is known about 
the natural history of the condition in African countries, 
but the majority of children with sickle cell disease are 
thought to die before the age of five years. This mark-
edly higher mortality in Africa reflects the importance of 
environmental factors, and is probably mainly related to 
malaria, pneumococcal and other infections. Sickle cell 
disease remains a disease without a cure. Haematopoietic 
stem cell transplantation has been successfully performed 
in a few patients but carries a procedure-related risk 
with 5% mortality. In the absence of reliable predictors 
of clinical severity, which varies widely among affected 
patients, this is difficult to justify in most cases. The role 
of transplantation is likely to increase as the procedure 
becomes safer and able to draw from a wider range of do-
nors. Human trials of gene therapy are currently planned, 
but as yet, no patients have been successfully treated.
The search for effective anti-sickling agents has tar-
geted the essential steps in the pathophysiology of sickle 
cell disease: polymer formation, membrane changes and 
interactions with the microvasculature. The first ap-
proach, aimed at combating polymer formation, either by 
altering oxygen affinity or increasing HbF concentrations, 
seems most likely to be successful. Hydroxycarbamide 
(hydroxyurea), which increases HbF concentrations, has 
been shown to reduce the frequency of acute pain and 
acute chest syndrome in randomized controlled trials, 
and is now an important therapeutic option in adults and 
children suffering frequent episodes of pain or severe 
chest problems.
Other structural haemoglobin variants
There are several hundred less common structural hae-
moglobin variants, most of which are very rare and have 
no clinical or functional consequences. An exception 
is the β globin variant haemoglobin E (β26 Glu→Lys), 
which is probably the most prevalent haemoglobin vari-
ant, being carried by an estimated 84 million individuals 
worldwide, mainly in South-East Asia. Haemoglobin E 
has an electrophoretic mobility similar to that of HbC 
and HbA2 at pH 8.9 but can be differentiated by citrate 
agar electrophoresis at acid pH. Unlike most other struc-
tural variants, inheritance of HbE is associated with a β 
thalassaemia phenotype with microcytosis and hypochro-
mia. This is because the βE mutation activates a cryptic 
splice site that inhibits the normal splicing mechanism. 
Haemoglobin E is also unstable, which may contribute 
to the unexpectedly severe phenotype that occurs when 
HbE is co-inherited with β thalassaemia mutations. This 
compound heterozygous state results in thalassaemia 
­major in about half of cases.
The other common abnormal haemoglobins are C 
and DPunjab, which affect millions, predominantly in West 
Africa and the Punjab region of India, respectively. In the 
homozygous state, there is mild haemolysis, with few if 
any symptoms. Co-inheritance of both of these variants 
with HbS results in sickle cell disease.
The unstable haemoglobin variants usually result 
from neutral substitutions affecting amino acid residues 
that contact the haem group and generally present as a 
	
29  The haemoglobinopathies	
557
congenital Heinz body haemolytic anaemia, for example 
Hb Köln and Hb Bristol. Heinz bodies are inclusion bod-
ies seen in some red cells consisting of degraded haemo-
globin. The diagnosis is made by the heat denaturation 
or isopropanol precipitation tests and identification of 
the globin mutation by protein or DNA analysis. Owing 
partly to the instability of the variant haemoglobin, only 
half of these variants are detectable by electrophoresis.
Amino acid substitutions involving either α- or β-chains 
in the vicinity of the haem group can also result in altered 
oxygen affinity or a propensity to methaemoglobin forma-
tion. Haemoglobin variants in which oxygen affinity is sig-
nificantly increased (e.g. Hb Chesapeake, Hb San Diego) 
are associated with erythrocytosis (polycythaemia). Low-
affinity haemoglobins (e.g. Hb Kansas) and HbM variants 
(e.g. HbM Boston) cause cyanosis, usually with no associated 
signs or symptoms of disease. The possible consequences 
of abnormal haemoglobins are summarized in Table 29.3.
LABORATORY DIAGNOSIS OF 
HAEMOGLOBINOPATHIES
The primary investigation of a haemoglobinopathy should 
include a full blood count, peripheral blood film and 
­haemoglobin electrophoresis (see Fig.  29.4). The full 
blood count allows assessment of haemoglobin formation, 
as judged by the red cell indices, the mean cell volume 
(MCV) and mean cell haemoglobin (MCH). Microcytosis 
(MCV <76 fL) and hypochromia (MCH <27 pg), in the 
face of a normal or raised red cell count (>5.5 × 1012/L) in 
an iron-replete patient, suggest a diagnosis of thalassae-
mia. In the case of β thalassaemia major or intermedia, 
this is associated with a significant degree of anaemia, 
whereas in thalassaemia trait the haemoglobin is usually 
normal or only marginally reduced. Examination of a 
blood film stained by a Giemsa method may be helpful in 
confirming the diagnosis. However, definitive diagnosis 
often rests on electrophoretic or chromatographic analy-
sis of haemoglobin in red cell haemolysates. Cellulose ac-
etate electrophoresis at alkaline pH (8.9–9.1) is the most 
widely used method, being simple, rapid, inexpensive and 
effective in separating the common haemoglobin variants. 
In homozygous sickle cell anaemia, HbS predominates. A 
variable amount of HbF is present, higher proportions 
(>10%) generally being associated with a milder clinical 
course. Haemoglobin A2 concentration is usually normal.
Solubility testing based on the reduced solubility of 
deoxy-HbS in the presence of reducing agents, for ex-
ample sodium dithionite, has a limited role in the diagno-
sis of sickle cell disease since it does not differentiate the 
homozygous disease and carrier states. In an emergency 
situation, a positive solubility test taken in conjunction 
with a significantly reduced haemoglobin and typical red 
cell morphology points strongly towards a diagnosis of 
sickle cell disease. This should be confirmed by haemo-
globin analysis at the earliest opportunity. Several other 
variants, including HbD, HbG and Hb Lepore, have an 
electrophoretic mobility identical to that of HbS on cel-
lulose acetate but may be distinguished by the negative 
sickle solubility test and citrate agar gel electrophoresis 
at acid pH (6.0). Similarly, haemoglobins C, E and O, 
which co-migrate on cellulose acetate at alkaline pH, can 
be differentiated by citrate agar electrophoresis. Both 
HbE and Hb Lepore are associated with thalassaemic 
red cell indices, which further aids their distinction from 
electrophoretically similar variants. Isoelectric focusing 
improves the resolution of some structural variants and 
can also be used for neonatal screening of eluates from 
Guthrie (dried blood spot) cards, since it reduces inter-
ference from methaemoglobin present in such samples.
High performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) is 
a fast and sensitive method for separation and quantita-
tion of haemoglobins that, in some cases, allows identifi-
cation of variants not possible by other techniques. Since 
it is largely automated and requires minute quantities 
of sample, HPLC has become the method of choice for 
large-scale population testing such as neonatal screen-
ing programmes. Universal neonatal screening for sickle 
cell disease has been used in the USA and England for 
some time, and similar programmes are being introduced 
into other European, Middle Eastern and African coun-
tries, depending on the prevalence of the conditions and 
the resources available. Such programmes have resulted 
in significant benefits in terms of reduced mortality and 
morbidity due to improved care, early ­implementation 
of prophylaxis against pneumococcal infection and 
­parental education. In β thalassaemia, the proportion of 
­individual haemoglobins varies with the underlying gen-
otype. Homozygous β0 thalassaemia is associated with 
TABLE 29.3  The functional and clinical consequences of abnormal haemoglobins
Functional abnormality
Clinically 
expresseda
Clinical disorder
Example
Molecular abnormality
None
No
None
HbG Philadelphia
α68 Asn→Lys
Polymerization with 
reduced solubility
Hom/Co het
Sickle cell disease
HbS
β6 Glu→Val
Unstable
Het
Haemolytic anaemia
Hb Köln
β98 Val→Met
Increased O2 affinity
Het
Erythrocytosis
Hb Chesapeake
α92 Arg→Leu
Decreased O2 affinity
Het
Cyanosis
Hb Kansas
β102 Asn→Thr
Methaemoglobinaemia
Het
Blue discolouration
HbM Saskatoon
β63 His→Tyr
α Thalassaemia
Hom/Co het
Thalassaemia intermedia
Hb Constant Spring
α + 31Cb (142 Stop→Gln)
β Thalassaemia
Co het
Thalassaemia intermedia/
major
Hb Lepore–Boston
δ (1–87) β (116–146) fusion
a The abnormality may be expressed in the homozygous (Hom), heterozygous (Het) or compound heterozygous (Co het) state.
bThis chain terminator mutation results in an α globin chain with an additional 31 amino acids.
558	
Clinical biochemistry
a predominance of HbF, absence of HbA and variable 
amounts of HbA2 (range 1.0–6.0%, mean 1.7%). In in-
dividuals with homozygous β+ thalassaemia or compound 
heterozygous β0/β+ thalassaemia, a variable amount of 
HbA is present. Haemoglobin F is increased and distrib-
uted heterogeneously among red cells.
Accurate quantitation of HbA2 by HPLC or microcol-
umn chromatography is essential for the diagnosis of β 
thalassaemia trait, in which the HbA2 is elevated, typically 
>3.5%. Carriers of ‘normal A2’ or ‘silent’ β thalassaemia 
due to mild β gene defects or co-inheritance of a δ gene 
mutation in cis or trans cannot easily be distinguished 
from α thalassaemia by conventional screening methods 
and require investigation by specialized techniques, in-
cluding in vitro globin chain synthesis and DNA analysis. 
Analysis of globin chain synthetic ratios by tritiated 
­leucine incorporation and carboxymethylcellulose chro-
matography is the definitive way of identifying individu-
als with thalassaemia, although it is rarely used because of 
its laborious nature.
The α thalassaemias are characterized electropho-
retically by the presence of the fast moving variants, Hb 
Bart’s (γ4) and HbH (β4), which are most obvious in neo-
natal samples. In hydrops fetalis owing to homozygous 
α0 thalassaemia, Hb Bart’s predominates and is found in 
smaller amounts in other α thalassaemia syndromes in the 
neonatal period. Haemoglobin H may also be detected 
by staining for HbH inclusion bodies. The diagnosis of 
clinically silent forms of α thalassaemia is often one of 
exclusion, being made on the basis of the subject’s eth-
nic origin, microcytic hypochromic red cell indices and 
a normal or low HbA2 concentration in the presence of 
normal iron status. Definitive diagnosis can be made by 
DNA analysis, which can also often distinguish α0 and α+ 
thalassaemia.
While the majority of haemoglobinopathies can be di-
agnosed by haemoglobin electrophoresis, variants caused 
by amino acid substitutions that do not alter charge, such 
as those found in some unstable haemoglobins or haemo-
globins with altered oxygen affinity, may escape detec-
tion. Further investigations that may be helpful in this 
context include assessment of haemoglobin instability 
and oxygen affinity. High throughput DNA analysis has 
made this a feasible way of screening for globin mutations 
in richer countries, with techniques such as multiplex 
ligation-dependent probe amplification allowing identi-
fication of large gene mutations which were previously 
only detectable using Southern blotting. Haemoglobin 
mass spectrometry can also be used to identify abnormal 
globins by measuring their mass accurately, with particu-
lar potential use in screening programmes which already 
use mass spectrometry.
The identification of couples at risk for major haemo-
globinopathies by antenatal or preconceptional screening 
permits informed reproductive choice with the option of 
prenatal diagnosis. In most cases, this can now be accom-
plished in the first trimester by detection of mutant glo-
bin genes in chorionic villous DNA. In several countries, 
Clinical picture and/or blood count or film
suggestive of a haemoglobinopathy
Hb Electrophoresis
Hb variants, e.g. S,C,D,E
Hb Bart’s and HbH
Estimation of HbA2
Normal
Estimation of HbF
   Thalassaemia
HPFH
Thalassaemia
Thalassaemia trait
Thalassaemia
‘Normal A2’
Thalassaemia
Further tests,
e.g. unstable Hb
O2 affinity
Heinz bodies
Raised
Globin chain
synthesis
DNA
analysis
N/low
FIGURE 29.4  ■  A simple algorithm for the diagnosis of haemoglobinopathies.
	
29  The haemoglobinopathies	
559
notably Cyprus where the carrier rate for β thalassaemia 
reaches 12%, this has led to a marked decline in the birth 
incidence of haemoglobin disorders. Preimplantation 
genetic diagnosis is increasingly used to allow selection 
of unaffected embryos, although it continues to be a de-
manding and expensive process that is not applicable to 
most couples. Attempts continue to develop non-invasive 
prenatal diagnosis using fetal cells and DNA in maternal 
blood, although this is currently not technically feasible 
as a routine procedure for the haemoglobinopathies.
CONCLUSION
Haemoglobin is arguably the best studied of all human 
proteins. It is a tetramer of two pairs of globin chains. 
Each chain binds a molecule of haem, to which a mol-
ecule of oxygen can become reversibly bound. The affin-
ity of haemoglobin for oxygen can be modified by various 
physiological factors in ways that respond to the require-
ments of tissues for oxygen under different circumstances.
Inherited disorders of haemoglobin synthesis can be 
qualitative or quantitative. More than 400 structural vari-
ants have been described, of which the most important 
is haemoglobin S, the haemoglobin of sickle cell disease. 
Quantitative abnormalities of globin chain synthesis cause 
the thalassaemias. Advances in diagnosis and treatment 
have dramatically altered the prognosis for many affected 
patients, although there is still a limited range of treat-
ments available.
Further reading
Dacie J. The hereditary haemolytic anaemias. Part  2. 3rd ed  
The haemolytic anaemias. vol. 2. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 
1988.
Rees DC, Williams TN, Gladwin M. Sickle-cell disease. Lancet 
2010;376:2018–31.
Serjeant GR, Serjeant BE. Sickle cell disease. 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press; 2001.
Weatherall DJ, Clegg JB. The thalassaemia syndromes. 4th ed. Oxford: 
Blackwell Science; 2001. 
Each of these texts provides a comprehensive account of the pathology, 
diagnosis and management of the haemoglobinopathies.
560
THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
Introduction
The human immune system monitors the internal and 
external environment at a molecular level and relays in-
formation within itself and to other systems regarding 
the molecular nature of the environment. Within this 
process, the system has evolved so that certain stimuli 
elicit a reaction (an immune response) while others are 
tolerated, eliciting no response. Microbes that invade our 
bodies can replicate every 20 min, giving them enormous 
potential to evolve more virulence. Humans reproduce 
approximately every 20 years with considerably less po-
tential for population adaptation. However, an immune 
system that uses overlapping and interwoven processes, 
and can evolve by somatic mutation, allows an individ-
ual to adapt to a changing microbial environment. The 
immune response, like any other biological process, at-
tempts to restore homoeostasis but may itself, if inappro-
priate or persistent, result in tissue damage and disease.
Over the last 20 years, there has been a rapid devel-
opment of our knowledge of immunology, particularly at 
the biochemical and molecular level, in terms of the so-
phisticated intercellular interactions that accompany any 
immune response. This chapter will make no attempt to 
summarize this vast body of knowledge but rather aims to 
convey broad concepts in describing immune responses, 
the immune system that makes the responses and the 
relevance of these to clinical laboratory medicine. The 
spectrum of immunological diseases includes genetic 
deficiencies, autoimmune diseases, allergy, malignancy, 
inflammation and infection. Manipulation of immune 
responses by inducing immune activation or suppression 
has great importance in many areas, including immuniza-
tion and transplantation.
Immune responses
There are two major types of immune response: in-
nate and adaptive. The innate immune response shares 
many components with the adaptive response but differs 
fundamentally in that no specific antigen recognition is 
required. Instead, it involves recognition of molecular se-
quences that are widely expressed in nature, for example 
on microbial cells (lipopolysaccharide) and on damaged 
tissue (heat shock proteins).
The adaptive response is antigen driven and requires 
prior antigen exposure and recognition of the antigen by 
T and B lymphocytes through cell surface receptors. On 
first contact with any antigen, the system reacts relatively 
slowly and transient infection may occur. Immunologically, 
this process is termed immunization. The initial response 
is known as the primary immune response: it also involves 
acquisition of memory of the exposure. As a result, on sec-
ond contact with an antigen there is a more rapid response 
(the secondary immune response) and there is no infection: 
the host has acquired immunity. These responses involve 
a combination of cells, tissues and soluble mediators that 
are described more fully below. In order to understand 
immune responses, it is first necessary to consider two im-
portant terms: antigen and clonality.
C H A P T E R  3 0
Immunology for clinical biochemists
Joanna Sheldon  •  Rachel D. Wheeler  •  Pamela G. Riches
CHAPTER OUTLINE
THE IMMUNE SYSTEM  560
Introduction  560
Immune responses  560
The innate immune system  561
The adaptive immune system  562
Complement  570
Acute phase proteins  571
Cytokines  572
Conclusion  575
DISEASES OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM  575
Introduction  575
Immune deficiency  575
Allergies  580
Autoimmune diseases  582
LYMPHOID MALIGNANCIES  588
B lymphocytes and monoclonal 
proteins  588
β2-Microglobulin  594
B cell malignancies  594
INFECTION AND SEPSIS  597
Diagnosis and monitoring of  
infections  598
TRANSPLANTATION  599
Organ transplantation  599
Stem cell transplantation  600
CONCLUSION  600
APPENDIX  602
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
561
Antigens
Most biological materials, including proteins, polysac-
charides, glycoproteins and polypeptides can be antigens. 
How the antigen influences the immune system is related 
to its reaction with lymphocytes, which will determine 
whether it stimulates an immune response (i.e. it is an im-
munogen) or is tolerated (i.e. it is a tolerogen). For exam-
ple, human albumin is tolerated by the human immune 
system but on injection into a rabbit, it will stimulate an 
immune response such that the rabbit produces antibod-
ies to the protein. These antibodies, which react with hu-
man albumin, but not, for example, with horse albumin 
or with the rabbit’s own albumin, are described as being 
specific for human albumin.
The antibodies produced are not directed against the 
entire molecule but to short, overlapping amino acid 
sequences termed epitopes. A large protein molecule 
such as albumin will have many hundreds of epitopes 
and, generally, the larger the protein, the more immu-
nogenic it is.
Clonality
Both T and B lymphocytes have the property of antigen 
recognition through molecules expressed on their cell 
surfaces (antigen receptors). This is immunoglobulin 
(Ig) on B cells and the T cell receptor (TCR) on T cells. 
On any one cell, all the antigen receptors will be identi-
cal. Generally, this unique receptor is able to recognize 
one or a few epitopes. It is estimated that approximately 
10
10 different antigenic specificities may potentially be 
encountered during the lifetime of an individual, re-
quiring approximately this number of unique recep-
tors. The development of this very large number of 
lymphocyte receptors occurs before antigen contact 
by random rearrangements of the immunoglobulin 
and TCR genes. The molecular process by which this 
is achieved will be described in more detail in a later 
section. Immune responses are driven by the presence 
of antigen. Engagement of a compatible receptor with 
antigen provides signals for further proliferation and 
differentiation. The affinity of the antigen-­receptor 
binding is crucial in determining the nature of that im-
mune response. This is the molecular basis for the es-
tablishment of immune responses and immunological 
memory.
Additionally, in the B cell, the DNA that codes for 
the part of the Ig receptor that binds antigen is hyper-
mutable, so that during proliferation, somatic mutations 
within the receptor DNA sequences occur frequently. 
These mutations may result in a receptor that has a 
higher affinity for the antigen and, as a result, the clone 
bearing that receptor will compete more successfully for 
the antigen and receive a stronger signal, so that it is 
preferentially selected and responds more quickly. The 
secreted immunoglobulin from the B cell will similarly 
show this higher affinity. This process is termed affin-
ity maturation. Immunity to many potentially lethal or 
harmful human diseases, for example measles, polio and 
smallpox, is mediated by such high-affinity immuno-
globulin (antibody).
The innate immune system
One of the major roles of the immune system is to neutral-
ize and destroy invading pathogens. These pathogens – 
bacteria, viruses, fungi, protozoans and worms – vary in 
their size, typical route of entry into the body and mech-
anism for evading the immune system. Generally, they 
enter the body across the mucosal surfaces of the respi-
ratory system and gut and across the skin; it is in these 
areas of the body where the innate immune system forms 
the first-line of defence from invading pathogens. The 
major components of the innate immune system are:
•	 mechanical barriers, e.g. intact skin, mucous mem-
branes
•	 sebaceous secretions; contents include fatty and 
other acids (hence skin acidity)
•	 lysozyme (in tears)
•	 gut acidity
•	 urine acidity
•	 intestinal motility
•	 IGA (in tears, at mucosal surfaces)
•	 mucus
•	 ciliated surfaces
•	 normal bacterial flora
•	 acute phase proteins
•	 interferons
•	 other molecules (including defensins, lactoferrin, 
peroxidases)
•	 neutrophils and complement, although these over-
lap with the acquired immune system.
Intact mucosal surfaces give a high degree of protec-
tion against pathogens, and if breached, for example by 
surgery, burns or mechanical damage, significant infec-
tion can occur. The skin is relatively dry with a high salt 
content; sweat and sebaceous secretions contain fatty ac-
ids, triglycerides, lactic acid, amino acids and ammonia 
that have antimicrobial activity. Mucus and the cilia of the 
respiratory tract act together to trap and sweep inhaled 
particles towards the mouth and nose, where they can 
leave the body or where they can be swallowed to be inac-
tivated by the gastric acid. The gastrointestinal tract has 
a combination of innate defence mechanisms such as the 
alkalinity of saliva and the strongly acidic conditions and 
enzymic activity of the stomach. Mucopolysaccharides in 
the secretions of the genital tract help make it inhospit­
able to pathogens. The eyes are bathed in tears contain-
ing the enzyme lysozyme, and the rate of tear production 
can increase to flush away any potential invading patho-
gens. Similarly, the urinary tract has a high flow rate that 
helps to keep it free from pathogens.
Many areas of the body are colonized with commensal 
organisms. It is estimated that a normal gut is colonized 
with 10
14 bacteria, which form the normal (commensal) 
bacterial flora and produce chemicals that are antimicro-
bial and also compete with potentially pathogenetic organ-
isms for essential nutrients. Commensal organisms may 
cause infection – usually called opportunistic infections – 
particularly if they get into areas where they do not normally 
live or if the immune system is compromised.
The innate immune system overlaps with the adaptive 
immune system (Fig. 30.1), with both systems using the 
complement cascade, cytokines, phagocytic cells, natural 
562	
Clinical biochemistry
killer cells and acute phase proteins. These components 
can act alone in an innate response to destroy invading 
pathogens, but the mechanisms are non-specific and slow 
and are significantly enhanced by involvement of the 
adaptive immune system.
The adaptive immune system
An adaptive immune response involves an integrated 
­system, in which there are three elements.
1.	 Lymphoid tissue, wherein the components of the 
immune system are made and where immunologi-
cal processing occurs.
2.	 Cells with specific functions, including specific 
­antigen recognition and presentation.
3.	 Soluble mediators that participate in immune reac-
tions and can interact with other systems of the body.
The components of the adaptive immune system are 
summarized in Table 30.1.
Lymphoid tissue
Lymphoid tissue is distributed around the body 
(Fig.  30.2), with the blood and the lymphatics form-
ing the lymphoid circulatory system. The bone marrow 
and the thymus are primary lymphoid organs, the bone 
marrow being the major site of production of all the 
cells of the immune system. The bone marrow is also 
the site of maturation of B lymphocytes. Immature T 
lymphocytes leave the bone marrow to develop further 
in the thymus (a bilobed organ in the upper anterior 
mediastinum that diminishes in size with age). The 
secondary lymphoid organs are found throughout the 
body, but particularly at junctions of the lymphatics, 
for example in the groin and axillae. This arrangement 
enables specialized antigen-presenting cells (APCs) to 
show antigens to an enormous number of lymphoid cells 
as they ‘traffic’ around the immune system. Secondary 
lymphoid tissue can be diffuse aggregates of cells or can 
be more organized into identifiable areas, for example 
the tonsils and Peyer patches in the gut. Lymph nodes 
also have an identifiable structure, with B cells resid-
ing mainly in the outer cortex and T cells mainly in the 
paracortex. Upon antigen stimulation, primary follicles 
within lymph nodes develop into secondary follicles with 
germinal centres. Activation of the immune system 
causes the cells within the lymph nodes to differentiate 
and proliferate, resulting in enlargement of the lymph 
nodes (lymphadenopathy). This is sought on physical 
examination of patients as a sign of increased activity of 
the immune system, for example in infection and malig-
nancy. A large proportion of lymphoid cells are found 
in the gut and respiratory systems (gut and mucosal as-
sociated lymphoid tissue: GALT and MALT), where 
the antigenic burden is high.
Although specific immune responses are made within 
lymphoid tissues, other non-lymphoid organs have a 
role to play; for example, the liver is the major site of 
production of the complement proteins and acute phase 
proteins.
Cells
All cells of the body interact with the immune system. 
For example, any damaged nucleated cell has the capac-
ity to make cytokines, and red blood cells have comple-
ment and antibody receptors on their surface that, owing 
to their enormous numbers, represent an important re-
moval mechanism for immune complexes. Immune cells 
circulating in the blood are represented by the white cell 
population. Normally, the total white cell count of an 
adult is 4–11 × 10
9/L. This total is made up of a number of 
different cell types as shown in Table 30.2; the differential 
white cell count represents the number and proportion 
of each of these types. Each cell type has particular func-
tions within the immune system: the major functions are 
listed in Table 30.2.
Each cell type has a characteristic morphology that 
enables it to be identified in a stained blood film ex-
amined under a microscope. Figure  30.3 shows dia-
grams of the various types of white blood cell with their 
major progenitor cell types. The cell membranes are 
covered with molecules that enable the cells to interact 
Innate immune system
• inborn and non-specific
• no immunization
• negligible memory
Integrity of barriers
Mucosal surfaces
Skin
Cilia
Acidity
Mucus
Sweat
Interferons
Lysozyme
Adaptive immune 
system
• acquired and specific
• needs immunization
• memory
Spleen
Bone marrow
Lymph nodes
Neutrophils
Lymphocytes (T & B)
Monocytes
Macrophages
Basophils
Eosinophils and mast cells
Antibodies
Complement
Phagocytic cells
Natural killer cells
Cytokines
FIGURE  30.1  ■ The overlap between the innate and adaptive 
­immune systems.
TABLE 30.1  The components of the adaptive 
­immune system
Lymphoid  
tissue
Cells
Soluble mediators
Embryonic
a
Neutrophils
Monocytes
Macrophages
T lymphocytes
Natural killer 
cells
B lymphocytes
Basophils
Eosinophils
Mast cells
Dendritic cells
Cell bound 
recognition 
molecules
(HLA or MHC)
Cell receptor 
molecules
Antibodies
Complement proteins
Cytokines
Acute phase proteins
Inflammatory 
mediators:
  Tryptase
  Histamine
  Platelet activating 
factor
  Prostaglandins
  Leukotrienes
Soluble receptor 
molecules
Yolk sac
Fetal liver
Primary
Bone marrow
Thymus
Secondary
Spleen
Lymph nodes
and lymphatics
Tonsils
Adenoids
Lymphoid tissue 
in the skin and 
mucosa of the 
bronchus, gut 
and urogenital 
tract
aAfter the early fetal development, all the cellular elements of the 
blood arise from haematopoietic cells in the bone marrow. HLA, 
­human leukocyte antigen; MHC, major histocompatibility antigen.
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
563
with their environment. They may be constitutively 
expressed (i.e. expressed in the unstimulated state) and 
this expression be increased on activation, or they may 
be induced when a cell is activated. Cells have many 
thousands of molecules of a whole variety of cell re-
ceptors on their surfaces. The cell surface molecules 
are classified by their cluster of differentiation (CD) 
numbers, with a different CD number for individual 
types of cell membrane protein. (The designation + af-
ter a CD number indicates that a specific antigen is ex-
pressed by that cell. For example, all T cells are CD3+; 
T helper cells are CD4 + .) The cellular expression of 
these markers is used to provide a more detailed picture 
of cell populations, for example whether they are im-
mature or mature, whether activated, how they are 
functioning and whether they are normal or malignant. 
Aberrant expression of the CD markers is used to clas-
sify lymphoid malignancies while reduced expression of 
CD antigens can be used in the investigation of immu-
nodeficiency, for example, CD4 counts to monitor HIV 
infection. The technique (known as immunophenotyp-
ing), uses specific antibodies to the CD markers and 
flow cytometry to count and quantify cell populations. 
There are approximately 400 different human proteins 
that have been assigned a CD number. The most im-
portant immunological markers, their major functions 
Bronchus
associated
lymphoid
tissue
Tonsils and adenoids
Thymus
Lymph nodes
Spleen
Bone marrow
Bone marrow
Peyer patches
Urogenital lymphoid
tissue
Mesenteric
lymph nodes
Lymph nodes
FIGURE 30.2  ■ The lymphoid organs.
TABLE 30.2  The major cells types, their approximate percentage of the differential white cell  
count and their major functions
Cell type
Reference  
range (×10
9/L)
Function
Total white cell count
4–11
 
Neutrophil
1.6–7.5
Attracted to site of inflammation by chemotactic factors
Most important cell type for phagocytosis and killing of bacteria
Opsonization with antibody and complement enhances phagocytosis
Lymphocyte
1.5–4.0
Key role in orchestrating the immune response and producing soluble 
mediators of immunity
  T cell (CD3+)
0.8–2.66
T helper cells (CD4+) control the development of an immune response by 
secreting cytokines
Cytotoxic T cells (CD8+) can directly kill cells, e.g. that are infected with 
virus
Regulatory T cells modify immune responses
  B cell (CD19+)
0.1–0.6
Antibody production
  Natural killer cell (CD56+, 
CD16+)
0.05–0.60
Can directly kill cells, e.g. infected with virus, tumour cells
Monocyte
0.1–0.8
Important phagocytic cells and can act as antigen presenting cells
Cytokine production – particularly in inflammation
Basophil
<0.1
Major role is in allergic responses via release of mediators, e.g. histamine
May be important in defending against parasites
Eosinophil
0.04–0.45
Some phagocytic function
Major role in hypersensitivity reactions via release of variety of mediators
Activation of mast cells
564	
Clinical biochemistry
and the cells types on which they are predominantly 
expressed are shown in Table 30.3.
The cells of the immune system arise from haemato-
poietic stem cells in the bone marrow. Individual stem 
cells respond to a number of positive or negative feedback 
mechanisms, for example colony stimulating factors, and 
are driven to proliferate and differentiate along commit-
ted pathways to give rise to populations of lymphocytes, 
granulocytes, APCs etc. The major processes are out-
lined in Figure 30.3.
Neutrophils. Neutrophils, in common with basophils 
and eosinophils, can be shown to contain a large num-
ber of cytoplasmic granules when stained and examined 
by light microscopy and are thus termed granulocytes. 
They have a multilobed nucleus (polymorphonuclear or 
PMN, hence their alternative name, polymorphs) and are 
the most abundant white cells in the circulation. They 
show high expression of adhesion molecules that enable 
them to roll along blood vessel walls. If expression of ad-
hesion molecules on the vascular surface is upregulated, 
Platelets
Lymphocyte
(lymphoid) lineage
Erythrocytes
Monoblast
Dendritic cell precursor
Pre-B lymphocyte
Mature
blood
forms
Mature
tissue
forms
Bone
stem cell
Plasma cell
Mast cell
Monocyte
B lymphocyte
T lymphocyte
 Immature dendritic cell
Neutrophil
Basophil
Thymus
Natural killer cell
precursor
Natural killer cell
Granulocyte precursor
Pre-T lymphocyte
?
Tissue
dendritic cells
Granulocyte/monocyte
(myeloid) lineage
Pluripotent
stem cell
Macrophage
Alveolar macrophage
Mesangial cell
Kupffer cell
Osteoclast
L 
T 
T 
NK
NK
B 
B 
P 
Eosinophil
FIGURE 30.3  ■  Major types of white blood cell and their generation.
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
565
for example because of tissue damage or infection, neu-
trophils are attracted to the site of inflammation (by che-
motactic factors) and leave the blood stream and enter 
the tissues to engulf the invading pathogens or damaged 
tissue components, and destroy them, in a process termed 
phagocytosis.
The stages in phagocytosis are as follows.
1.	 Cells move to a site of injury or inflamma-
tion, ­attracted by chemicals released during the 
­inflammatory process. Adhesion molecules, for ex-
ample on the endothelium, are upregulated to hold 
the phagocytic cells and prevent them from moving 
away.
2.	 At the site of injury, the particle or microorganism, 
coated with antibody and complement, adheres to 
the phagocyte via C3b and Fcγ receptors.
3.	 The adherence of the particle to the phagocyte re-
sults in the activation of the phagocyte’s membrane, 
initiating a change in its shape and leading to in-
ternalization of the foreign material (phagocytosis: 
literally, ‘eating’ the particle).
4.	 As the particle is taken into the cell, it becomes sur-
rounded with a membrane, forming a phagocytic 
vesicle or phagosome.
5.	 The phagosome fuses with lysosomes to form a pha-
golysosome, in which the microorganism is killed, 
and it, or other ingested material, is digested.
6.	 Completely digested material is reused by the 
cell; incompletely digested material is released 
(sometimes accompanied by potentially harmful 
enzymes).
If phagocytic cells are incubated in vitro with, for ex-
ample, bacteria, phagocytosis will occur, but the process 
is significantly enhanced if the bacteria are coated with 
complement or antibody. This coating is called opsoniza-
tion and, in simple terms, it enables phagocytic cells to 
adhere to the marked particles (giving the process speci-
ficity) and enables them to change shape to engulf the 
particles. Many cell types are capable of phagocytosis, 
the ‘professional’ phagocytic cells being neutrophils and 
cells of the monocyte/macrophage lineage. Many mac-
rophages home to particular tissues where they develop 
highly specialized functions, e.g. Kupffer cells (in the 
liver), mesangial cells (kidneys), microglia (brain) and 
Langerhans cells (epidermis).
Basophils and eosinophils. These two cell types are also 
granulocytes and are particularly important in defending 
against multicellular pathogens, for example parasitic 
worms. This defence mechanism relies on the mediators 
in the cytoplasmic granules rather than the phagocytic 
functions of the cells. A close relation of the basophil, 
the mast cell, is tissue-based and important in allergic 
responses.
TABLE 30.3  The major CD phenotypes, their normal functions and cell types where they  
are normally expressed
Phenotype
Function of protein
Cells where expressed
CD3
Part of the T cell receptor
All T cells (pan T cell marker)
CD4
Helps T cells to hold on to antigen-presenting cells 
(HLA class II)
T helper cells
CD8
Helps T cells to hold on to antigen-presenting cells 
(HLA class I)
Cytotoxic T cells
CD19
B cell co-receptor
B cells
CD20
B cell activation and differentiation
B cells
CD45
Cell differentiation, signal transduction and 
lymphocyte activation
All white blood cells (leukocyte common 
antigen)
CD16
Binds Fc γ RIII (binds IgG Fc)
Natural killer cells, neutrophils, monocytes
CD32
Binds Fc γ RII (binds IgG Fc)
Neutrophils, macrophages, B lymphocytes, 
eosinophils
CD64
Binds Fc γ RI (binds IgG Fc)
Monocytes, macrophages, activated 
neutrophils
CD89
Binds Fc α R (binds IgA Fc)
Monocytes, macrophages, neutrophils
CD21
CR2 (binds C3d)
B cells (some)
CD35
CR1 (binds C3b, C4b)
Neutrophils, monocytes, B cells, 
erythrocytes
CD25
IL-2R α chain
Activated T and B cells
CD56
 
Natural killer cells
CD40
Binds to CD40 ligand (CD154); B cell  
proliferation and class switching
B cells, antigen-presenting cells
CD11a (+CD418)
Cell adhesion (to other cells)
Leukocytes
CD11b (+CD18)
Cell adhesion (to other cells) CR3
Monocytes, neutrophils, natural killer cells
CD11c (+CD18)
Cell adhesion (to other cells) CR4
Monocytes, neutrophils, natural killer cells, 
some T and B cells
CD18 (+ CD  
11 a, b and c)
Cell adhesion (to other cells)
Leukocytes, monocytes, neutrophils, natural 
killer cells, some T and B cells
CD62E
E selectin cell adhesion (to other cells)
Endothelium, platelets
CD62L
L selectin cell adhesion (to other cells)
Neutrophils
CD62P
P selectin cell adhesion (to other cells)
Endothelium
 
B cell proliferation and class switching
Activated T cells
IL, interleukin; HLA, human lymphocyte antigens.
566	
Clinical biochemistry
Monocytes. Monocytes are immature macrophages 
that are travelling from their site of production in the 
bone marrow through the bloodstream to the tissues 
where they will become fixed macrophages. Potentially, 
they are phagocytic cells but they do not seem to act 
as phagocytes in the bloodstream. They have receptors 
that recognize many bacterial products so are very ef-
fective cells in innate immunity. Engagement of these 
receptors stimulates release of proinflammatory cy-
tokines such as interleukin 1 (IL-1), IL-6 and tumour 
necrosis factors (TNFs). These cytokines are able 
to drive many aspects of inflammation and specific 
immunity. Monocytes therefore provide a valuable 
­second-line defence mechanism once infectious agents 
have breached the mucosal defences and entered the 
bloodstream.
Lymphocytes. The major subpopulations of lym-
phocytes are B and T cells. A haemopoietic stem cell 
first gives rise to a lymphopoietic stem cell, which in 
turn becomes committed to the B or T cell lineage. 
Lymphocytes are further divided into subsets on the ba-
sis of the presence of particular cell surface molecules 
(see Table 30.3). B cells (CD19+) can differentiate into 
antibody (immunoglobulin)-producing plasma cells in 
response to exposure to antigen. T cells leave the bone 
marrow to mature in the thymus. They undergo further 
differentiation to become either T helper cells (CD4+) 
that ultimately control the immune response, through 
cytokine production or cytotoxic T cells (CD8+) that 
have an important role in killing viruses, fungi and 
infected cells. Other T cell types are becoming in-
creasingly well recognized as having important im-
munological roles; for example, that of regulatory T 
cells (Treg) in the modulation of autoreactive T cells, and 
of Th17 (T helper) cells in inflammatory responses.
There are two main types of T helper cells (Th1 and 
Th2), which are defined by the cytokines they produce. 
Th1 cells predominantly produce IL-2, TNFα/β and 
γ-interferon, and drive cell-mediated immunity by cy-
totoxic T cells, macrophage stimulation and inflamma-
tion, and production of immunoglobulins, such as IgG1 
and IgG3 by B cells. Th2 cells predominantly produce 
IL-4, 5, 6, 10 and 13, and are important in driving IgE 
responses and the growth of mast cells and eosinophils.
Natural killer (NK) cells (CD16+ and CD56+) are cy-
tolytic cells of the lymphocyte lineage, acting in a slightly 
different way from the cytotoxic Tc cells.
B and T lymphocytes are at the heart of the adaptive 
immune response by virtue of their antigen receptors (Ig 
and T cell receptor, TCR). A comparison of the B and 
T cell receptors is shown in Table 30.4. The property of 
antigen binding is also shared by the human leukocyte 
antigens (HLA). These three sets of antigen-binding 
molecules are all products, or partial products, of the im-
munoglobulin gene superfamily; they are all composed of 
one or more homologous domains of approximately 110 
amino acids, as illustrated in Figure 30.4.
Antigen recognition
Immunoglobulins. Immunoglobulins are proteins pro-
duced by cells of the B-lymphocyte lineage, either in a 
membrane-bound form as an antigen receptor, or as 
a secreted product that shows antibody activity. The 
­membrane-bound and secreted forms differ only in the 
terminal amino acid residues that serve to anchor the pro-
tein into the membrane or allow secretion. The basic mo-
nomeric immunoglobulin unit consists of two identical 
heavy chains and two identical light chains arranged in a 
Y-shape (see Fig. 30.5). In humans, there are five possible 
heavy chains (γ, α, μ, δ and ε) that give the five immuno-
globulin classes (IgG, IgA, IgM, IgD and IgE). In addi-
tion, there are four subclasses of IgG and two subclasses 
of IgA. There are two light chain types (κ and λ).
TABLE 30.4  Comparison of B cell receptor and T cell receptor
 
B cell receptor (membrane-bound IgM)
T cell receptor
Similarities
Variation created by gene rearrangement
Part of a protein complex including accessory  
chains and signalling adaptors
Variable and constant domains
Differences
Two heavy chains and two light chains
Two polypeptide chains (αβ or γδ)
Somatic hypermutation allows affinity maturation
No somatic hypermutation
Class switching from IgM to other 
immunoglobulin classes
No class switching
Binds directly to specific antigen
Binds to specific antigen only when bound by appropriate 
HLA molecule
Constant region domains
Variable region domains
Antigen binding sites
Antigen presentation grooves
Membrane
bound IgM
(monomeric)
T cell
receptor
HLA
Class II
α-
chain
β-chain
HLA
Class I
α-
chain
β2M
FIGURE  30.4  ■ The antigen presenting and binding molecules. 
β2M, β2-microglobulin; HLA, human leukocyte antigen.
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
567
The class (or subclass) of the heavy chains and type 
of light chains is determined by the common amino acid 
sequences in areas of the molecule called the constant do-
mains. The light chains have one constant domain and 
the heavy chains have three or four constant domains, 
depending upon the class; it is these areas that confer 
functionality to secreted immunoglobulin molecules. 
Each chain also has a single domain of great variability 
in the amino acid structure, called the variable domain. 
The heavy and light chains are arranged such that their 
variable domains are adjacent, forming a groove in which 
antigen binding occurs.
If every antigen recognition receptor on B and T cells 
were encoded on a one gene/one enzyme principle, these 
receptors alone would require more than the total DNA 
present within individual cells. The enormous scope for 
receptors to recognize antigens is achieved by a mecha-
nism of genetic recombination.
In humans, the gene for the production of the immuno-
globulin heavy chain is located on chromosome 14. In the 
germ line, there are large numbers (estimated 250–1000) 
of variable (V) gene segments followed by small numbers 
of D (∼ 12) and J (∼ 4) gene segments. Finally, there is 
the constant (C) gene segment that can encode for any of 
the immunoglobulin heavy chains. A diagram of the im-
munoglobulin heavy chain gene is shown in Figure 30.6. 
Processing of this genetic material occurs by deletion of 
the introns (the non-coding DNA) and splicing together 
of the exons (the coding portions of the gene). One of the 
many V-region genes is selected and joined to one of the 
D-region genes, which is joined to one of the J-region 
genes. This VDJ sequence is then joined to the constant 
region genes, typically starting with the μ gene, which is 
the first downstream heavy chain gene in the sequence, 
resulting in the production of IgM. The genes for the 
κ and λ light chains are located on chromosomes 2 and 
22, respectively, and are similar to the heavy chain gene 
except that they do not have a D region. Diversity of the 
variable region is generated by the large number of pos-
sible combinations between the V, D and J or V and J 
regions of the genes, variation in how these genes are 
spliced and by somatic mutation generated during cell 
development.
CH3
S-S
C
Fc
Fab
CH2
S-S
S-S
S-S
S
S
S
S
S-S
S-S
S-S
S-S
S
S
CL
VL
VL
CH1
S-S
S-S
S-S
S-S
S
S
Light
chain
Heavy
chain
NH2
Antigen
binding
site
FIGURE 30.5  ■ The basic structure of an immunoglobulin molecule.
µ
(pseudo ε)
δ γ3
α1
α2
γ1
γ2 γ4 ε
FIGURE 30.6  ■ The immunoglobulin heavy chain gene.
568	
Clinical biochemistry
TABLE 30.5  The major properties of immunoglobulins
Property or function
IgG
IgA
IgM
IgD
IgE
Molecular weight (kDa)
150
160 (monomer)
900 (pentamer)
185
200
Adult plasma reference range (g/L)
6.0–16.0
0.8–4.0
0.5–2.0
0.01–0.5
<0.1
% Carbohydrate
3
8
12
13
12
Subclasses
4
2
0
0
0
Complement fixation: classical pathway
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Complement fixation: alternative pathway
No
Yes
No
No
No
Crosses placenta
Yes
No
No
No
No
Binds to Fc receptors on phagocytes
Yes
No
Yes
No
No
Binds to Fc receptors on mast cells
No
No
No
No
Yes
In any cell, there is allelic exclusion, so that only one 
of each pair of chromosomes coding for immunoglobulin 
is translated. Each cell, theoretically, has two chances for 
each gene to be successfully rearranged. The products 
of unsuccessful rearrangements are secreted by the cell 
and degraded or cleared by the kidneys. The immuno-
globulin heavy chain gene(s) is rearranged first, followed 
by ­κ-gene rearrangement. In about 40% of cells, the κ 
­rearrangements are abortive and the cell then proceeds 
to λ-gene rearrangement. A small excess of free light 
chains (polyclonal) is produced. The immunoglobulin 
molecule is then assembled and expressed on the surface 
of B cells. The cell is now committed to a light chain 
type and unique variable region specificity (also called 
the idiotype). The organization of the heavy chain gene 
enables the variable region to be spliced onto a differ-
ent heavy chain by the process of ‘class switching’. This 
occurs after interaction with antigen, when cells that 
show appropriate recognition of the antigen are driven 
to proliferate. IgM is the antibody produced in primary 
immune responses; IgG (or IgA or IgE), produced after 
class switching, is produced in secondary immune re-
sponses, as shown in Figure 30.7. Some cells will mature 
into memory cells and others into end-differentiated 
plasma cells. Plasma cells are typically non-proliferative 
and have little membrane-bound immunoglobulin but 
secrete large amounts.
IgA and IgM both occur as oligomers of the basic 
unit. Combination is facilitated by the addition of a short 
polypeptide chain called the J-chain. This J-chain should 
not be confused with the J gene segments coding for part 
of the variable region of the immunoglobulin molecule – 
the two bear no relationship. In the plasma, IgM occurs 
as a pentamer. IgA can occur as a dimer and this is the 
predominant form in secretions. A glycoprotein called 
‘secretory piece’ is synthesized by mucosal epithelial 
cells and integrated into secreted IgA molecules, mak-
ing them more resistant to degradation by the mucosal 
environment.
The major properties of the immunoglobulins are 
shown in Table 30.5.
Under normal circumstances, there is enormous mi-
croheterogeneity within immunoglobulin molecules. 
This results in polyclonal immunoglobulins, represent-
ing all classes, light chain types and a large number of 
different idiotypes, each produced by a different B cell 
clone, even to a single antigen. Monoclonal immuno-
globulins, which consist of a single heavy chain class, light 
chain type and idiotype, result from the proliferation of a 
single clone of B cells. In fact, polyclonal immunoglobu-
lins comprise very small amounts of many thousands of 
monoclonal immunoglobulins.
Each class and subclass of immunoglobulin has its own 
function or group of functions. IgG is the most ­abundant 
antibody in the circulation and also diffuses into the 
­extravascular compartment bathing all the tissues. It is 
produced in secondary immune responses and is vital for 
immunological memory. There are four subclasses, with 
IgG1, IgG2, IgG3 and IgG4 being approximately 65%, 
25%, 7% and 3%, respectively, of the total IgG. IgG1 
and IgG3 responses mature earliest, while IgG2 and 
IgG4 responses mature more slowly. IgG1, IgG2 and 
IgG3 are all potent activators of the classical comple-
ment cascade. IgG (bound to an antigen) binds to the Fcγ 
­receptors I, II and III on neutrophils, macrophages etc. 
to facilitate and enhance phagocytosis. IgG has a half-
life of approximately 21 days, but this depends upon the 
plasma concentration, catabolism being increased with 
raised IgG concentrations and decreased with low IgG 
concentrations.
IgA is the major immunoglobulin in mucosal secre-
tions and is also produced in secondary immune re-
sponses. It is most important in binding and neutralizing 
organisms at mucosal surfaces, without interacting with 
other immunological systems.
IgM is the antibody of the primary immune response, 
culminating in the process of class switching, inducing 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Weeks
IgM
IgG
Antibody titre (arbitrary)
1st
immunization
2nd immunization
booster
FIGURE  30.7  ■  Antibody production in primary and secondary 
responses.
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
569
the B cells to make the antibodies of the secondary re-
sponses, IgG or IgA. The large pentameric structure of 
IgM gives good potential for antigen binding and its high 
molecular weight keeps it restricted to the vascular com-
partment. The half-lives of IgA and IgM are independent 
of their plasma concentrations and are approximately five 
days for both.
IgD is detectable on B cells early in their development, 
but its concentration in plasma is normally very low. Its 
exact function in not known, but it is likely that it is im-
portant in processing antigens in immature B cells.
The plasma concentration of IgE is very low; it relies 
on its binding to the Fcε receptor on mast cells and baso-
phils for its activity. The release of inflammatory mediators 
within these cells is precipitated by binding of the sur-
face-bound IgE to a specific antigen or allergen.
T cell receptors. The T cell receptor is somewhat sim-
pler. It is a heterodimer in which each polypeptide chain 
is composed of two domains, one variable and one con-
stant. There are four possible polypeptide chains, α, β, γ 
and δ. A receptor is made up of a pairing of either α with 
β or γ with δ. In no cell are both types expressed, nor 
are other pairings possible (e.g. α with δ). The variable 
domains are similarly constructed from gene segments, 
as described for immunoglobulin receptors (V, D and J 
for β and δ; V and J for α and γ), and then spliced into the 
corresponding constant regions.
The T cell receptor differs from the immunoglobulin 
receptor in that it has no hypermutable sequences and 
therefore does not show affinity maturation. Also, it can 
only recognize antigen that is bound to an HLA (human 
leukocyte antigen) molecule expressed on the surface of 
an appropriate antigen presenting cell (APC).
Human leukocyte antigens (HLA). The major histo-
compatibility complex (MHC) is a group of molecules 
that are integral to the development of adaptive immune 
responses. In humans, the genes for these molecules, 
which are designated human leukocyte antigen (HLA), 
are on chromosome 6. They are expressed on the cell 
surface and bind peptides in an antigen-binding groove, 
where they are recognized by T cells via the T cell recep-
tor. There are two types of HLA, class I and class II, 
summarized in Table 30.6.
HLA molecules bind antigen but they are different 
from the receptors on B and T cells in that there is no 
genetic re-arrangement. Instead, the HLA genes are 
highly polymorphic, i.e. their nucleotide sequences vary 
between individuals giving different alleles, summarized 
in Figure 30.8.
HLA class I molecules are widely expressed on most 
nucleated cells. They comprise a small non-membrane 
polypeptide, β2-microglobulin (the invariant chain of 
MHC class I) covalently linked to a heavy chain, an in-
tegral membrane protein with external domains. The 
variation within MHC class I arises from polymorphisms 
within genes for the heavy chains. There are three loci for 
class I (HLA-A, HLA-B and HLA-C). Each individual 
inherits A, B and C from each parent and, unlike the situ-
ation with immunoglobulins and the TCR, there is no al-
lelic exclusion: both sets of genes are translated. All types 
occur on any one cell. Because of the polymorphisms, it 
is likely that any individual will be heterozygous at each 
locus; therefore six products will be formed.
HLA class II molecules are primarily expressed on 
immune cells, particularly those able to present anti-
gen. They may be inducible on many other cell types. 
They comprise two transmembrane polypeptides (α and 
TABLE 30.6  Comparison of HLA class I and class II
 
Class I
Class II
Structure
Variable heavy 
chain + invariant 
chain 
(β2-microglobulin)
Two variable 
chains, α and β
Expression
Most nucleated cells
Antigen 
presenting 
cells; may be 
induced on 
other cell types
Antigen 
presented
Intracellular 
antigen, i.e. viral, 
self
8–9 amino acids
Extracellular 
antigen, e.g. 
microbes or 
their products
14–22 amino 
acids
Gene loci
HLA-A, B, C
HLA-DQ, DR, DP
Responding 
T cell
CD8+ T cells
CD4+ T cells
Centromere 
HLA-DP 
HLA-DQ 
HLA-DR 
Complement C4B, C4A 
Heat shock proteins 
Inflammatory genes LTB, 
TNFA, LTA 
HLA-B 
HLA-C 
HLA-A 
Telomere 
Class II
Class III
Class I 
HLA-DPA1: 22 alleles 
HLA-DPB1: 116 alleles 
HLA-DQA1: 28 alleles 
HLA-DQB1: 60 alleles 
HLA-DRA: 182 alleles 
HLA-DRB: 3 alleles 
HLA-A: 349 alleles 
HLA-B: 626 alleles 
HLA-C: 182 alleles 
FIGURE 30.8  ■  Simplified overview of the MHC locus on human 
chromosome 6. The MHC locus is 4 MB and encodes ∼ 300 
genes. Dashed lines are used to indicate that other genes lie 
between the ones shown.
570	
Clinical biochemistry
β chains) of similar size. As for class I, there are three loci 
(HLA-DR, HLA-DQ and HLA-DP). Again, the like-
lihood is that these properties will result in at least six 
distinct receptors. The class II system is, however, more 
complex. During evolution, there has been replication 
of some loci such that it is possible to express a num-
ber of different DR and DQ types, leading to increased 
diversity. Even with the variations described above, it is 
apparent that the total number of different HLA types 
expressed in any one individual is relatively small com-
pared with immunoglobulins and TCRs.
Antigen presentation
Unlike immunoglobulin and the TCR, HLA molecules 
are loaded with peptide antigen intracellularly during mol-
ecule assembly, so that prior ‘loaded’ HLA is expressed 
on the cell surface. Indeed, it would appear that antigen-­
binding is essential for stability of the molecule and that 
HLA without antigen is intrinsically unstable. Antigen 
binds in grooves formed by the folding of class I molecules 
and the juncture of the α and β chains in class II. The source 
of the antigen is different for each class. Class I molecules 
bind antigens synthesized intracellularly, e.g. self-peptides 
or viral antigens; if these antigens are able to stimulate an 
immune response it is via CD8+ T cells, resulting in de-
struction of the target cell. Class II molecules bind antigen 
that was derived extracellularly, e.g. microbes or microbial 
products. These antigens are internalized within the APC, 
where they are subjected to partial proteolytic degradation 
and then bound to the class II molecules for antigen pre-
sentation. These antigens are recognized by CD4+ T cells 
and stimulate an immune response.
B cells can act as antigen presenting cells. Their sur-
face immunoglobulins are able to react with free antigen 
molecules, forming complexes that are taken into the 
cells, where the antigen is degraded into peptides. These 
peptides can combine with HLA class II molecules to al-
low antigen presentation to T cells.
Cellular immune activation
Antigen binding alone will rarely stimulate an immune 
response. Some very repetitive antigen sequences, for ex-
ample polysaccharides, may directly stimulate B cells. To 
respond to most antigens, however, both T and B cells re-
quire additional signaling from cytokines or contact with 
other cell types mediated through accessory or co-ligatory 
molecules expressed on these cells. Accessory cell interac-
tions are many and complex and the reader is referred to 
dedicated immunological texts for an account of these.
Complement
The complement system
The complement system consists of approximately 30 
plasma proteins, normally present in inactive forms 
­(zymogens). Activation results in the generation of a 
cascade of enzymes that leads to activation of the ter-
minal cytolytic pathway (membrane attack complex). 
Activation can occur via two major pathways, the 
classical pathway and the alternative pathway. In addi-
tion, complement can be activated through the lectin 
pathway and may be ­recruited by proteolytic activ-
ity generated by other physiological pathways such as 
coagulation. The system is inherently labile and sub-
ject to regulation by various proteins (see below). A 
simple diagram of the complement system is shown in 
Figure 30.9. The role of the complement system as a 
whole is to destroy invading pathogens via the mem-
brane attack complex and opsonization but there are 
many other effects of complement activation, as shown 
in Table 30.7. During activation of the earlier compo-
nents (C2, C4, C3 and C5), smaller peptides are cleaved 
off the zymogens. These have powerful biological ac-
tivities: they are able to initiate and potentiate inflam-
mation by increasing blood vessel permeability and 
attracting inflammatory and immune cells to a site of 
injury via a process termed chemotaxis.
The larger fragment formed on activation usually has 
the alphabetical annotation ‘b’ (e.g. C3b) and the smaller 
fragment, ‘a’ (e.g. C3a). Some authors use a line over a 
component name (e.g. C1s) to denote an active enzyme 
that can activate the next component; this convention is 
unnecessary and has not been adopted in this chapter.
Activation via the alternative pathway
The alternative pathway is initiated at the level of C3, by-
passing the earlier components C1, C4 and C2, which are 
activated in the classical pathway. C3 spontaneously de-
grades in tissue fluids and is rapidly inactivated. However, 
on activating surfaces, including damaged tissue and com-
ponents of bacterial cell walls such as lipopolysaccharides, 
degraded C3 is stabilized and can form an enzyme to 
­activate further C3 and to generate an enzyme to cleave 
C5 and thus activate the terminal sequence of the pathway.
Activation via the classical pathway
Complexes of antigens with their antibodies (immune 
complexes) binding C1 activate the classical pathway. C1 
is a trimolecular complex of C1s, C1r and C1q. Binding 
of C1 liberates an enzyme C1s (the C1 esterase), which is 
able to cleave C4 and C2, and an enzyme formed from a 
complex of the larger fragments of these two molecules 
can activate C3. The pathway beyond this is common 
with the alternative pathway.
Activation via the lectin pathway
Various components of bacterial cell walls are able to bind 
to a protein in the blood called mannose binding lectin 
(MBL); this complex is able to stimulate serine proteases 
that can directly activate component C4.
Regulation of the complement pathways
Many of the complement proteins have a natural cleav-
age site, making them inherently unstable; therefore the 
presence of a number of regulatory proteins is vital to 
stop uncontrolled activation of the cascade. Some of the 
control proteins circulate while others are membrane 
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
571
bound; some have enzyme activity, others are simple 
binding proteins. The important complement regulatory 
proteins are shown in Table 30.8.
Acute phase proteins
Inflammation is a fundamental pathological process 
that occurs in response to tissue injury. The inflamma-
tory response has three main stages: local reactions; de-
struction and/or removal of the injurious material, and 
repair and healing of the damaged tissue. Stimulators of 
inflammation include trauma, infection, infarction and 
deposition of immune complexes; these result in the re-
lease of inflammatory mediators (see Table 30.9) and the 
classic signs of inflammation – redness, swelling, warmth 
or heat, pain and loss (or impairment) of function. These 
Classical pathway
Immune
complexes etc.
C1q
C1r
C1s
C4
C2
C3
Lectin pathway
Bacterial
carbohydrate
MBL
MASP-1
MASP-2
C4
C2
C3
Alternative pathway
Bacterial
carbohydrate
C3b
Factor B
Factor D
Properdin
C3
Major classical pathway
regulators
C1 esterase inhibitor
Factor I
Carboxypeptidase N
Decay accelerating factor
Membrane cofactor protein
CR1
C4b binding protein
Major alternative pathway
regulators
Factor H
Factor I
Decay accelerating factor
CR1
Membrane cofactor protein
C3b
C5
C6
C7
C8
C9
Membrane attack
complex of
terminal lytic
pathway
Major MAC regulators
CD59
S protein
Protein SP-40,40
(clusterin)
FIGURE 30.9  ■ The complement system, showing the pathways for activation and their major regulatory proteins.
TABLE 30.7  The major actions of components of 
the complement system
Complement 
components
Effect
C1q, C3, C4
Clearance of immune complexes
Clearance of cell debris
C3a, C4a, C5a 
(anaphylatoxins)
Histamine release from mast 
cells
Increase smooth muscle 
contraction
Increase vascular permeability
Inflammation
C3b (opsonin)
Binding of antigen–antibody 
complex to receptors on 
phagocytes, enabling effective 
ingestion and destruction
C5a, C3a 
(chemotaxins)
Recruitment of phagocytes into 
areas of inflammation
C5–C9 (membrane 
attack complex)
Cell or bacterial lysis
Cell signalling
TABLE 30.8  The major control mechanisms of 
the complement cascade
Complement control 
mechanism
Activity
C1 esterase inhibitor
Protease inhibitor that blocks 
the activity of C1 esterase
Factor H
Binds C3b and enhances the 
degradative action of Factor I
Factor I
Enzyme that degrades C3b and 
C4b
C4b binding protein
Binds to C4 and enhances its 
destruction by Factor I
Protein S and SP-40,40 
(clusterin)
Binds C5b67 and prevents 
formation of the membrane 
attack complex
Carboxypeptidase N
Enzyme that inactivates C3a, 
C4a and C5a
Decay accelerating 
factor
Transmembrane glycoprotein 
on most blood cells that binds 
C4b and inhibits C3 convertase
Membrane cofactor 
protein (CD46)
Membrane-bound C3 binding 
protein
Membrane attack 
complex inhibitory 
factor (CD59)
Membrane-bound protein 
that hinders insertion of the 
membrane attack complex
Complement receptor I 
(CRI, CD35)
High affinity receptor for C3b and 
C4b on surface of erythrocytes
572	
Clinical biochemistry
features may be localized, but in more severe inflamma-
tion there is a widespread response and the features also 
include fever, leukocytosis and the production of a variety 
of liver-derived acute phase proteins. The functions of 
these proteins are summarized in Table 30.10.
The acute phase proteins show diverse properties, par-
ticularly in the kinetics of their responses, as shown in 
Table 30.11. The magnitude of response is generally re-
lated to the degree of injury, although other factors such 
as catabolic rate, hormonal influences and genetic vari-
ability are also important.
Cytokines
These are biological signalling peptides, whose many ac-
tions include the control of the differentiation of white 
blood cells and the modulation of the actions of the cells 
of the immune system. They include the interleukins, 
interferons, tumour necrosis factors and various growth 
factors. They are summarized in Table 30.12.
In general, cytokines, like hormones, act through 
high-affinity cell surface receptors that can be widely dis-
tributed on many cell types or can be restricted to one or 
two cell types. The receptors can be up- or downregu-
lated or induced, depending upon the prevailing condi-
tions. Most cytokines are glycated and their binding to 
the receptors may be influenced by the configuration of 
the sugar residues and by the other cytokines being re-
leased in the vicinity. Most cytokines are multifunctional 
molecules with diverse biological actions upon a wide 
variety of target cells. Cytokines, in general, show sig-
nificant overlap in their functions, with any one function 
typically being shown by a number of cytokines (pleio­
tropism). They mostly act locally in either an autocrine or 
paracrine fashion; very few, for example IL-6, show a true 
endocrine function. The major differences between cy-
tokines and hormones are shown in Table 30.13. Genetic 
deficiencies of cytokines are rare, possibly reflecting their 
vital role in the maintenance of health.
TABLE 30.11  Properties of the major acute phase proteins
Protein
Molecular  
mass (kDa)
Half-life  
(days)
Normal adult plasma 
concentration (g/L)
Magnitude of increase  
in concentration
Caeruloplasmin
135
2.5
0.2–0.6
 Up to 50% increase
Complement C3
185
2.5
0.7–1.7
α1-Acid glycoprotein
41
2.3
0.5–1.0
 
2–3-fold increase
α1-Antitrypsin
54
4
1.4–3.2
α1-Antichymotrypsin
68
2
0.3–0.6
Haptoglobin
86
4
0.5–3.2
Fibrinogen
340
4–6
2.0–3.5
C-reactive protein
105
1
<0.005
 Up to 1000-fold increase
Serum amyloid A
12
1
<0.001
TABLE 30.9  Inflammatory mediators and  
their actions
Mediator
Action
Platelet activating factor, 
histamine, prostaglandins
Vasodilatation
Platelet activating factor, 
histamine, complement 
C3a and C5a, bradykinin, 
leukotrienes
Increased vascular 
permeability
IL-8, IL-1, and TNFα, complement 
C5a, leukotrienes
Leukocyte adhesion 
and chemotaxis
Bradykinin and prostaglandins
Pain
Enzymes (proteases) and 
products of neutrophil 
respiratory burst (free radicals)
Tissue damage
Inflammatory cytokines IL-1, IL-6 
and TNFα
Hepatic production of 
acute phase proteins
TABLE 30.10  The functions of acute phase 
proteins
Acute phase 
function
Examples
Mediating
Working as parts of networks of 
inflammatory mediators:
  C-reactive protein (CRP) binds a variety 
of ligands and activates complement;
  complement components are 
important opsonins and chemotactic 
factors;
  fibrinogen and the clotting 
components form clots and fibrin 
matrices as a basis for repair
Inhibiting
Inhibiting protease activity and 
controlling pathways:
  α1-antitrypsin and α1-antichymotrypsin 
inhibit the actions of enzymes released 
from leukocytes during phagocytosis;
  C1 esterase inhibitor inhibits part of 
the complement system
Scavenging
Inhibiting or eliminating noxious 
substances produced during the 
inflammatory process:
  haptoglobin combines with free 
haemoglobin to form a complex that is 
rapidly cleared by the liver;
  CRP may opsonize DNA and cell 
membrane debris
Regulating
Modulating the immune response:
  α1-acid glycoprotein is expressed on 
lymphocyte cell membranes
Repairing
Control and laying down of connective 
tissue elements:
  α1-antitrypsin and α1-antichymotrypsin are 
deposited in a sequential fashion on the 
surface of newly formed elastic fibres;
  α1-acid glycoprotein promotes 
fibroblast growth
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
573
TABLE 30.12  The major groups of cytokines
Cytokine
Major cell sources
Major immunological functions
Interleukins (ILs; over 35 interleukins have now been characterized)
IL-1α and β
Monocytes
Macrophages
Endothelial cells
Fibroblasts
Activation of T and B cells, macrophages and endothelium
Acute phase response and production of acute phase proteins
Fever
IL-2
T cells
Activation and proliferation of T, B and NK cells
IL-4
T and B cells
Macrophages
mast cells
Activation of B cells
Differentiation of Th2 cells
Suppression of Th1 cells
IL-5
T cells
Mast cells
Eosinophil recruitment, activation and development
IL-6
Monocytes
Macrophages
T cells
Endothelial cells
Fibroblasts
Activation of stem cells
Differentiation of T and B cells
Acute phase response and production of acute phase proteins
IL-8
T cells
Monocytes
Neutrophils
Endothelial cells
Fibroblasts
Chemoattraction and activation of neutrophils
Chemoattraction of T cells and basophils
IL-10
T and B cells
Macrophages
Suppression of macrophages
Suppression of Th1 cells
Activation of B cells
IL-12
B cells
Macrophages
Dendritic cells
Differentiation of Th1 cells
Activation of T and NK cells
IL-13
T cells
Activation of B cells
Suppression of Th1 cells
IL-15
Macrophages
T and B cell proliferation
IL-17
Activated T cells
Inflammation
IL-18
Macrophages
IFNγ production by T cells
IL-23
Macrophages
Dendritic cells
IL-17 production
IL-35
Regulatory T cells
Suppresses T cell proliferation
Interferons α,β,γ
IFNα,β
T and B cells
Monocytes
Macrophages
Fibroblasts
Antiviral
Stimulation of macrophages and NK cells
Upregulation of HLA class I expression
IFNγ
T cells
NK cells
Antiviral
Stimulation of macrophages and endothelium
Upregulation of HLA class I and class II expression
Suppression of Th2 cells
Tumour necrosis factor superfamily (>50 members)
TNF
Macrophages
T and B cells
Neutrophils
Endothelium
Mast cells
Anti-tumour
Activation of macrophages, endothelium and granulocytes
Upregulation of HLA class I
Acute phase response and production of acute phase proteins
Weight loss (cachexia)
BAFF
b
Dendritic cells
T cells
Enhancement of expression of B cell survival factors
Colony stimulating factors (G-, M-, GM-CSF)
G-CSF
T cells
Macrophages
Neutrophils
Fibroblasts
Endothelium
Activation and development of neutrophils
M-CSF
Activation and development of monocytes and macrophages
GM-CSF
T cells
Macrophages
Neutrophils
Mast cells
Eosinophils
Stem cell differentiation
Development of neutrophils, macrophages and eosinophils
Growth factors (GF)
Fibroblast, platelet derived, epidermal, insulin like, transforming, erythropoietin
Chemokines
e.g. lymphotactin, monocyte chemotactic protein-1, IL8, RANTES
a, macrophage inflammatory 
protein 1α
aRANTES: regulated on activation, normal T expressed and secreted; Th, T helper.
bBAFF: B Cell activating factor.
574	
Clinical biochemistry
Many cytokines interact with each other and the effect 
of a cytokine may change depending upon the prevailing 
micro-environment. It is important to stress that cyto-
kine synthesis, including that of the proinflammatory 
cytokines, is a normal response to injury. Their functions 
should not be thought of as exclusively harmful, resulting 
in tissue damage or systemic shock. In the majority of 
instances, cytokines act to coordinate the elimination of 
invading organisms or removal of damaged tissue, thus 
avoiding excessive stimulation of specific immunity that 
could lead to hypersensitivity reactions.
Inflammatory cytokines
The cytokines interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6 and tumour 
necrosis factor alpha (TNFα) are all central to the initia-
tion of the inflammatory response. However, they do not 
function in isolation: other cytokines implicated in the 
inflammatory response include IL-8, 10, 11, 12, 17, 18, 
23 and interferon γ. In addition, both defensive and inju-
rious effects will involve the release of many mediators of 
inflammation such as peptides, for example the comple-
ment fragment C5a, and lipids, for example platelet acti-
vating factor. Many of these mediators act synergistically 
and also induce each other’s production and the produc-
tion of other cytokines, resulting in both positive and 
negative feedback control pathways. Cytokines are also 
responsible, either directly or indirectly, for healing and 
successful resolution of the inflammatory insult. Severe 
inflammatory responses frequently overlap with specific 
immune responses, as they are often induced by infec-
tion and, furthermore, the tissue damage accompanying 
severe trauma may lead to secondary infection.
Mechanisms of immunological damage
Immune responses are usually well controlled and host 
damage is minimal and reversible. Under some circum-
stances, resolution does not occur and an exaggerated or 
persistent response leads to irreversible host tissue damage 
and, in extreme situations, even death. These inappropri-
ate reactions are termed hypersensitivity reactions. These 
are classified into four types (I-IV), each with a different 
mechanism. Type I hypersensitivity reactions, central to 
allergic responses, may occur without involvement of any 
other type of hypersensitivity reaction. Most reactions, 
however, involve more than one type of response and do 
not, alone, define a pathogenetic mechanism that under-
lies a group of diseases. There are also other reactions 
that do not fit neatly into this classification, for example 
stimulatory reactions, such as when specific immune cells 
are stimulated by external agents, and when autoantibod-
ies have a stimulatory effect, for example as occurs with 
thyroid receptor antibodies in Graves disease.
Hypersensitivity reactions result in the release of in-
flammatory mediators. Some mediators have direct effects 
on local, or even distant, tissues; others recruit and acti-
vate effector cells that further contribute to tissue damage.
Type I hypersensitivity
Type I hypersensitivity reactions are IgE mediated. The 
IgE antibodies are formed to an antigen (or allergen), 
with an individual’s tendency towards making IgE be-
ing determined by many factors including genetic, T cell 
responsiveness and antigenic burden. The IgE binds to 
high-affinity IgE receptors on the surfaces of mast cells 
and basophils, and these cells are now primed to react the 
next time the cells come into close proximity with the al-
lergen. The cross-linking of IgE on the cell surfaces causes 
rapid cellular degranulation and liberation of a number 
of chemical mediators. The mediators released by mast 
cell degranulation include the preformed molecules his-
tamine, protease enzymes, proteoglycans ­(heparin) and 
chemotactic factors. Reaction of antigen with IgE on mast 
cells also stimulates synthesis and release of platelet ac-
tivating factor (PAF), leukotrienes (B4, C4 and D4) and 
prostaglandins (mainly PGD2). The mediators of type I 
hypersensitivity reactions are shown in Table 30.14.
The actions of histamine depend on the site of release. 
In the airways, it induces smooth muscle contraction; in 
the skin, it causes the hallmark wheal and flare response. 
Widespread activation of mast cells leads to systemic ­effects 
TABLE 30.13  Major differences between  
cytokines and endocrine hormones
Property
Cytokine
Hormone
Sites of 
production
Many and 
varied
Many, but 
specific to each 
hormone
Cellular targets
Few
Many
Biological role
Fighting 
infection, 
tissue repair
Homoeostasis
Biological 
redundancy
High
Low
Biological 
pleiotropy
High
Low
Present in the 
circulation
Rarely
Yes
Sphere of 
influence
Predominantly 
autocrine/
paracrine
Widespread and 
distant from site 
of production
Inducers
External insults
Primarily 
physiological 
changes (except 
stress hormones)
TABLE 30.14  Mediators of type I hypersensitivity 
reactions
Mediator
Pharmacological effect
Histamine
Vasodilatation, capillary 
permeability, bronchoconstriction
Heparin
Control of histamine release
Leukotrienes 
(various)
Bronchoconstriction, airway tissue 
oedema
Prostaglandins 
(various)
Potent mediators of inflammatory 
response
Platelet activating 
factor
Platelet aggregation
Tryptase
Proteolytic enzyme activates C3
Kininogenase
Kinins → vasodilatation → oedema
Cytokines (IL-5,  
IL-8, TNFs)
Chemoattractants
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
575
of circulatory shock, hypotension, collapse, chest tightness 
and, in the most severe cases, respiratory ­arrest and death: 
this is anaphylactic shock. Type I hypersensitivity reactions 
occur rapidly (within approximately 20 min of an insult) and 
are also called ‘immediate hypersensitivity reactions’.
Type II hypersensitivity
The important characteristic of type II hypersensitivity re-
actions is that the antigens involved are localized to the 
membranes of the target cells; they may be synthesized cell 
products, cell membrane components or bound foreign mol-
ecules (e.g. a drug). The circulating antibodies (IgG or IgM) 
bind to the cell-bound antigen and activate complement. 
Full activation of the complement pathway results in the 
membrane attack complex (C5–9) being assembled on the 
cell surface, resulting in target cell lysis. Partial activation via 
C3 will also render the cell a target for phagocytosis, via C3b 
and IgG that bind to appropriate receptors on phagocytic 
cells. Activation of phagocytic cells leads to release of further 
tissue-damaging enzymes. The tissue damage persists for as 
long as antibody and antigen are present.
Some of the more important type II responses involve 
red blood cell antigens (including transfusion reactions 
and haemolytic disease of the newborn) and autoantibod-
ies to cell surface components, for example autoimmune 
haemolytic anaemia (in which the target is red blood 
cells), idiopathic thrombocytopenia purpura (in which the 
target is platelets) and Goodpasture syndrome (in which 
the target is the kidney glomerular basement membrane).
Type III hypersensitivity
Type III hypersensitivity reactions are also termed 
immune complex reactions. Complexes of antigen and 
antibody form in the circulation and are then deposited 
in susceptible tissues; they may also form directly in the 
tissue. The latter mechanism is termed the Arthus re-
action, and is typically seen with repeated insect stings, 
where a red swollen lesion develops after a sting. The tis-
sue damaging mechanisms are similar to those described 
for the antigen-antibody complexes that form in type II 
responses. The response times of types II and III hy-
persensitivity reactions are slower than that of type I 
reactions; they typically develop 3–6 h after exposure to 
antigen. The response can also become chronic, particu-
larly in autoimmune reactions, where antigen persists.
The clinical manifestations of type III hypersensitiv-
ity reactions relate to the tissue deposition, for example 
vasculitic (skin), serum sickness (systemic), nephritis (kid-
neys) and extrinsic allergic alveolitis (lungs).
Type IV hypersensitivity
These reactions are cell mediated. Membrane recep-
tors on sensitized T lymphocytes recognize antigen 
and the cells (particularly Th1) release cytokines that 
in turn ­activate macrophages. The major mediators of 
the hypersensitivity response are products of activated 
macrophages including enzymes, coagulation factors, 
complement, superoxide ions, leukotrienes, prosta-
glandins and cytokines. The hallmark of responses to 
persistent antigen is formation of granulomas that wall 
off the inflammatory focus.
Type IV reactions are also known as delayed type hy-
persensitivity reactions because symptoms occur 24–48 h 
after re-exposure to antigen. They are seen in response to 
mycobacteria (e.g. Mycobacterium tuberculosis) and are the 
mechanism underlying contact dermatitis.
Conclusion
This brief introduction has described the major compo-
nents of the immune system and their interactions dur-
ing immune responses. Antigens, typically encountered 
across mucosal surfaces, are taken up by antigen pre-
senting cells (APCs) and processed and presented on the 
major histocompatibility antigen (MHC) molecules of 
these cells to the lymphocytes in lymphoid tissue. The 
lymphocytes, with their randomly rearranged receptors 
(TCR and Ig), traffic around the lymphoid tissue until ac-
tivated by an antigen, whose three-dimensional shape can 
engage the receptor. Activated cells communicate via cy-
tokines and various peptides and proteins to induce lym-
phocyte proliferation and maturation. Plasma cells of the 
B lymphocytic lineage secrete antibody that circulates, 
coats the mucous membranes and bathes the tissues. Re-
exposure to a previously encountered antigen stimulates 
a rapid and specific response via antibody, complement, 
phagocytosis and T cell killing to provide long-lived im-
munity to infection. The complexity of the system makes 
it robust but also provides opportunities for something 
to go wrong and result in diseases of the immune system.
DISEASES OF THE IMMUNE SYSTEM
Introduction
Diseases of the immune system can be classified as follows:
•	 immune deficiency resulting from failure of the 
development or function of immune organs, cells 
or other components, either from inherited causes 
(primary immune deficiency) or from some other 
disease (secondary immune deficiency)
•	 allergic reactions, which may result from any of the 
hypersensitivity reactions previously described or 
from direct activation of inflammatory mediators
•	 autoimmune disease resulting from immune reac-
tions against body tissues
•	 malignancy of organs or cells of the immune system.
In addition, severe sepsis resulting from damage to the 
immune system rather than direct bacterial tissue damage 
may be considered as an immunological disease.
These disorders will be considered in more detail in 
the following sections.
Immune deficiency
Development of immunity in humans
The ability to recognize antigen is present at birth, but 
except on the rare occasions when there has been an in-
trauterine infection, antigens will not previously have 
been encountered. The newborn will not have memory 
576	
Clinical biochemistry
responses so are potentially vulnerable to infection. In 
the first 3–6 months of life, during which many microbes 
will be met, immunity is provided by maternally derived 
IgG, giving time for a child’s own system to mature and 
to establish memory. Active transfer of IgG occurs from 
12 weeks of gestation but the major portion is transferred 
after 32  weeks of gestation. A term baby should have 
adult plasma IgG concentrations. Premature babies will 
have reduced IgG concentrations and are more vulner-
able to infection. Babies who grow poorly in utero may 
also have low concentrations. A diagram showing serum 
immunoglobulin concentrations from pre-term to adult-
hood is shown in Figure  30.10. Term babies have dif-
ferent immune responsiveness from adults, as shown in 
Table 30.15.
Deficiencies of the immune system can be due to the 
lack of a component (or group of components) or de-
fective (or absent) function of a component. Owing to 
immune interactions, defects in one component may af-
fect another. For example, T cell defects may also result 
in marked antibody deficiency when T helper activity is 
compromised.
Infection and immune deficiency
The hallmark of immune deficiency syndromes is 
­frequent, severe or unusual infection. The pattern of in-
fections can give an indication of the type of deficiency, al-
though in young children, this may be difficult to judge. It 
is estimated that children have eight minor infections per 
year and it is suggested that significant infection should be 
regarded as one requiring antibiotic treatment. Even this 
can be misleading, as the threshold for prescribing antibi-
otics varies between practitioners. The infections typically 
seen in specific and non-specific immune deficiencies are 
summarized in Table 30.16. In general, systemic viral and 
fungal infections are more typical of T cell deficiencies 
and common respiratory tract and gut infections are more 
typical of B cell deficiencies. With regard to the non-spe-
cific immune system, defects in complement tend to pre-
dispose to most common bacterial infections and impose 
an increased risk of autoimmune disease, while defects in 
phagocytes are linked with most common skin infections, 
cutaneous abscesses and lung abscesses.
In addition to the pattern of infections, there are other 
factors that can be used to build up an impression of 
whether immune deficiency should be considered. These 
are listed in Box 30.1.
Investigation of patients with suspected  
immune deficiency
The various categorizations of immune deficiency (pri-
mary or secondary, cell mediated or humoral etc.) are 
made at the end of the diagnostic process, not the be-
ginning. The investigation of patients with recurrent, 
atypical or severe infections, irrespective of age, should 
follow the same basic pattern, but the detailed inves-
tigative process needs to be tailored to the individual 
patient. A careful history, including the type of symp-
toms, age of onset of symptoms, organisms responsible 
(where known) and family history (particularly of im-
mune problems) is essential. Microbiological investiga-
tions and basic tests like a full blood count and white 
cell differential are vital. The process aims to determine 
the following:
•	 are all the components of the immune system present?
•	 are all the components functional (alone or in 
consort)?
•	 can the system respond to a defined challenge?
•	 what is the molecular defect?
As a general guide, the simple tests, and those that 
are important in the more common immune deficien-
cies, should be done first. The more complex, functional 
and genetic tests should be done later in the investiga-
tion process (unless there are strong indications from the 
clinical manifestations or family history). Figure  30.11 
shows a basic plan for the immunological investigation 
of a patient with suspected immune deficiency. Following 
100
50
0
20
30
Birth
1
10
Gestation
(weeks)
Age (years)
Serum immunoglobulin concentrations
(% adult values)
Maternally
transferred
IgG
IgM
IgG
IgA
Total
IgG
FIGURE 30.10  ■  Serum immunoglobulin concentrations with age. 
IgG is actively transferred across the placenta to be gradually 
replaced by the IgG synthesized by the infant. The assays should 
be capable of reliably detecting concentrations for IgG of 1 g/L, 
IgA of 0.07 g/L and IgM of 0.1 g/L (after Adinolfi (ed). Immunology 
and development. Heinemann: London, 1969).
TABLE 30.15  Immune responsiveness in  
term neonates
Components
Responsiveness
B cells
Normal numbers but immature 
(CD5+)
Antibodies
Able to make IgM, with good 
response to protein antigens but 
poor response to carbohydrates
 
Maternal IgG
Complement
Classical pathway, 90% of adult; 
alternative pathway, 60% of adult; 
C8 and C9, only 20% of adult
T cells
Higher numbers than in adults and 
immature neonates
Cytokines
IL-2, as adult; IFNγ, 20% of adult; Th2 
cytokines very low
Cytotoxicity
Tc only 30–60% of adult; NK 50% of 
adult
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
577
this plan should make it possible to classify the type of 
immune deficiency.
Primary immunodeficiencies
Clinically significant primary immune deficiency is rare. 
Many patients suffer years of ill health before they are ap-
propriately investigated and a diagnosis made. The clas-
sification of these disorders is by an International System 
(see Further reading, below) based on the identified defect.
B Lymphocyte (humoral) system 
IgA deficiency. This is the most common of the pri-
mary immune deficiencies, affecting approximately 
1:700 of the population, and is characterized by low 
plasma IgA concentrations (<0.07 g/L for total IgA 
deficiency). Patients are often asymptomatic, although 
they can suffer with repeated respiratory tract and si-
nus infections, especially if IgA deficiency is associated 
with IgG subclass deficiency. No particular treatment is 
­indicated, although, if the patient is symptomatic, a low 
threshold for antibiotic treatment should be adopted. 
Salivary IgA concentration matures at approximately 
six weeks of age and can be measured to give an early 
indication of deficiency. Patients with IgA deficiency 
can develop antibodies to any IgA present in blood 
products and this can cause transfusion reactions.
Common variable immunodeficiency (CVID). This 
is a primary immune deficiency, although the age of 
presentation can be any time from childhood to late in 
adulthood. It is not one clearly defined disease, rather 
a heterogeneous group of undifferentiated syndromes 
with the common feature of defective (quantitative and/
or qualitative) antibody production. The most common 
presentation is with recurrent sinus and pulmonary in-
fections. The critical laboratory test is quantification of 
immunoglobulin concentrations (with serum and urine 
electrophoresis to exclude myeloma). These are typically 
well below the lower limits of the age-related reference 
ranges. Patients can also have poor responses to vaccines, 
low CD4 counts, abnormal cell-mediated immunity and 
changes in the B cell subset profile. Treatment is with 
intravenous or subcutaneous immunoglobulin (IgG) re-
placement, with the dosage being calculated on the basis 
of body weight. Antibiotics can be given prophylactically 
or a low threshold adopted for their use in treatment. 
The IgG should be given every 2–3  weeks and trough 
immunoglobulin concentrations should be checked regu-
larly, particularly in children.
TABLE 30.16  Infections typically seen in deficiencies of the immune system
Specific immune system
Non-specific immune system
T cell deficiencies
B cell deficiencies
Complement
Phagocytes
Common infections
Viruses:
Bacteria:
Bacteria:
Bacteria:
Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
Staphylococci
Haemophilus
Staphylococci
Herpes
Streptococci
Streptococcus
Fungi:
Adenovirus
Haemophilus
Neisseria
Candida
Fungi:
Neisseria
 
Aspergillus
Candida
 
 
 
Aspergillus
 
 
 
Pneumocystis carinii
 
 
 
Protozoa:
 
 
 
Cryptosporidium
 
 
 
Less common infections
Bacteria:
Bacteria:
Viruses:
Bacteria:
Mycobacteria
Campylobacter
Cytomegalovirus
Salmonella
Listeria
Salmonella
Herpes
 
Campylobacter
Enteroviruses:
 
 
 
Polio
 
 
 
Echoviruses
 
 
BOX 30.1	
Factors that should be considered 
in the evaluation of patients with 
possible immune deficiency
•	 Increased number of infections
•	 More than three infections requiring antibiotics in one 
winter
•	 Frequent minor episodes
•	 More infections than siblings
•	 More infections than siblings at same age
•	 Severe infections
•	 More than one severe bacterial infection
•	 Frequent requirement for antibiotics
•	 Infections that recrudesce when antibiotics are finished
•	 Unexpected infections
•	 Opportunistic infections
•	 Unexplained causative organism
•	 Unusual infections
•	 Positive family history
•	 Siblings
•	 Male relatives on maternal side (for X-linked immune 
deficiencies)
•	 Unexplained bronchiectasis
•	 Therapy-resistant or steroid-resistant asthma
•	 Severe warts
•	 Complications of vaccination (e.g. disseminated BCG)
•	 Failure to thrive
•	 Chronic diarrhoea
578	
Clinical biochemistry
X-linked agammaglobulinaemia. This condition, also 
known as Bruton agammaglobulinaemia, is caused by mu-
tations in the gene for a B cell-specific tyrosine kinase (Btk). 
This results in no B cell development in the bone marrow, 
a lack of circulating B cells and profoundly low immuno-
globulin concentrations. Patients present with recurrent 
bacterial infection from 4–5 months of age, once protective 
maternal IgG has disappeared. Treatment is with replace-
ment immunoglobulin, as in patients with CVID.
T Lymphocyte (cell-mediated immunity) system
Severe combined immunodeficiencies (SCID). This is a 
group of deficiencies with a variety of underlying molecu-
lar defects. They are the most profound of the immune 
deficiency diseases and patients typically present in early 
infancy. The most common of the diseases is the X-linked 
SCID that results from a defect in the common γ-chain of 
the IL-2 receptor. This affects the responsiveness to IL-2, 
IL-4, IL-7, IL-9, IL-15 and IL-21, so that there is no T cell 
or NK-cell function; although B cells can be detected, they 
have no T cell help to make antibodies. The lymphocyte 
count and T and B cell numbers are the most important 
investigations when considering SCID; immunoglobulin 
concentrations are not particularly helpful (owing to the 
presence of maternal IgG, and the normally low IgA and 
IgM concentrations expected in young babies). Any baby 
with suspected SCID should be referred to a paediatric im-
munologist for investigation. Treatment is with stem cell 
transplantation or, more recently, gene therapy.
DiGeorge syndrome. This condition is associated 
with deletions in the chromosomal region 22q11. It 
is a clinical spectrum of developmental defects in-
cluding congenital cardiac defects, dysmorphic facies 
(including cleft palate), immune deficiency secondary 
to thymic hypoplasia and hypocalcaemia due to para-
thyroid aplasia or hypoplasia. The abnormal develop-
ment of the thymus results in reduced T cell numbers 
and/or function and increased susceptibility to infec-
tion. The immunological abnormalities, which are 
seen in approximately 25% of patients, usually im-
prove with age.
X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome/CD40 ligand de-
ficiency. This immune deficiency is due to a defect in 
the gene for a cell surface receptor called CD40 ligand 
(CD154). The binding of CD40 (on antigen-presenting 
cells and B cells) to CD40 ligand (on T cells) is vital for 
B cell maturation and class switching. Presentation is sim-
ilar to X-linked agammaglobulinaemia but these patients 
are also susceptible to opportunistic infections. They 
typically have low plasma concentrations of IgG, IgA 
and IgE and increased concentrations of IgM (as high as 
10 g/L). Assessment of the expression of CD40 ligand on 
T cells is the most important investigation. The bacterial 
infections can be well controlled with replacement IgG, 
but patients may develop infections with Cryptosporidium, 
and can develop a sclerosing cholangitis and liver failure. 
Rare, autosomal recessive forms of hyper-IgM syndrome 
also exist.
IgG, IgA, IgM
Abnormal
(below age-related
reference range)
Borderline/normal
Normal
IgG subclasses
Abnormal
(below age-related
reference range)
Normal
Functional antibodies
to specific organisms
Abnormal
Normal
ANTIBODY DEFICIENCY
Investigation of
lymphocyte function
Abnormal
Normal
DEFECT OF
LYMPHOCYTE
FUNCTION
CH50 and AP50
Phagocyte function
Individual
complement
components
Normal
Normal
Abnormal
Abnormal
Normal
SPECIFIC
COMPLEMENT
DEFICIENCY
UNCLASSIFIABLE
DEFECT OF
PHAGOCYTE
FUNCTION
FIGURE 30.11  ■  A basic plan of investigations in suspected immune deficiency (after IUIS/WHO 1981, 1988, 2009).
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
579
Phagocytic (polymorphonuclear and mononuclear) 
system 
Chronic granulomatous disease. This condition, 
which can be X-linked or autosomal recessive, is caused 
by abnormalities in the NADPH oxidase system. This is 
critical in the respiratory burst and the production of anti­
microbial free radicals in neutrophils. Patients present 
with recurrent abscesses or infections and granulomata. 
An abnormally low respiratory burst in the neutrophils is 
the most significant finding; this property is increasingly 
being investigated by flow cytometric assays. Molecular 
testing is used to confirm the diagnosis.
Leukocyte adhesion defect types I and II. Recruit­
ment of neutrophils, lymphocytes and monocytes 
into sites of infection relies on the presence of adhe-
sion molecules, for example CD11a/18 and selectins. 
Absence or deficient expression of these molecules on 
cell surfaces results in poor cellular adherence, migra-
tion and phagocytosis. Patients present with recur-
rent, life-threatening bacterial infections and impaired 
wound healing.
Complement system. Deficiencies of all the comple-
ment components have been identified but have varied 
clinical consequences. Deficiencies of C3 and C6 are par-
ticularly associated with recurrent infections. The most 
important initial investigation is assessment of the integ-
rity of the whole complement system, using haemolytic 
assays of the classical and alternative pathways or enzyme 
linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)-based total com-
plement pathway tests. If these are abnormal, individual 
components can be investigated: this usually requires re-
ferral to specialized centres.
C1 Esterase inhibitor deficiency. This inherited (au-
tosomal dominant) deficiency of the control protein C1 
esterase inhibitor results in hereditary angioedema – 
episodes of subepithelial swelling of the skin (especially 
of the face, limbs and trunk), gut, larynx etc. The major 
laboratory findings are low C4 and C1 esterase inhibi-
tor concentrations but normal C3 concentrations. There 
are rare forms in which antigenic C1 esterase inhibitor 
concentrations are normal but function is impaired and 
C4 concentrations are usually low. Measurement of C1 
esterase inhibitor should also be considered in patients 
with apparent anaphylaxis, as the two conditions have 
similar features in their early stages. However, it should 
be noted that C4 concentrations may also be low post-
anaphylaxis. C1 esterase inhibitor deficiency can also be 
seen secondary to B cell malignancy when the monoclo-
nal protein interferes with the normal activity of C1 es-
terase inhibitor.
Transient hypogammaglobulinaemia of infancy. This 
condition is not strictly a primary immune disorder but 
is mentioned here for completeness. Some babies show a 
very slow maturation of their own antibody production, 
resulting in a lengthening of the physiological trough 
in concentrations after maternal IgG has disappeared. 
These babies show normal responses to immunization 
and will eventually achieve normal antibody concentra-
tions. No particular treatment is indicated, but patients 
should be monitored regularly in case antibody concen-
trations do not improve or they become symptomatic.
Secondary immune deficiency
Secondary immune deficiencies are significantly more 
common than primary immune deficiencies. They are 
the predominant form in adults, although they do occur 
in children. Investigation should concentrate on identi-
fying the underlying process rather than identifying the 
nature of the defect in immunity. The causes of secondary 
immune deficiency are summarized in Table 30.17.
There are two broad mechanisms of secondary im-
mune deficiency: inadequate production of a com-
ponent or excessive loss of a component. Iatrogenic 
causes of immune deficiency rarely warrant investiga-
tion as they are accepted consequences of treatment 
for other (usually more severe) diseases. Malnutrition 
is the single most common cause of immune deficiency 
worldwide.
The most clinically important virally induced second-
ary immune deficiency is that related to HIV infection. 
The investigation of this relies particularly on measure-
ments of CD4+ T cell numbers and viral load. Infections 
with other viruses, for example Epstein–Barr virus and 
cytomegalovirus, may be associated with some degree of 
secondary immune deficiency (usually of the cell-mediated 
responses).
Adults with symptoms of immune deficiency without 
an obvious cause should be investigated for lymphoid ma-
lignancy. These conditions can affect both the cell- and 
antibody-mediated immunity, making the patient partic-
ularly prone to infection. The investigation of lymphoid 
malignancies is discussed on p. 589.
Protein loss. The most frequent type of immune defi-
ciency associated with excessive component loss is hypo-
gammaglobulinaemia. The loss of immunoglobulins, if 
sufficiently marked to cause low plasma concentrations, 
is certain to be accompanied by the loss of ­albumin 
TABLE 30.17  Causes of secondary immune 
deficiency
Cause
Examples
Immunosuppression
Corticosteroids
Chemotherapy
Cyclophosphamide, 
methotrexate, vincristine
Radiotherapy
Total body irradiation
Malnutrition
Protein malnutrition, vitamin 
deficiencies, trace element 
deficiencies
Infection
HIV, cytomegalovirus (CMV), 
Epstein–Barr virus, some 
bacteria, e.g. mycobacteria 
post-septicaemia
Malignancy
Myeloma, lymphoma, leukaemia
Loss of protein(or 
other components)
Nephrotic syndrome, protein 
losing enteropathy, loss from 
skin, e.g. burns
Miscellaneous
Trauma, type 1 diabetes, 
splenectomy, inflammatory 
bowel disease
580	
Clinical biochemistry
TABLE 30.18  Important points in taking the  
history in a patient with suspected allergy
Point
Notes
Age
Babies and young children should 
be investigated by people with 
appropriate training. Allergy 
can have a wider impact in 
children – loss of schooling, 
poor health, exclusion from 
normal activities
Family history
A positive family history increases 
the likelihood of allergy in an 
individual
Symptoms (what 
symptoms and 
where, e.g. gut, 
respiratory, skin 
etc.)
Can help to narrow down the 
allergen and direct investigation
Symptoms (severity)
Severe symptoms, e.g. 
anaphylaxis, need rapid 
investigation
Symptoms – all year 
or seasonal
Can help to identify the allergen 
and direct the testing, e.g. 
respiratory symptoms all year 
round are unlikely to be due to 
pollen allergy
Daytime or night-
time, indoors or 
outdoors
Can help to identify the allergen 
and direct the testing, e.g. 
symptoms at night are more 
likely to be due to house dust 
mites, feathers etc.
Frequent animal 
contact
Household pets, but also animals 
of friends and relatives etc.
Does the patient 
know (or believe) 
what causes the 
symptoms?
Often the patient knows what 
precipitates the symptoms – but 
they may be wrong
Has exclusion been 
attempted?
Patients often spontaneously 
avoid something that makes 
them unwell
(a protein of lower molecular weight and higher plasma 
concentration than the immunoglobulins). It is ­useful, 
therefore, to check serum albumin concentrations to-
gether with immunoglobulin concentrations when in-
vestigating this group of patients. A normal albumin 
concentration with low immunoglobulins would suggest 
suppression of production rather than excessive loss. 
It is also vital to remember that protein loss via the kid-
neys can be seen with lymphoid malignancy so serum 
and urine electrophoresis must be performed. Protein 
loss through the gut can be difficult to prove, but a raised 
faecal α1-antitrypsin concentration is good evidence that 
protein is being lost into the gut. α1-Antitrypsin is used 
because, as a protease inhibitor, it is relatively resistant 
to proteolytic degradation in the gut; nevertheless, spec-
imens must be frozen as soon as possible after collection 
to minimize degradation.
Splenectomy. Patients without a spleen, for example 
owing to surgical removal following trauma, have an 
increased susceptibility to overwhelming infection 
with bacteria such as Pneumococcus, Meningococcus and 
Haemophilus influenzae type B. Patients who are hav-
ing elective splenectomy should be vaccinated with 
pneumococcal, haemophilus and meningococcal A and 
C vaccines; asplenic patients should take prophylactic 
antibiotics. The measurement of specific antibody ti-
tres (approximately six weeks post-vaccination) may 
be indicated to confirm adequate antibody responses. 
Asplenic patients may not maintain optimal antibody 
concentrations and these should be measured every 
2–3 years, depending on the clinical findings. Patients 
found to have suboptimal concentrations should be 
re-immunized.
Allergies
Various mechanisms exist, whereby an individual can 
have an unexpected or inappropriate response to an agent 
that is not typically considered to be harmful. The mech-
anisms of such reactions include types I–IV hypersensi-
tivity reactions, direct pharmacological effects (e.g. from 
biogenic amines in certain foods), biochemical effects 
(e.g. due to alcohol or other drugs) and intolerances due 
to enzyme defects (e.g. lactose intolerance). The term 
allergy is often used by lay people to describe such reac-
tions but this term should only be applied to type I hyper-
sensitivity reactions mediated by IgE.
The prevalence of allergies is increasing rapidly; it 
is estimated that 15–20% of the population have some 
type of allergy. The clinical features of allergic reactions 
include:
•	 abdominal pain
•	 anaphylaxis
•	 eczema and atopic dermatitis
•	 bronchospasm
•	 conjunctivitis
•	 diarrhoea
•	 headache
•	 malabsorption
•	 pneumonitis
•	 pruritus
•	 rhinitis
•	 urticaria
•	 vomiting.
Patients may have only one symptom or a mixture 
of symptoms. They can range in severity from mild and 
inconvenient to damaging to health and, in the extreme, 
to life-threatening anaphylactic shock.
Investigation of patients with allergies
It is important to investigate patients with suspected allergy 
to provide a logical basis for exclusion of the allergen, with 
the objective of improving well-being and preventing se-
vere reactions. Investigation must start with the patient’s 
history and examination; the important points in the his-
tory are shown in Table 30.18. The exceptions are patients 
who complain of mild symptoms clearly related to eating 
one particular food, who often do not need investigation 
and should simply be advised to avoid that food, and pa-
tients with mild reactions to inhaled allergens, for exam-
ple hay fever and seasonal rhinitis, who should attempt to 
avoid exposure and be treated symptomatically. However, 
if a patient has had a severe reaction, investigation is in-
dicated to identify positively the causative agent. Accepted 
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
581
reasons for investigating patients with allergies are shown 
in Table 30.19.
There are two general ways of investigating allergy 
but they are only useful as an adjunct to a good clinical 
history and examination. They are skin prick testing and 
measurement of IgE (total and specific). Both are widely 
used but have advantages and disadvantages, as shown 
in Table 30.20. In practice, both methods of investiga-
tion have a role in the allergy clinic and the allergist 
will use a combination depending upon a patient’s age, 
symptoms, the putative allergens and the overall clinical 
picture.
Raised plasma total IgE concentrations are seen in 
allergic disease, parasitic infections, immune deficien-
cies, malignancies, liver disease and some viral infections. 
With regard to allergies, there are some important 
caveats. While a raised total IgE concentration sug-
gests a high risk of allergic disease, it does not directly 
relate to the severity of disease. An IgE concentration 
within the reference range (particularly in children) 
does not exclude significant allergy and if there are 
strong clinical indications, further investigation is 
warranted.
The IgE that has activity against a particular defined 
antigen is called specific IgE. The term RAST refers to 
the technique that was first developed to detect and quan-
tify IgE to specific allergens and, although now scientifi-
cally outdated, the term is still commonly used. Specific 
IgE is reported as kAU/L or converted to a grade based 
upon the concentration; both these results can be used 
as a guide to the patient’s potential reactivity to that al-
lergen (or group of allergens). (The subscripted ‘A’ refers 
to ‘allergen’; however, the units are arbitrary in that they 
are calibrated against a total IgE standard rather than an 
allergen-specific IgE standard.) The grades correspond-
ing to various ranges of specific IgE concentrations, and 
their significance, are shown in Table 30.21. Like total 
IgE, the specific IgE does not correlate with disease ac-
tivity between patients. However, in individual patients 
(particularly children), there is some predictive value 
in specific IgE concentrations, for example to predict 
whether a challenge test would be appropriate, so re-
porting specific IgE in units rather than grades is now 
accepted.
Anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis is a medical emergency. It is the sudden, 
generalized shock and collapse that occurs when patients 
react to substances to which they are exquisitely sensi-
tive. The clinical features (see Table 30.22) are induced 
TABLE 30.19  Indications for investigating 
­patients with allergies
Reason
Notes
Severe 
symptoms
Anaphylactic reaction or symptoms 
affecting patient’s overall health
Progressively 
worsening 
symptoms
Every time the patient encounters the 
allergen, the symptoms appear to 
be worse – next time it could be 
anaphylactic
Allergen is 
difficult to 
exclude or 
hidden
Foods, e.g. nuts, eggs, occupational 
allergens, particular tree pollens, 
favourite pet
Patient needs a 
diagnosis
Showing a patient test results may 
help them accept their condition and 
accept the reason for the proposed 
management, particularly if it involves 
dietary or other restrictions
TABLE 30.20  Comparison of skin prick testing and specific IgE in the investigation of allergy
Property
Skin prick testing
Specific IgE
Specificity
Atopic patients may show positive skin tests 
to several antigens, not all of which cause 
symptoms
Atopic patients may show positive specific IgE to 
several antigens, not all of which cause symptoms
Applicability
In vivo test, so assesses the patient’s response to 
the allergen
In vitro test, so more a test of the potential to react to 
an allergen
Use in children
Can be difficult in young children because they 
have to sit still for ~20 min
Requires a blood test but many allergens can be 
checked on a single specimen
Dermatological 
symptoms
Can be impossible in patients with extensive 
skin disease, e.g. eczema, dermatitis
Dermatological disease does not interfere
Risk
Must be done under medical supervision with 
resuscitation facilities available
As for a blood test
Convenience
Results available in the clinic within ~20 min
Samples need to be tested in the laboratory; results in 
days or weeks
Antihistamines
Limited use if the patient is taking antihistamines
Antihistamines do not interfere
Sensitivity
Can be insensitive for diagnosis of food allergy
Can give negative results even with highly suggestive 
history. Specific IgE may be negative in the first few 
weeks after a severe reaction
Allergens
Can be difficult if the allergen is toxic or 
insoluble test material often less purified and 
similar to native allergen
Can be used for toxic or insoluble allergens
Allergens are highly purified and can show variability 
between different manufacturers
Standardization
Subjective with interoperator variability
Saline and histamine must be used as negative 
and positive quality controls
Results reported as wheal and flare diameter
Objective with results reported in arbitrary kAU/L of 
IgE (or grades) related to the international reference 
preparation
External QA schemes available to validate results
582	
Clinical biochemistry
via an IgE-mediated mechanism (anaphylaxis), but simi-
lar, non-IgE mediated (anaphylactoid) reactions also 
occur. The precipitating agents are varied, with drugs, 
bee and wasp venoms, peanuts, latex, fish and eggs being 
the most common. The mediators involved are shown in 
Table 30.9. Initial treatment should be aimed at protect-
ing respiratory and cardiovascular function and tissue ox-
ygenation. Adrenaline (epinephrine), antihistamines and 
steroids are the mainstays of treatment, together with 
general measures (e.g. oxygen and intravenous fluid). 
Long-term management must include avoidance of the 
precipitating allergen (which in practice may be diffi-
cult). Patients with a history of anaphylactic reactions 
should carry a self-injecting adrenaline device (and be 
instructed in its use) to administer if they inadvertently 
encounter the relevant allergen. In some situations, for 
example sensitivity to bee and wasp venoms, desensitiza-
tion can be successful.
The investigation of anaphylaxis. It is important to 
confirm that an apparently anaphylactic reaction is a type 
I hypersensitivity reaction, and to try to identify the pre-
cipitating agent. Serum tryptase is a good marker of mast 
cell degranulation and can be used for this purpose; the 
minimum number of samples required is three: at times 
zero (as soon after the start of the reaction as possible 
and preferably within 30 min), at 1–2 h post reaction and 
a third sample 24 h post reaction or during convalescence. 
Ideally, additional samples at 3, 6 and 12 h should be re-
quested to help interpretation. The peak concentration 
(>50 μg/L) is reached 1–3 h after the start of the reaction; 
values gradually return to normal by 24 h. The timing 
for further investigation will be guided by the clinical 
­situation but may involve closely supervised skin testing 
and/or total and specific IgE, generally with interpreta-
tion by an immunologist. Hereditary angioedema can 
cause symptoms very similar to those of a type I hyper-
sensitivity reaction, so measurement of C3, C4 and C1 
esterase inhibitor concentrations may be indicated.
Autoimmune diseases
The immune system is tolerant to self-antigens or 
makes only limited responses to them. Sometimes, this 
tolerance breaks down and the immune system makes a 
progressive response that attacks the body’s own tissue, 
resulting in autoimmune disease. The factors that trig-
ger such responses are not well understood; many fac-
tors are likely to be involved, for example the patient’s 
immunological status, including their HLA types, any 
pre-existing inflammation and the presence of any infec-
tion. The initial damaging stage is usually cell mediated, 
and biopsies from affected tissue often show monocytic 
and lymphocytic infiltration. The production of auto-
antibodies can be part of the pathogenetic process or 
a result of a response to hidden antigens that are re-
leased as a consequence of cellular destruction. The 
general characteristics of pathogenetic antibodies and 
non-pathogenetic antibodies are shown in Table 30.23. 
The presence and the concentration of many of these 
antibodies are used to help diagnose and, occasionally, 
to monitor autoimmune diseases.
Autoantibodies can be detected by their reaction 
against tissue containing the relevant antigens, using sub-
jective methods such as indirect immunofluorescence. 
Samples found to be positive by these sensitive (but not 
very specific) methods are then analysed, using more 
specific and quantitative methods, for example ELISA. 
Automated ELISA-based ‘screening’ techniques are in-
creasingly being used, although the validity in a routine 
setting is questionable.
It is important that detection of these autoantibodies 
is not considered to be a ‘gold standard’ test. They are, at 
best, markers of disease: they have significant limitations 
and should be used as part of a diagnostic panel rather 
than the presence of individual autoantibodies being re-
garded as diagnostic of any particular disease.
TABLE 30.22  The clinical features of anaphylaxis
Organ affected
Feature
Respiratory 
system
Upper airway obstruction due to 
oedema
Bronchospasm
Oedema
Asphyxia
Cardiovascular 
system
Hypotensive shock due to vascular 
pooling
Cardiovascular collapse
Gastrointestinal 
system
Vomiting, nausea, diarrhoea, 
abdominal cramps
Skin
Erythema, pruritus, urticaria, 
angioedema
General
Warmth, tingling, flushing, feeling of 
impending doom
TABLE 30.21  Guide to the interpretation of 
­specific IgE
a measurements
Units
Grade
Interpretation
Significance (kAU/L)
<0.35
0
Negative
Significance of 
grades 1–3 varies 
depending on 
allergen
0.35–0.7
1
Weakly 
positive
Grade 1 to foods or 
moulds may be 
significant, but to 
inhaled allergens 
is of doubtful 
significance
0.7–3.5
2
Positive
Positive specific 
IgE
a indicates 
potential to react
3.5–17.5
3
Positive
 
17.5–50
4
Strongly 
positive
 
50–100
5
Strongly 
positive
 
>100
6
Strongly 
positive
 
aHistorically, specific IgE was measured by radioallergosorbent  
assay (RAST); this method is no longer available but the term  
RAST is still used as a synonym for a test for specific IgE.
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
583
An arbitrary distinction is often made between organ-
specific and non-organ-specific autoimmune diseases, 
but in reality there is a spectrum of involvement ranging 
from only one or several organ(s) being affected to auto-
immune diseases with systemic manifestations.
Autoimmune endocrine diseases
The autoimmune endocrine disorders include diseases 
of the thyroid, pancreatic islets, adrenal cortex, gonads, 
pituitary and parathyroids. More than one endocrine or-
gan can be affected, either simultaneously or at different 
times during the patient’s life. Autoimmune disease af-
fecting the parathyroids or pituitary is rare, and is not 
discussed further in this chapter.
Thyroid. Autoimmune thyroid disease is discussed in 
detail in Chapter  19. It includes primary myxoedema, 
Hashimoto thyroiditis and Graves disease. Measurement 
of thyroid antibodies is of limited use. Approximately 
95% of patients with Hashimoto thyroiditis have an-
tibodies to thyroid peroxidase. There is little point 
in measuring them in patients with obvious hypo- or 
hyperthyroidism. Measurement is best reserved for pa-
tients with equivocal thyroid function test results and 
when thyroid disease is suspected, but there are unusual 
clinical findings. Thyroid peroxidase antibody measure-
ments are not required for monitoring patients on thyroid 
hormone replacement. Thyroid peroxidase antibodies are 
also found in Graves disease, but are neither of diagnostic 
value nor useful in monitoring the response to treatment. 
They are non-pathogenetic, so their concentration does 
not change in relation to disease activity.
Patients with untreated Graves disease have antibod-
ies to the thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) receptor 
molecule, to which they bind, stimulating the gland and 
causing hyperthyroidism. These antibodies are patho-
genetic, but while the titre of antibodies correlates with 
thyroid gland hyperfunction, their measurement is not 
required routinely for diagnosis, nor is it used for moni-
toring treatment. The antibody is an IgG and capable of 
crossing the placenta and causing (transient) neonatal hy-
perthyroidism. A high maternal antibody titre in the third 
trimester indicates an increased risk of this condition. 
Less frequently, antibodies to the TSH receptor block 
the binding of TSH and cause hypothyroidism.
Pancreas. Type 1 diabetes is caused by progressive auto-
immune destruction of pancreatic islet cells. Antibodies 
to islet cells and the enzyme glutamic acid decarboxylase 
can be found before clinical onset of disease and for a 
fairly short period early in its course, often disappear-
ing later. There is considerable interest in how these 
antibodies participate in the immunological damage and 
whether the immune process may be susceptible to mod-
ulation. There is no clear indication for measuring these 
­antibodies in most patients with diabetes, although they 
can sometimes be useful in patients with atypical clini-
cal or laboratory findings. (More details can be found in 
Chapter 15.)
Adrenals. Approximately 60% of cases of Addison disease 
are due to autoimmune destruction of the adrenal cortex. 
Antibodies can be demonstrated to a number of adrenal 
cell components and these can show cross-reactivity to 
steroid-producing cells of the ovary, testis and placenta, 
potentially leading to gonadal failure.
Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes (APS). These 
are a well-recognized group of conditions where two or 
more endocrine organs are affected. Table 30.24 shows 
how the conditions may be classified.
Autoimmune diseases of the gut. Pernicious anaemia 
(see Chapter  27) causes impaired absorption of dietary 
vitamin B12. Patients develop a macrocytic anaemia and 
may develop neurological complications. Antibodies to 
gastric parietal cells and intrinsic factor are detectable in 
the majority of patients.
Coeliac disease is characterized by destruction of 
small intestinal villi, leading to malabsorption. It is 
triggered by an immunological response to the glia-
din component of gluten (a protein in wheat and 
other cereals) but the endogenous antigen is endo-
mysium, the tissue that surrounds the smooth muscle 
fibres of the gut. The initial response is T cell me-
diated but gradually antibodies (IgG and/or IgA) 
are made to gliadin, endomysium and tissue trans-
glutaminase (the important antigen within the en-
domysium). Detection of antibodies is valuable in 
screening for the condition and may be sufficient for 
diagnosis in patients presenting with typical features 
(see Chapter  12, but the ‘gold standard’ diagnostic 
investigation is evidence of villous atrophy on ­jejunal 
biopsy. The UK National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence (NICE) has issued a guideline on the 
diagnosis of coeliac disease (see: www.nice.org.uk/ 
nicemedia/pdf/CG86FullGuideline.pdf).
TABLE 30.23  Characteristics of pathogenetic and 
non-pathogenetic antibodies
Characteristic
Pathogenetic 
antibodies
Non-
pathogenetic 
antibodies
Antigen 
distribution
Cell surface 
antigens, e.g. 
glomerular 
basement 
membrane, 
acetylcholine 
receptor, thyroid 
stimulating 
hormone receptor
Antigens within 
the cell
Specificity
Antibodies rarely 
seen in other 
conditions
Antibodies 
often seen in 
the absence 
of clinical 
features
Concentration
Related to disease 
severity
Unrelated 
to disease 
severity
 
Mirrors disease 
activity
Unrelated to 
disease activity
584	
Clinical biochemistry
Autoimmune liver diseases. The majority of cases of 
chronic hepatitis are due to viral infections (particularly 
with hepatitis B and C viruses) but approximately 20% of 
cases are autoimmune in origin. The distinction between 
autoimmune and infectious hepatitis is made mainly on 
the basis of the clinical features and the results of viro-
logical studies. It is important to identify the cause of 
chronic hepatitis, because interferon treatment (which is 
used for viral hepatitis) may worsen autoimmune liver 
disease and immune suppression (used for autoimmune 
liver disease) can worsen the viral disease. Unfortunately, 
patients with viral hepatitis sometimes make the very 
antibodies used in the investigation of autoimmune 
hepatitis.
Autoimmune hepatitis generally affects young 
females and is classified into types I and II. The typical 
age of presentation for type I is in the teenage years 
(∼10–20 years of age), while the peak age of presentation 
for type II is 7–8 years. Table 30.25 shows typical results 
of autoantibody measurements in autoimmune liver 
diseases. The antibodies are usually detected by indi-
rect immunofluorescence. Considerable skill may be 
needed to interpret the immunofluorescence patterns 
and follow-up investigations, for ­example by ELISA, 
may sometimes be necessary. In general, high antibody 
titres are more closely associated with disease than low 
antibody titres. The hepatic autoantigens are often en-
zymes; for example, 2-oxoacid dehydrogenase is the 
specific antigen for the M2 subtype of mitochondrial 
antibodies that is the most specific for primary biliary 
cirrhosis.
Liver disease is not usually an indication for mea-
surement of immunoglobulin concentrations, although 
abnormal immunoglobulin concentrations are common 
in liver disease, particularly when chronic. For exam-
ple, patients with primary biliary cirrhosis usually have 
TABLE 30.25  Investigations in liver disease, focusing particularly on the measurement of 
autoantibodies
Cause
Disease
Relevant finding
Infection
Hepatitis
Virus or antibody
Polyclonally raised IgG and IgA
Autoimmunity
Autoimmune hepatitis type I
Smooth muscle antibodies
Antinuclear antibodies
Anti-soluble liver antigen
Anti-liver kidney microsomal antibodies
a
Autoimmune hepatitis type II
Anti-liver kidney microsomal antibodies
a
Anti-liver cytosol antibodies
Anti-soluble liver antigen
Immunoglobulins (polyclonal raised IgG)
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Antimitochondrial antibody
b
Immunoglobulins (predominantly polyclonal raised IgM)
Alcohol
Hepatitis and cirrhosis
Immunoglobulins (predominantly polyclonal raised 
serum IgA)
Drugs and toxins
Paracetamol, industrial toxins, e.g. 
carbon tetrachloride, polyvinyl chloride
 
Genetic α1-antitrypsin 
deficiency
Prolonged jaundice in neonate
Total α1-antitrypsin and phenotype
Wilson disease
Varied but include fulminant hepatic 
failure, or cirrhosis
Urinary copper, serum copper and caeruloplasmin
Malignancy
Primary liver cancer and metastases 
(e.g. from bowel primary)
Tumour markers, e.g. α-fetoprotein, carcinoembryonic 
antigen
Obesity
Fatty liver disease
 
aLiver kidney microsomal antibodies occur only in a small number of patients with autoimmune hepatitis.
bAntimitochondrial antibodies are virtually pathognomic of primary biliary cirrhosis.
TABLE 30.24  Classification of autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes
Type (syndrome)
Main clinical features
Underlying cause
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy, 
candidiasis, ectodermal dysplasia 
(APECED)
Candidiasis, adrenal failure, 
hypoparathyroidism
Mutations in the autoimmune 
regulator element (ARE) gene
Schmidt
Adrenal failure, autoimmune thyroid 
disease, type I diabetes
Antibodies to steroid synthesis 
enzymes (e.g. 21α-hydroxylase)
Thyroid disease with other autoimmune 
disease but not Addison disease or 
hypoparathyroidism)
Type I diabetes, pernicious anaemia, 
vitiligo, alopecia
Unknown
Undefined
Two or more organ specific autoimmune diseases that do not fall into  
categories 1–3
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
585
markedly raised polyclonal IgM concentrations; patients 
with alcoholic liver disease tend to have raised polyclonal 
IgA concentrations, and patients with persistent infec-
tions or inflammatory responses show raised polyclonal 
IgG and IgA concentrations. However, these patterns 
are non-specific and of negligible diagnostic value. Serial 
measurements of IgG may, however, be of value in moni-
toring patients with autoimmune chronic hepatitis.
Autoimmune skin diseases. The blistering skin dis-
eases, pemphigus and pemphigoid, are caused by anti-
bodies to components of the skin. These IgG antibodies 
bind to antigens in the skin, activate complement and dis-
rupt the skin basement membrane (pemphigoid) or skin 
intercellular cement (pemphigus) causing intraepidermal 
blisters.
Autoimmune kidney diseases. Immunological dam-
age due to the deposition on the glomerular basement 
membrane (GBM) of immune complexes (either to an-
tigens of the GBM (as in Goodpasture syndrome) or 
formed in the circulation), is an important pathogenetic 
mechanism in renal disease. When the clinical features 
suggest a diagnosis of autoimmune kidney disease, evi-
dence from renal biopsy often provides a definitive di-
agnosis. However, laboratory data can reduce the need 
for biopsy. The antibodies particularly implicated in 
autoimmune kidney disease are shown in Table 30.26. 
Laboratories should have protocols that have been 
agreed with the local renal physicians for investigat-
ing patients with renal disease, but detection of anti-
nuclear antibody (ANA), antineutrophil cytoplasmic 
antibodies (ANCA) and GBM antibodies should ideally 
be available on an urgent basis (although, note that in 
immunological terms, this means results being available 
within 24 h of request). Patients with ANCA-associated 
vasculitis and GBM disease can also have pulmonary 
involvement (Goodpasture syndrome can manifest as 
haemoptysis). The vascularity of the lungs and kidneys 
makes them particular targets for vasculitic disease and 
the antibodies formed to either glomerular or alveolar 
basement membrane often show cross-reactivity with 
the other membrane. The concentrations of GBM an-
tibodies and of antibodies to proteinase 3 (and myelo-
peroxidase) can be used to monitor patients’ responses 
to treatment and, in the vasculitides, to provide an early 
warning of exacerbations of disease.
Testing for renal autoantibodies is essential early in the 
investigation of unexplained renal impairment. Such pa-
tients should also have their serum and urine investigated 
for paraproteins (including Bence Jones proteinuria). The 
investigation of samples for cryoproteins is often forgot-
ten but can be a vital test. The cryoproteins of relevance 
are not those that are seen with large monoclonal compo-
nents that precipitate in the cold in vivo. Rather, they are 
high molecular weight immune complexes associated with 
infectious agents, for example hepatitis B and C viruses, 
which lodge in blood vessels, activating complement and 
causing vasculitis. This process can affect any organ, but 
the kidneys, with their large vascular network, are a par-
ticular target. This cryoprecipitation is a laboratory arte-
fact, generated by storage of serum samples in the cold; 
the amount of precipitate can be very small, but careful 
isolation and investigation typically reveals monoclonal or 
polyclonal IgM showing rheumatoid factor activity.
Autoimmune articular diseases. These diseases are 
also referred to as connective tissue diseases. They are 
discussed in more detail in Chapter 32. There is consid-
erable overlap between the clinical features seen in indi-
vidual conditions. Autoantibodies are used as markers of 
the diseases; their presence contributes to, but does not 
establish, the diagnosis.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA). Rheumatoid factor (RF) 
is an autoantibody (usually IgM) directed against the Fc 
portion of IgG. It is not specific for rheumatoid arthri-
tis, also occurring in infections, malignancies, persistent 
inflammatory conditions and in up to 10% of healthy 
adults, with increasing frequency in elderly patients. A 
raised RF is one of the diagnostic criteria for RA but is 
not essential for the diagnosis. There is a correlation be-
tween higher RF concentrations and more severe disease 
and poorer long-term prognosis in RA; less severe disease 
is seen in seronegative patients. Rheumatoid factor is not 
of value in monitoring RA: measurement of C-reactive 
protein (CRP), reflecting the severity of inflammation, is 
superior. Changes in CRP precede both radiological and 
clinical changes.
TABLE 30.26  Antibody mediated renal disease
Disorder
Serological findings
Biopsy findings
Antiglomerular basement disease 
(Goodpasture syndrome)
Serum antibodies that react with normal 
basement membrane (GBM
a)
Linear IgG, C3 along basement 
membrane
SLE nephritis
Antinuclear antibodies
a (see text)
Granular IgG, IgM, C3, C4 along GBM
Vasculitis, e.g.
  Wegener granulomatosis
  Microscopic polyarteritis
Anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
a (ANCA)
Staining in the cytoplasm hence c-ANCA and is 
associated with antibodies to proteinase 3
ANCA
Staining in the perinuclear area hence 
p-ANCA and is associated with antibodies to 
myeloperoxidase
Inflammatory – nothing specific
Cryoglobulinaemia
Cryoglobulins (proteins that form a precipitate 
on cooling of serum)
IgG, IgM, C3 along capillary wall
aThe indirect immunofluorescent staining patterns are shown in Figure 30.12.
586	
Clinical biochemistry
The measurement of IgG antibodies to citrulli-
nated peptides (anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide, CCP) 
is increasingly being used in investigation of patients 
with RA. It shows similar clinical specificity and sen-
sitivity to RF but the presence of CCP antibodies can 
precede overt signs of RA. A combination of RF and 
CCP antibodies is becoming important to stratify pa-
tients with RA and to direct treatment, e.g. use of anti 
TNF. The UK National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence has issued a guideline on the management 
of RA in adults (see: http://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/
cg79).
FIGURE  30.12  ■  Indirect immunofluorescent patterns of: (A) ho-
mogenous and (B) speckled ANA; (C) pANCA and (D) cANCA and 
(E) anti-GBM antibodies.
A
B
C
D
E
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
587
Other connective tissue diseases. The detection of 
antibodies to nuclear components is one of the most im-
portant laboratory tests in the investigation of patients 
with suspected systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), 
Sjögren syndrome and scleroderma. The term ‘antinu-
clear antibodies’ is used to describe this diverse group 
of autoantibodies that react with nuclear and cytoplas-
mic antigens that are common to all nucleated cells. The 
antigens typically have functions in the cell cycle, or in 
transcription and translation.
Antinuclear antibodies. Antinuclear patterns are de-
tected by indirect immunofluorescence using either fro-
zen sections of animal tissue or cultured human cancer 
cell lines, most commonly the epithelial cell line HEp-2. 
This is usually a very sensitive test and specimens that test 
positive for antinuclear antibodies then need testing for 
one of the nuclear antigens by specific methods. These 
specific tests use purified or partially purified antigens. 
There is a move towards using combined specific tests 
instead of the subjective immunofluorescence assays, but 
these methods are not yet widely accepted as potential 
replacements.
The pattern of the immunofluorescence reaction 
gives some indication of the antigen specificity because 
of the different distribution of antigens within the nu-
cleus and cytoplasm. Figure 30.13 shows a diagram of a 
nucleus with the distribution of the important antigens. 
The more frequently identified and clinically useful 
antibodies are listed in Table 30.27. Specificities other 
than those listed rarely have clinical significance, are 
usually present at low concentrations and can be found 
non-specifically in many infectious and inflammatory 
conditions.
Antibodies to double-stranded DNA. Antibodies 
to single-stranded (ss) DNA are frequently present 
in SLE but can also be demonstrated in many other 
­inflammatory conditions and in infections. Antibodies 
to double-stranded (ds) DNA are one of the impor-
tant diagnostic criteria in SLE. The most frequently 
used methods for the quantification of anti-dsDNA 
are ELISAs, but the immunofluorescence assay using 
Crithidia luciliae is usually a more specific (although 
less sensitive) assay. High antibody concentrations to 
dsDNA are associated with renal complications of SLE 
and quantification of dsDNA antibodies is useful (to-
gether with C3 and C4 concentrations) to monitor the 
disease and response to treatment.
Antibodies 
to 
extractable 
nuclear 
antigens. 
Numerous antibodies to various nuclear or cytoplas-
mic protein antigens (commonly termed the extractable 
nuclear antigens or ENAs) are detectable in connective 
tissue disorders (see Table 30.27). They may be of di-
agnostic value but, in contrast to antibodies to dsDNA, 
there is negligible value in using these tests for monitor-
ing disease activity.
Antinuclear antibodies in pregnancy. Antinuclear an-
tibodies are of the IgG class and can therefore be trans-
ported across the placenta to the fetus. Antibodies to 
dsDNA can cause a transient, self-limiting, neonatal lupus 
syndrome. Antibodies to the Ro antigen cross-react with 
the fetal heart tissue and can cause neonatal heart block.
Antiphospholipid antibodies. These are a group of 
­antibodies that are associated with an increased ten-
dency for thrombosis. The most clinically relevant are 
Chromosomes
Centromere
Nucleolus
Extractable
nuclear antigens
Homogeneous staining
seen with antibodies
to ssDNA and (with
chromosomal staining)
with antibodies
to dsDNA
FIGURE 30.13  ■  Diagram of a nucleus showing staining patterns; 
ss, single-stranded; ds, double-stranded.
TABLE 30.27  Antinuclear antibody patterns and 
their disease-associated antigens with reported 
frequency of detection (%)
ANA pattern
Antigen
Disease 
association
Homogeneous
DNA (double and 
single stranded)
SLE (60%)
Histone
Drug-induced 
lupus (95%)
SLE (60%)
Topoisomerase-1 
(Scl-70)
Progressive 
systemic 
sclerosis 
(15–70%)
Speckled
Sm
SLE (20%)
RNP
SLE-Sjögren 
overlap (100%)
SLE (25%)
SSA/Ro
Sjögren 
syndrome 
(60%)
SLE (35%)
SSB/La
Sjögren 
syndrome 
(40%)
SLE (15%)
Centromere
CENP
Limited 
cutaneous 
scleroderma 
(formerly 
CREST
a 
syndrome) 
(7–21%)
Nucleolar
PM-Scl
Polymyositis (8%)
Myositis/
scleroderma 
overlap (50%)
Nucleolar RNA
Scleroderma 
(5–43%)
Cytoplasmic
Histidyl-tRNA 
synthetase (Jo-1)
Polymyositis (2%)
aCREST: calcification, Raynaud phenomenon, (o)esophageal  
involvement, sclerodactyly and telangiectasia.
588	
Clinical biochemistry
­antibodies to cardiolipin, β2-glycoprotein 1 and ‘lupus an-
ticoagulant’. They may occur in some patients with SLE 
but can also be found in patients with recurrent miscar-
riages, unexplained transient ischaemic attacks, strokes or 
thrombotic events.
LYMPHOID MALIGNANCIES
Lymphocytes go through a complex process from the start 
of their lives as naïve lymphocytes to end-­differentiated, 
functional lymphocytes. The complexity of the process 
means that there are many opportunities for a cell to 
undergo a malignant transformation that may result in 
malignant disease. The classification of lymphoid ma-
lignancies is based upon the normal physiological path-
ways and the place in this pathway where the malignant 
transformation has occurred. The leukaemias are malig-
nancies of cells whose mature forms are normally found 
in the blood, while the lymphomas are tumours of the 
non-recirculating lymphoid cells. The diagnosis and 
management of lymphoid malignancy is predominantly 
the remit of haematologists. Flow cytometric analysis of 
peripheral blood for panels of CD markers is important 
as are cytological examinations of either lymph node or 
bone marrow biopsies. The detection of the products of 
monoclonal B cells, monoclonal proteins, is, however, a 
vital test in the investigation of patients with suspected 
B cell malignancy (the category that includes myeloma). 
There are no specific biochemical investigations for the 
diagnosis and management of malignancies of the T cell 
lineage, and the subsequent discussion therefore focuses 
on malignancies of B cells.
B lymphocytes and monoclonal proteins
Early B lymphocytes, with their randomly rearranged 
B cell receptors (IgM), leave the bone marrow and traf-
fic around the lymphoid tissue, searching for appropri-
ate antigens. Once a lymphocyte meets an antigen, there 
is a process of maturation to secrete high-affinity anti-
body (after class switching) and to maintain a memory 
response. Plasma cells are end-differentiated B cells that 
reside in the bone marrow and secrete immunoglobu-
lins. There is normally considerable microheterogene-
ity in the immunoglobulin molecules. This results in 
polyclonal immunoglobulins, representing all classes 
and light chain types, with a large number of different 
idiotypes produced by a large number of different B cell 
clones. A monoclonal immunoglobulin of a single heavy 
chain class, light chain type and idiotype, results from 
the proliferation of a single clone of B cells. Monoclonal 
B cells, especially those that have undergone malignant 
transformation, do not necessarily produce normal, in-
tact immunoglobulin: in approximately 20% of patients 
with myeloma, they produce only monoclonal free light 
chains (detectable in the urine as Bence Jones protein, 
BJP). Almost all variations on the normal immunoglobu-
lin molecules are possible: monoclonal monomeric (7S), 
instead of the normal pentameric IgM, may be secreted, 
monoclonal fragments, for example free heavy chains, 
half molecules and truncated molecules can all occur; 
so, too, can combinations of immunoglobulin fragments 
and intact monoclonal immunoglobulins. The class of 
immunoglobulin produced by the tumour can give a 
clue to the place in the B cell development where the 
malignant transformation occurred. For example, tu-
mours of early B cells often secrete monoclonal IgM, 
while tumours of end-differentiated B cells tend to se-
crete IgG or IgA.
Monoclonal proteins or fragments appear as homo-
geneous, compact bands on electrophoretic separations. 
These bands should be called monoclonal proteins but 
are often called paraproteins, M components or M pro-
teins. Monoclonal proteins detectable in serum are most 
often intact immunoglobulins; if there is renal damage 
these proteins can leak into the urine. Low molecular 
weight fragments and monoclonal free light chains (BJPs) 
can pass readily through normal glomeruli and appear in 
the urine in the absence of renal damage but may also be 
detectable in the serum.
Clinical significance of monoclonal proteins
The finding of a monoclonal protein in the serum and/or 
urine can be associated with both malignant and benign 
conditions, as indicated in Table 30.28.
In malignant diseases, paraproteins are sensitive tu-
mour markers (see below), but their presence in (appar-
ently) non-malignant diseases limits their specificity. 
However, immunoglobulin fragments are rarely found 
in non-malignant monoclonal B cell expansions and 
their presence is thus highly suggestive of malignant 
B cell proliferation. The clinical features associated 
with paraproteinaemia can be due to the effects of the 
underlying tumour or to the properties of the mono-
clonal protein. Features related specifically to parapro-
teins are listed in Table 30.29. Some paraproteins also 
show autoantibody activity, for example against other 
TABLE 30.28  Conditions associated with the 
production of monoclonal proteins
Category
Condition
Malignant
Multiple myeloma, 
plasmacytoma, Waldenström 
macroglobulinaemia, lymphoma 
(of B cell origin), chronic 
lymphocytic leukaemia
Non-malignant 
(asymptomatic)
Benign
Transient
Monoclonal gammopathy of 
unknown significance (MGUS)
Non-malignant 
(symptomatic)
Amyloidosis
Cryoglobulinaemia and immune 
complex disease
Primary cold agglutinin disease
There are also dermatological and neurological diseases where the 
incidence of paraproteinaemia is greater than can be accounted for 
by coincidence. Amyloidosis with neurological and dermatological 
manifestations can occur as a complication of malignant diseases.
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
589
immunoglobulins (e.g. rheumatoid factor) in immune 
complex disease and cryoglobulinaemia, against the I 
red cell antigen in primary cold agglutinin disease, and 
against myelin-associated glycoprotein in peripheral 
neuropathy.
Monoclonal proteins can also occur secondarily to 
infection and as part of immune reconstitution post-­
transplantation; in these situations, they are ­generally 
transient, disappearing over weeks or months. Monoclonal 
proteins may also be found in patients without any overt 
clinical signs of malignancy; this is particularly true in the 
elderly.
Prevalence of monoclonal proteins
The prevalence of monoclonal proteins is dependent 
on the population being considered. In symptomatic 
populations (e.g. hospital patients), paraproteins are pre-
dominantly associated with B cell malignancy, of which 
myeloma is the most common. In asymptomatic popu-
lations, the prevalence depends on the sensitivity of the 
electrophoresis used to detect the paraprotein and the 
characteristics of the group that is screened. The inci-
dence of paraproteins rises with age; a survey of over 9000 
apparently healthy individuals showed paraproteins in 
0.1% of those aged 20–30 years, in 0.6% by age 60 years 
and in 6% of subjects aged 90–99 years.
Laboratory investigation of paraproteins
The detection, typing and quantification of monoclonal 
components in serum and urine are essential laboratory 
investigations in the diagnosis and monitoring of both 
malignant and non-malignant monoclonal B cell expan-
sions. A serum paraprotein and/or urine BJP is a highly 
sensitive tumour marker for certain B cell malignancies, 
particularly myeloma (>95%) and Waldenström macro-
globulinaemia (100%). In these conditions, the monoclo-
nal component is indeed a diagnostic feature. However, 
they are not entirely specific for these conditions and can 
be found in other B cell malignancies and non-malignant 
diseases (see Table 30.28). It is important to note that the 
detection of a monoclonal protein does not necessarily 
indicate that the patient has myeloma or, indeed, any ma-
lignant transformation of B cells, nor does the absence 
of a paraprotein completely exclude the presence of my-
eloma or B cell malignancy.
The presence of a monoclonal immunoglobulin may 
be suspected from the patient’s clinical presentation or 
from results of other investigations. The findings that 
should, in the absence of another explanation, prompt in-
vestigation for paraproteinaemia, are shown in Box 30.2.
Identification of paraproteins
The detection of monoclonal proteins is one of the two 
clear indications for the measurement of serum IgG, IgA 
and IgM concentrations and protein electrophoresis; 
these investigations should be done as a logical group of 
tests for optimum interpretation; this approach is in line 
with the consensus recommendations of the International 
Myeloma Workshop Consensus Panel (see Further read-
ing, below). Protein electrophoresis is the only reliable 
method for the detection of paraproteins in serum and 
urine. Abnormal bands (in the serum), once detected by 
electrophoresis, can be quantified by scanning densitom-
etry or directly from the capillary zone electrophoresis 
trace. Immunofixation should be used to type the mono-
clonal band; this will confirm clonality and identify the 
heavy and light chains.
Automated capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE) sys-
tems are becoming the most common method for serum 
TABLE 30.29  Clinical manifestations of the 
­physicochemical properties of paraproteins
Condition
% of patients 
with 
paraproteins
Main Ig classes
Hyperviscosity 
syndrome
8
IgG3, IgA and, 
particularly, 
IgM
Amyloid deposition
8
Bence Jones
Renal tubular 
obstruction
6
Bence Jones
Thromboembolism
5
IgG
Immune complex 
disease
4
IgM, IgG
Monoclonal 
cryoglobulinaemia
2
IgM, IgG
Fanconi syndrome
1
Bence Jones
BOX 30.2	
Findings that should prompt the 
investigation of serum and urine for 
a monoclonal immunoglobulin
Symptoms
•	 Backache (especially localized or with local tenderness)
•	 Lassitude
•	 Recurrent infection
Clinical syndromes
•	 Renal impairment
•	 Nephrotic syndrome
•	 Peripheral neuropathy
•	 Hyperviscosity syndrome
•	 Carpal tunnel syndrome
•	 Malabsorption
Radiological findings
•	 Osteolytic lesions
•	 Pathological fractures
Haematological findings
•	 Normochromic, normocytic anaemia
•	 Raised erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR)
Biochemical findings
•	 Raised serum total protein
•	 Raised serum globulin (total protein minus albumin)
•	 Proteinuria
•	 Abnormal results of renal function tests
•	 Subnormal immunoglobulin concentrations
•	 Hypercalcaemia
590	
Clinical biochemistry
protein electrophoresis, although agarose gel based 
methods are still in frequent use. Capillary zone elec-
trophoresis techniques for urine protein electrophore-
sis are available but sample preparation is complex and 
the methods not sufficiently robust for routine prac-
tice. Serum proteins are separated by electrophoresis 
at pH 8.6; both agarose and CZE systems generate five 
major zones. Figure 30.14 shows the typical mobility of 
the major serum proteins. Agarose separations should 
be long enough (3–4 cm) to allow good separation of 
zones and show a good spread of the β-γ zone, which 
is achieved by properties of the agarose gel and buffer 
system that produce high endosmotic flow. The major-
ity of serum paraproteins migrate in the β or γ zones, 
although they may be found anywhere on the electro-
phoretic separation between the α1 zone and the post-γ 
region. Monoclonal heavy chains may show as diffuse 
zones running very anodally in the α2-β region of the 
electrophoretic separation; IgD paraproteins can also 
form a diffuse zone in the β-γ region. Representative 
examples of serum protein electrophoretic patterns are 
shown in Figure 30.14.
Paraproteins may be missed if they are present at low 
serum concentrations (<5.0 g/L), when their mobility co-
incides with other bands such as β-globulins, or where 
there is no suppression of normal background immuno-
globulin concentrations. This is most often seen with 
low-concentration IgM or IgA paraproteins. Therefore, 
whenever there is a raised concentration of IgA or IgM 
with no clear increased staining in the β-γ region that 
would indicate a polyclonal increase, immunofixation 
should be done, as it should be also if there is a high clini-
cal index of suspicion of B cell malignancy but an appar-
ently normal electrophoresis. IgD paraproteins and free 
heavy chains are susceptible to post-synthetic degrada-
tion, which results in diffuse paraprotein bands on elec-
trophoresis, and these may be missed if present at low 
concentrations or if the operator is expecting to see a 
narrow band rather than a diffuse zone. Precipitation of 
paraproteins on cooling of blood samples (monoclonal 
cryoglobulins) and subsequent removal with the clot, can 
also result in failure to detect a significant paraprotein. 
There are a number of proteins that can be mistaken for 
monoclonal proteins in electrophoresis separations.
These include:
•	 allotypic variants, e.g. of α1-antitrypsin, may result 
in two bands in a normally homogeneous region
•	 a haptoglobin–haemoglobin complex as a result of 
in  vitro haemolysis, causing splitting of the nor-
mally homogeneous α2 zone
•	 acute phase proteins, e.g. C-reactive protein, in-
creases, which may result in additional bands being 
present
•	 fibrinogen in plasma or inadequately clotted sam-
ples, which results in an additional band in the fast γ 
region
•	 lipoproteins, which may give distinct bands in the β 
region in agarose systems
•	 haemoglobin, which migrates in the β region.
Urine should be examined in every patient in whom 
B cell malignancy is being considered. This is especially 
important if there is suppression of the serum immuno-
globulins or if there is renal impairment, and it should 
be done even where no serum monoclonal component is 
detected. It is also important to monitor the amount of 
BJP during a patient’s follow-up, even when BJP is not 
detected at presentation, because it can appear later in the 
course of the disease (‘Bence Jones escape’).
The presence of BJP provides strong evidence of 
malignancy, although it can occur in apparently benign 
conditions. The International Federation for Clinical 
Chemistry (IFCC) recommends a sensitivity for the de-
tection of BJP of 10 mg/L: high-sensitivity electropho-
resis of urine is therefore essential. This can be achieved 
by using very sensitive stains when electrophoresis is 
performed on unconcentrated urines, or by concentrat-
ing urines at least 100-fold. The concentration devices 
separate the water, ions and low molecular weight pep-
tides from higher molecular weight constituents across 
a semipermeable membrane. The molecular exclusion 
of these membranes should be between 11.5 kDa and 
13.0 kDa. Some concentration systems are static; oth-
ers require centrifugation to achieve separation. Urine 
concentrates should then be analysed alongside se-
rum in the agarose systems. Ideally, a trace of albumin 
should be visible in every urine sample; failure to detect 
any albumin on the electrophoretic separation should 
prompt further concentration and re-analysis. The re-
nal damage associated with Bence Jones proteinuria 
often results in complex patterns; immunofixation im-
proves both specificity and sensitivity, so is very useful 
to help resolve these patterns. Representative examples 
of urine protein electrophoretic patterns are shown in 
Figure 30.15. Low concentrations of BJP can be seen 
with a significant glomerular proteinuria in patients 
with light chain renal amyloidosis. Any urine with a 
marked glomerular proteinuria should be investigated 
by immunofixation, even in the absence of a band sug-
gestive of BJP.
Several proteins can be mistaken for monoclonal pro-
tein in urine electrophoresis separations, particularly 
where there is an element of tubular proteinuria. They 
include the following:
•	 α1-microglobulins
•	 lysozyme (migrating in the slow γ region)
•	 degraded fragments of protein of glomerular origin
FIGURE  30.14  ■  Representative serum electrophoresis patterns. 
Tracks 1 and 10 are dilutions of normal serum. Dots to the right 
of some of the tracks indicate bands that require immunofixa-
tion for further investigation.
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
591
•	 seminal fluid proteins (very rare)
•	 β2-microglobulin (can produce a prominent band 
when present in high concentrations).
Measurement of serum free light chains is now 
­routinely available. A combination of serum protein 
­electrophoresis and free light chain measurement has 
been suggested as a suitable screening protocol for B cell 
malignancy. This approach is now being used in some 
laboratories and is further discussed on p. 596.
Typing of monoclonal immunoglobulins  
in serum and urine
Immunofixation. Once a paraprotein band has been 
detected, it is important to identify the heavy and light 
chain components. The major indications for immuno-
fixation are to:
•	 confirm clonality of a band detected by electrophoresis
•	 test for α, γ or μ heavy chains and κ and λ light 
chains (routinely)
•	 test for δ and ε heavy chains when a serum shows 
monoclonal light chains without a corresponding α, 
γ or μ heavy chain
•	 exclude monoclonal components being present at 
low concentrations, even where no band is apparent 
on electrophoresis but when there are appropriate 
clinical indications, e.g. amyloid
•	 exclude the presence of monoclonal IGA or IGM if 
there are raised concentrations without β-γ fusion 
(the appearance when these bands lose their sepa-
rate identities)
•	 investigate the possibility of an apparent para-
protein in serum or urine being caused by a high 
concentration of another protein (e.g. fibrinogen, 
complement components, β2-microglobulin) (using 
antisera specific to these proteins)
•	 detect minimal residual disease or complete remis-
sion following haematopoietic stem cell transplanta-
tion for myeloma when no monoclonal component 
is seen on the electrophoretic separation.
When monoclonality has been confirmed, determina-
tion of the paraprotein type may provide useful additional 
information about the underlying tumour and prognosis. 
The distribution of heavy chain classes in B cell dyscra-
sias is shown in Table 30.30. The light chain distribution 
of the common paraproteins is similar to that of normal 
polyclonal immunoglobulins, with a predominance of κ 
over γ (about 2:1). IgD paraproteins are usually of γ light 
chain type, although κ may be found, and the few IgE 
paraproteins that have been reported have all been of κ 
light chain type.
The electrophoresis pattern may change during the 
course of a patient’s disease or treatment. For example, 
some patients may start producing BJP after having not 
done so at the time of diagnosis. Complete disappear-
ance of a paraprotein is rare but is occurring increasingly 
with treatment regimens using high-dose chemotherapy 
and bone marrow transplantation. An oligoclonal band-
ing pattern is often seen in patients after stem cell trans-
plantation and it is important to distinguish this from the 
original paraproteinaemia.
Immunofixation enhances the sensitivity of gel elec-
trophoresis both by removing background staining and 
selectively increasing the amount of protein (by add-
ing antibodies) in the band of interest. Representative 
examples of serum and urine immunofixation patterns 
are shown in Figures 30.16 and 30.17, respectively. The 
choice of antisera is paramount: problems with this tech-
nique are often related to the use of poor antisera. This is 
FIGURE  30.15  ■  Representative urine electrophoresis patterns. 
Tracks 1 and 10 are dilutions of normal serum; all urine samples 
contain a trace of albumin. Significant bands that require immu-
nofixation for further investigation are indicated by dots to the 
right of the respective tracks.
TABLE 30.30  Paraprotein types in B cell dyscrasias
Monoclonal type
All paraproteins (%)
Myeloma (%)
a
Waldenström 
macroglobulinaemia (%)
Other B cell 
diseases (%) 
(NHL/CLL
b)
MGUS (%)
IgG
53
53
c (40)
–
40
60
IgA
22
22
c (22)
–
10
35
IgM
11.4
0.5 (19)
100
c
50
5
IgD
1.3
1.51
c,d (14)
–
–
–
IgE
<0.001
e
0.1 (30)
–
–
–
BJP only
11.6
21 (5.4 g/24 h)
–
–
(+)
Biclonal
1.5
f
Unknown
–
–
–
Non-secretory
–
1
–
–
–
aValues in brackets = typical serum concentrations in g/L (except BJP); 
bNHL, non-Hodgkin lymphoma; CLL, chronic lymphatic leukaemia: 
both are tumours of B cell origin. 
cCan also show Bence Jones protein; 
dusually γ light chain; 
eusually κ light chain; 
fdoes not include intact 
monoclonal Ig with BJP or multiple bands of the same paraprotein type.
592	
Clinical biochemistry
especially true for the antisera to free κ and λ light chains. 
Such antisera are available but often react poorly. The 
antisera most widely used for immunofixation react with 
both free and bound immunoglobulin heavy and light 
chains. The presence of free light chains can be inferred 
if no heavy chain reaction is present. Immunofixation is 
not a quantitative method; antisera often show greater 
binding to free than to bound light chains.
A major problem with immunofixation of urine is 
distinguishing between monoclonal light chains and 
light chain fragments generated from normal immuno-
globulin catabolism, which result in a ‘ladder-like’ pat-
tern, particularly in the immunofixation reaction with 
antiserum to κ light chains. This ‘κ banding’ pattern is 
most often seen in elderly patients with inflammatory 
conditions. Examples of BJP and κ banding are shown in 
Figures 30.17 and 30.18.
Immunofixation techniques are not applicable in au-
tomated CZE systems; therefore, the technique of im-
munosubtraction has been developed for these systems. 
Immunosubtraction techniques work well for large 
monoclonal proteins but can lack sensitivity for small 
paraproteins and are inflexible; for example no reagents 
are available for typing IgD or IgE paraproteins or other 
non-immunoglobulin proteins.
In rare circumstances, the presence of free heavy chains 
may need to be confirmed. This is done by an adaptation 
of gel electrophoresis called immunoselection, or by mo-
lecular weight and immunoblotting methods that are best 
referred to expert laboratories.
Quantitation of monoclonal components
The concentration of a monoclonal component does 
not, in general, predict tumour mass. However, in in-
dividual patients, concentration does reflect tumour 
mass and is therefore an essential component in both 
the initial investigation and the assessment of the re-
sponse to treatment of patients with B cell malignancies. 
Table 30.30 shows the average paraprotein concentra-
tion at presentation with myeloma with respect to the 
paraprotein type.
The only reliable method of paraprotein quantitation 
is to measure the percentage of the monoclonal protein 
(by scanning densitometry or from CZE read-out), with 
respect to the total electrophoretic separation or to the 
globulin fraction. The stains used in protein electropho-
resis show differential dye binding between albumin and 
globulin; the more precise estimation of paraprotein is 
therefore derived from the percentage of relative dye 
binding of the paraprotein band compared with the to-
tal globulin fraction rather than the total protein. The 
CZE measuring system uses a UV detector system that 
overcomes the differential dye binding and also limits 
problems of non-linear dye binding at high paraprotein 
concentrations. Serum total protein is most often mea-
sured by biuret-based methods. A useful check is to take 
the sum of the paraprotein and albumin concentrations 
and add 10–15 g/L (to account for the other serum pro-
teins): the result should be approximately equal to the 
measured serum total protein.
It is possible to quantitate reliably a serum parapro-
tein down to a concentration of 1 g/L, provided there 
is suppression of the background immunoglobulins. 
Monoclonal proteins with electrophoretic mobility in 
the β region can be difficult to measure. However, the 
concentration of the β-globulins is relatively constant. 
Therefore, when a paraprotein band migrates with β-
globulins, the total band can be measured: significant 
changes in that concentration are likely to be due to 
changes only in the concentration of the monoclonal 
SPE
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
IgG
2
IgA
3
IgM
4
κ
5
λ
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
FIGURE 30.16  ■  Representative immunofixation of a serum sam-
ple containing an IgGλ paraprotein.
SPE
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
IgG
2
IgA
3
IgM
4
κ
5
λ
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
FIGURE 30.17  ■  Representative immunofixation of a urine speci-
men containing a λ Bence Jones protein.
SPE
1
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
IgG
2
IgA
3
IgM
4
κ
5
λ
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
FIGURE 30.18  ■  Representative immunofixation of a urine speci-
men showing κ banding (lane 5) (immunofixation will vary be-
tween manufacturers, in particular, the extent of separation).
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
593
component. When it is possible to delineate a mono-
clonal peak for the purposes of measurement, densito-
metric quantitation should be reported; however, once 
the concentration has fallen to an extent that the peak 
cannot be clearly seen, immunochemical quantitation 
should be used. The concentration of monoclonal com-
ponents can reach values in excess of 140 g/L, although 
this is rare. In this situation, falsely low concentra-
tions can be seen because the paraprotein concentra-
tion has exceeded the capacity of the detection system; 
the monoclonal peak on the CZE tracing may appear 
with a flat or split top. The frequency of monitoring 
the concentration of monoclonal proteins will depend 
upon a patient’s clinical condition and treatment regi-
men. Cumulative reporting of paraprotein studies is in-
valuable in monitoring patients with myeloma and other 
paraproteinaemias.
Quantitation of BJP in urine is generally more diffi-
cult than quantitation of monoclonal proteins in serum. 
Urine volume can be very variable, being influenced by 
factors such as fluid intake, renal function, state of hydra-
tion and time of day. Quantitation of BJP should start 
with the densitometric scan of the stained electrophoretic 
separation in a similar way to that used for serum para-
proteins. The band can be expressed as a percentage of 
the total protein, but this can give misleading informa-
tion, especially if the general background proteinuria is 
increased, making the percentage of BJP relatively lower. 
This percentage BJP can be used with the urine albumin 
or creatinine concentration to give the quantity of BJP 
expressed per gram of albumin or millimole of creatinine. 
It can also be used with the total protein concentration 
to generate a concentration in g/L and this result can be 
used with the 24 h urine volume to generate a 24 h excre-
tion. There are both practical and analytical issues, with 
no one method being ideal for all situations. Most impor-
tantly, a consistent approach should be adopted so that it 
is reliable to compare results on the same patient during 
the course of the disease.
Cryoproteins
Cryoproteins are proteins that aggregate on cooling of 
the serum or plasma and usually redissolve on warming 
to 37 °C; immunoglobulins and fibrinogen can all show 
this property.
Cryofibrinogen is an unusual finding resulting from 
misdirected synthesis or by post-synthetic modifica-
tions of fibrinogen. It can also be (artefactually) induced 
by heparin; thus collection into EDTA, citrate or oxa-
late is essential. Cryofibrinogen will only be visible in 
plasma samples while cryoprecipitating immunoglobulin 
should be visible in both serum and plasma stored at 4 °C. 
Cryofibrinogenaemia typically produces skin lesions or 
thrombophlebitis migrans and patients are managed by 
dermatologists or haematologists.
Cryoprecipitating immunoglobulins are classified 
into types I, II and III, based on whether they are mono- 
or polyclonal, their approximate concentrations and 
other properties; details of this classification are shown 
in Box  30.3. Individual cryoproteins show particular 
thermal profile characteristics that influence their clini-
cal significance. Monoclonal proteins that precipitate at 
temperatures close to 4 °C may not cause any significant 
problems, but those that precipitate close to room tem-
perature frequently precipitate in the plasma in vivo and 
are more likely to become clinically manifest, irrespective 
of relative concentrations.
The clinical features associated with types II and III 
cryoproteins are linked more to their ability to deposit 
in tissue as immune complexes rather than to their ten-
dency to precipitate in the cold. Types II and III cryopro-
teins are both associated with neuropathy, vasculitis and 
nephropathy.
Immune complex or cryoprotein deposition in tissues 
is likely to cause activation of the classical complement 
cascade. Low concentrations of complement (particularly 
C4) are a good marker of active immune complex disease; 
measurement of these components is an important part 
of the investigation of possible cryoproteinaemia. Careful 
specimen collection and handling are vital. Both serum 
and plasma samples should be collected, transported and 
BOX 30.3	
Classification and characteristics of 
cryoproteins
Type I cryoglobulins
•	 Monoclonal immunoglobulin, often present at high 
concentrations (>30 g/L)
•	 Account for ∼25% of all cryoproteins
•	 Occur predominantly with IgM paraproteins (6% of 
all macroglobulinaemia)
•	 Especially associated with lymphoma
•	 Can be seen with monoclonal IgG (particularly of the 
IgG3 subclass)
•	 Only occasionally with monoclonal IgA
•	 Significant cryoprecipitation can occur with low con-
centrations (∼5 g/L)
•	 Cryoprecipitation occurs most readily in the micro-
vasculature of the colder peripheries (fingers, toes, 
earlobes, nose); rapid precipitation (24 h incubation is 
usually adequate for their detection)
Type II cryoglobulins
•	 Monoclonal component (usually IgMκ), usually pres-
ent at low concentrations (<5 g/L) showing rheuma-
toid factor activity with polyclonal IgG
•	 Most often associated with viral hepatitis (hepatitis B 
and C); can occur with other infections, e.g. myco-
plasma pneumonia; can be seen in autoimmune dis-
eases and in lymphoproliferative diseases
•	 Precipitate slowly (need 72 h incubation)
Type III cryoglobulins
•	 Polyclonal rheumatoid factor (IgM) and polyclonal 
IgG or IgA; most often in association with autoim-
mune rheumatic diseases and persistent infections and 
only occasionally with lymphoproliferative diseases
•	 Precipitate slowly (need 72 h incubation)
Cryofibrinogen
•	 Fibrinogen that precipitates in the cold – collect into 
EDTA, citrate or oxalate
594	
Clinical biochemistry
separated at 37 °C. Failure to do this may result in sig-
nificant cryoproteins being lost in the blood clot during 
centrifugation.
β2-Microglobulin
In conditions in which there is increased cell turnover, 
for example malignancy (particularly lymphoid), acquired 
immune deficiency syndromes and inflammatory condi-
tions, plasma β2-microglobulin concentrations increase. 
This protein is cleared from the plasma by glomerular 
filtration followed by proximal tubular reabsorption and 
catabolism; plasma concentrations therefore reflect cell 
turnover and renal function. They have been shown to be 
an important prognostic indicator in myeloma.
α-Interferon, used in maintenance treatment of some 
β-Cell malignancies, induces marked increases in plasma 
β2-microglobulin concentrations, and this should be taken 
into consideration when using β2-microglobulin for the as-
sessment of tumour response during α-interferon therapy.
B cell malignancies
Myeloma
Plasma cell disorders have been classified into mono-
clonal gammopathy of unknown significance (MGUS), 
smouldering (asymptomatic) multiple myeloma and 
symptomatic multiple myeloma, based on the pres-
ence and concentration of a monoclonal protein, num-
ber and morphology of bone marrow plasma cells and 
end organ damage (hypercalcaemia, renal insufficiency, 
anaemia, bone lesions attributable to the plasma cell 
proliferation disorder). Myeloma is the commonest of 
the malignant causes of paraproteinaemia. The most 
frequent presenting features are bone pain (in 70% of 
patients), hypercalcaemia (30%), fever (15%), renal 
failure (10%) and infection (10%). It is predominantly 
a disease of the elderly, with a peak incidence between 
75 and 80 years.
The three major diagnostic features are the identi-
fication of a monoclonal protein in serum or urine, the 
presence of neoplastic cells in the bone marrow and the 
destruction of bone. The significance of these and other 
laboratory investigations is shown in Table 30.31.
As indicated in Table  30.30, IgG, IgA and BJP ac-
count for the majority of paraproteins in myeloma. 
IgD paraproteins occur occasionally, usually with λ 
light chains. IgM paraproteins are rare in myeloma; 
IgE paraproteins are extremely rare in any B cell ma-
lignancy. The paraprotein concentration at presentation 
does not predict survival; patients with Bence Jones and 
IgD paraproteins often present when the paraproteins 
are present only at relatively low concentrations (they 
also tend to present at an earlier age) but have shorter 
survivals than myeloma patients with IgG or IgA para-
proteins, even though the concentrations at presenta-
tion are often higher in the latter. Bence Jones protein 
(with or without intact monoclonal immunoglobulin) is 
seen in over 80% of patients with myeloma; it is rarely 
found in benign conditions.
The natural history of myeloma is generally one of 
progression. No treatment can be regarded as curative, 
although significant remission may be obtained with 
newer treatments regimens that may include chemo­
therapy, steroids, autologous stem cell transplant, 
bisphosphonates and the newer biologics, lenalidomide, 
bortezomib and thalidomide. Hypercalcaemia can be a 
particular problem and cause severe dehydration and/
or exacerbate renal failure; it is treated with rehydration 
and bisphosphonates. Monoclonal protein concentra-
tions that exceed 30 g/L can cause hyperviscosity: this is 
seen particularly with IgA and IgG3 paraprotein which 
have a tendency to aggregate. The effects of hypervis-
cosity can be ameliorated by plasmapheresis. Spinal cord 
compression requires urgent treatment with dexameth-
asone, followed by radiotherapy; the latter can also be 
helpful when localized bone pain is a problem. Infections 
(often associated with secondary immune deficiency) 
must be treated promptly. The anaemia may respond to 
erythropoietin.
TABLE 30.31  Investigations in myeloma
Investigation
Typical results and their 
significance
Diagnosis (two of these three are required for a diagnosis 
of myeloma)
Serum and urine 
for presence of 
paraprotein
Narrow band on electrophoresis 
shown to be monoclonal by 
immunofixation
Bone marrow 
biopsy
Abnormal number and 
morphology of plasma cells
Skeletal X-ray 
survey
Lytic lesions (punched out 
appearance)
Management and prognosis
Serum calcium
Hypercalcaemia (with normal 
alkaline phosphatase), due to 
bone destruction
Serum creatinine 
and urea
Raised concentrations in renal 
impairment;
a the presence of 
renal impairment is associated 
with a poor prognosis
Serum albumin
Low concentrations associated 
with high tumour burden and 
poor renal function
Full blood count 
and film
Anaemia, rouleaux formation (due 
to hyperviscosity), increased 
background staining (due to 
paraprotein)
Erythrocyte 
sedimentation 
rate (ESR)
High
Non-paraprotein 
immunoglobulins 
in serum
Low concentrations due to 
immune suppression that may 
predispose to infection
Serum 
β2-microglobulin
High concentrations are 
associated with high tumour 
burden and turnover and/or 
renal impairment and a poor 
prognosis
Serum paraprotein 
concentration
Serum free light 
chains
In individual patients, correlates 
with tumour mass so used to 
monitor response to treatment
Particularly useful in non-secretory 
myeloma and amyloid
aCauses of renal impairment include deposition of immunoglobulins 
in the glomeruli, precipitation of light chains causing tubular 
obstruction, amyloid and hypercalcaemia.
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
595
Solitary plasmacytoma
In addition to the disseminated form in multiple my-
eloma, plasma cell tumours may occur as apparently 
solitary lesions in either bone or soft tissue. Paraprotein 
concentrations may be very low and intensive urine 
concentration (×300) may be necessary to reveal small 
traces of BJP. Immunofixation of serum, even in the 
­absence of a visible band on electrophoresis, is also 
worthwhile as the high sensitivity of this technique 
may reveal a low concentration of paraprotein, which 
then acts as a valuable marker. Localized treatment 
by ­surgery or radiotherapy will frequently result in 
disappearance of the paraprotein. Patients should be 
­followed up at three-monthly intervals for the first year, 
six-monthly for the second year and then annually, as 
there is ­always a risk that progression to disseminated 
disease will ­occur and this may take as long as 20 years 
from detection of the solitary tumour. Extramedullary 
deposits may also occur in myeloma, particularly with 
IgD and Bence Jones type.
Waldenström macroglobulinaemia
IgM myeloma is very rare; IgM paraproteins are more 
often seen with a heterogeneous group of lymphoprolif-
erative diseases of the B cell lineage such as Waldenström 
macroglobulinaemia (WM), lymphoma and chronic lym-
phocytic leukaemia. Waldenström macroglobulinaemia 
is characterized by the presence of an IgM paraprotein 
and pleiotropic lymphoid proliferation in the bone mar-
row. It is generally a disease of elderly men. The present-
ing symptoms and laboratory investigations in WM are 
shown in Table  30.32. The malignant cells proliferate 
only slowly and are relatively non-invasive; it tends to 
be the high paraprotein concentration and its effects 
that account for the presenting features. Hyperviscosity 
(responsible for the headaches and visual disturbance) is 
associated with paraprotein concentrations over 30 g/L. 
Bence Jones protein does occur in WM patients but tends 
to be at lower concentrations and less damaging than in 
myeloma.
Lymphomas, chronic lymphocytic leukaemia  
and heavy chain diseases
A paraprotein (most often IgM) is found in 10–20% 
of patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL) and 
5–15% of patients with chronic lymphocytic leukaemia 
(CLL). These tumours arise from cells early in the B cell 
maturation and the monoclonal protein concentration 
is usually low. The tumours are diagnosed by biopsy 
and histological examination of lymphoid tissue and by 
immunophenotyping of blood and lymph node biopsy 
material.
Certain B-lymphoproliferative disorders are asso-
ciated with synthesis of heavy chains or heavy chain 
fragments in the absence of light chain synthesis; most 
often the fragments consist of heavy chains with dele-
tion of the variable and first constant region domain. 
Free heavy chains are more susceptible to enzymatic 
degradation than intact immunoglobulin; they un-
dergo considerable post-synthetic modification and 
migrate in electrophoretic separations as rather dif-
fuse zones, anywhere between the α2 and fast γ zone. 
Low concentrations of the heavy chain paraprotein 
may be missed on examination of the electrophoretic 
separation. The presence of heavy chains can be in-
dicated by immunofixation when reaction with heavy 
chain, but not light chain, antiserum is seen. Identity is 
confirmed by an immunoselection technique whereby 
the serum is electrophoresed through an agarose gel 
layer containing antiserum to light chains where any 
complete immunoglobulin will be trapped; free heavy 
chains pass through the light chain ‘trapping’ layer 
then move into a second layer containing antiserum to 
the appropriate heavy chain (α, γ or μ) and precipitate 
as they travel through this layer to form a ‘rocket’. The 
rocket is usually directly visible but can be stained with 
protein stains if necessary. It is essential that a posi-
tive heavy chain sample and a myeloma protein of the 
same class are included as controls in the heavy chain 
immunoselection technique. Bence Jones protein is 
unusual in α- and γ-chain diseases and is more often 
seen with ­μ-chain disease. Immunosuppression of non-
paraprotein immunoglobulin is frequent in the heavy 
chain diseases.
α-Chain disease represents the most distinct clinical 
entity among the heavy chain diseases. The disease is a 
lymphoma, usually of the gut, and is alternatively known 
as Mediterranean type lymphoma. It is interesting in that 
the initial diffuse infiltration appears benign and com-
plete remission can be achieved in some patients with oral 
antibiotics. However, untreated, the condition progresses 
to frank malignancy. The diagnosis depends on the find-
ing of α-chains in the serum. Gut biopsies show villus 
TABLE 30.32  Clinical features and ­results 
of investigations in Waldenström 
macroglobulinaemia
Clinical feature
% of patients
Weakness and fatigue
41
Hepatosplenomegaly
40
Lymphadenopathy
36
Bleeding tendency
31
Weight loss
18
Neurological
12
Visual disturbances
10
Infection
8
Bone pain and arthralgia
4
Raynaud phenomenon
3
Investigation
Typical results
Serum and urine for 
presence of paraprotein
Narrow band on 
electrophoresis shown 
to be monoclonal on 
immunofixation
Bone marrow biopsy
Increased number of 
lymphocytoid cells
Plasma viscosity
Increased
Lymph node biopsy
Well preserved 
architecture with 
lymphocytoid infiltrate
Haematology investigations
Anaemia, clotting 
disorders, rouleaux 
formation, high ESR
596	
Clinical biochemistry
­atrophy and plasma cell infiltration of the lamina propria. 
Clinical features include a malabsorption syndrome and 
diarrhoea.
γ-Chain disease is not characterized as a distinct clini-
cal entity but has a varied clinical and pathological picture 
ranging from apparently non-malignant proliferation, 
for example systemic lupus erythematosus, to aggressive 
lymphoma. An association with autoimmune diseases has 
been recorded in about 25% of published cases, most fre-
quently with rheumatoid arthritis and autoimmune hae-
molytic anaemia and, in a few cases, malignant NHL that 
was not diagnosed until many years after the autoimmune 
disorder.
μ-Chain disease is extremely rare and most often a 
variant of CLL.
Monoclonal gammopathy of unknown 
­significance (MGUS)
A clearer definition of MGUS is gradually emerging as 
a serum monoclonal protein present at a concentration 
<30 g/L, clonal bone marrow plasma cells <10% and 
no end-organ damage (e.g. hypercalcemia, renal insuffi-
ciency, anaemia or bone lesions). Nevertheless, the finding 
of a paraprotein without any symptoms poses a problem, 
and a relatively frequent one, given that sensitive electro-
phoretic techniques are so readily available and there are 
few constraints on requesting such investigations. Benign 
disease can be indistinguishable from malignant disease 
early in its course. No single feature can help differenti-
ate these two entities, but monoclonal protein concentra-
tion, the presence and degree of any immune suppression 
and the presence of BJP can give some guide. Thus, in 
general, benign disease is seen with serum paraprotein 
concentrations below <10 g/L (not applicable for IgD or 
BJP only): higher concentrations, and particularly values 
>30 g/L, suggest malignancy. Non-paraprotein immu-
noglobulins are suppressed in 75% of myeloma patients 
at presentation. The presence or absence of BJP is the 
most important distinguishing feature; myeloma should 
be considered in any patient with BJP in the urine at a 
concentration of >10 mg/L. The International Myeloma 
Working Group suggests that the measurement of serum 
free light chains can help to stratify patients with MGUS. 
The risk of progression of MGUS to an overt malignancy 
has a cumulative probability of 10% at 10 years (approxi-
mately 1% per year). The follow-up time in patients with 
MGUS should be determined by the clinical findings and 
the patient’s age. A general guide would be to examine 
the paraprotein in serum and urine at three-monthly in-
tervals for the first year, six-monthly for the second year 
and, if no progression occurs, annually thereafter. If any 
other features of B cell malignancy occur, full investiga-
tion is required.
Transient paraproteinaemia
Transient paraproteins are usually small IgG or IgM 
bands (~1–2 g/L); however, they may be >10 g/L. They 
typically occur during infections, often in patients with 
compromised immune systems, for example patients 
with CLL or with iatrogenic immune suppression for 
organ transplantation. Transient paraproteins may per-
sist for over one year but most disappear within a few 
months.
Serum free light chains (SFLC)
Methods for the quantification of serum free light chains 
are now widely available, with more manufacturers pro-
ducing reagents. The assays use antibodies directed 
against the ‘hidden’ epitopes of free light chain molecules 
at the interface between the light and heavy chains of in-
tact immunoglobulins. The general concerns about the 
immunochemical quantification of a monoclonal protein 
are as applicable to SFLC as they are to the quantifica-
tion of intact monoclonal IgG, IgA or IgM. However, 
there are additional concerns about the FLC assays with 
respect to their linearity, performance in external quality 
assurance schemes, reproducibility between laboratories 
and quantification of the proteins. Nevertheless, there is 
clear value to these measurements in patients with light 
chain amyloidosis and in non-secretory myeloma where 
the serum monoclonal protein may be undetectable by 
other methods. They are being used as ’stringent’ criteria 
for remission in some trials investigating new treatment 
regimes in myeloma. There are also publications promot-
ing their use to stratify risk in myeloma, other B cell dys-
crasias and MGUS.
Amyloidosis
Amyloidosis is a heterogeneous group of clinical condi-
tions characterized by the systemic or localized deposi-
tion of fibrils derived from a variety of protein precursors 
and having characteristic histological appearance. It can 
be systemic or localized, and both types can be acquired 
or hereditary (Table  30.33). This table also indicates 
the nature of the deposit and precursor proteins, where 
known. In addition to the precursor proteins, amyloid 
deposits can contain sulphated glycosaminoglycans and 
serum amyloid P component, which is a normal circulat-
ing protein in human plasma.
The tendency for monoclonal immunoglobulin to 
form amyloid fibrils (AL) can occur as a secondary com-
plication of B cell malignancies. Amyloidosis occurs in 
6–15% of patients with myeloma and is more common 
when the major paraprotein is free light chains. When 
amyloid fibrils are found in the absence of myeloma 
(previously classified as primary idiopathic amyloido-
sis), 90% of patients have a demonstrable serum para-
protein or Bence Jones proteinuria, albeit often at low 
concentrations; in addition, there is frequently a degree 
of hypogammaglobulinaemia and a slight increase in 
plasma cells in the bone marrow. Progressive amyloid 
deposition is the most serious clinical complication in 
these patients as they do not tend to progress to overt 
malignancy.
The clinical features of peripheral neuropathy, car-
diomyopathy, purpura, macroglossia and carpal tunnel 
syndrome are similar in both the malignant and benign 
conditions and both have similar age distribution (mean 
55–62  years), with males more frequently affected than 
females.
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
597
While the detection of a serum or urine paraprotein 
is an important finding in AL amyloidosis, the diag-
nosis depends on demonstration of amyloid fibrils in 
biopsy material. Tissue, usually rectal mucosa or ab-
dominal fat, is stained with Congo red: the presence 
of characteristic apple green birefringence under po-
larized light is diagnostic. The National Amyloidosis 
Centre can localize amyloid deposits using gamma 
camera photographs after injection of radiolabelled se-
rum amyloid P material. Increasingly, serum free light 
chain measurements are used to monitor patients but 
other biochemical markers (e.g. the cardiac biomarkers 
troponin-T (cTnT) and N-terminal pro–B-type natri-
uretic peptide (NT-proBNP) in cardiac amyloid) are 
equally important.
INFECTION AND SEPSIS
All bacteria are recognized as foreign and cause inflam-
mation on entry into tissues. This is achieved by various 
mechanisms, many of which are innate. In addition, many 
components of bacteria are able to stimulate inflamma-
tory or immune responses, and some of these are shown 
in Table 30.34.
Infection with a small bacterial load, particularly if 
confined to a local site, will cause cytokine production, 
a controlled inflammatory response and recruitment of 
immune cells. The outcome will be the resolution of 
the infection, the repair of any damage to surround-
ing tissue and wound healing. If the bacterial load is 
greater, the bacteria and/or the cytokine response may 
not be confined and may extend to produce a gener-
alized systemic response. If this is unabated, it will 
eventually lead to septic shock, the condition in which 
vital tissues are inadequately perfused with blood, with 
progressive deterioration of circulation and falling 
blood pressure leading inevitably to death if untreated. 
Because the inflammation progresses through cascades 
of host-mediated reactions, once the inflammatory 
TABLE 30.33  Amyloidosis
 
Disease/association
Fibril
Precursor
Systemic
Acquired
Paraproteinaemia
AL
Monoclonal Ig light chain
 
Chronic inflammation/infection
AA
SAA
 
Haemodialysis
β2M
Raised plasma β2M
 
Senile type
ASc1
Plasma PA
Hereditary
Neuropathic
 
 
 
  Type I (Portuguese, Japanese, Swedish, Jewish)
PA
Plasma PA
 
  Type II (Swiss, German, Indiana-Maryland)
PA
Plasma PA
 
  Type III + nephropathy (Irish, Scottish, English, 
Iowa)
Apolipoprotein A1
 
 
  Type IV (Finnish)
?
 
 
Nephropathic
 
 
 
  Familial Mediterranean fever
AA
SAA
 
  Others (Ostertag, Muckle–Wells)
?
 
 
Cardiomyopathic
PA
Plasma PA
Localized
Acquired
Cerebral (Alzheimer, senile dementia, Down 
syndrome)
B-protein
Precursor encoded on 
chromosome 21
 
Endocrine (APUDomas)
Calcitonin
Calcitonin
 
 
(? others)
 
 
Nodular deposits
AL
Monoclonal Ig light chains
 
Primary cutaneous
?
? Keratin
 
Ocular deposits
?
 
Hereditary
Cerebral
 
 
 
  Icelandic type
Cystatin C
Cystatin C
 
  Dutch type
B-protein
Precursor encoded on 
chromosome 21
 
Cutaneous
?
 
APUD, amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation; ASc1, an amyloid protein derived from prealbumin; β2M, β2-microglobulin; PA, 
­prealbumin; SAA, serum amyloid A protein.
TABLE 30.34  Proinflammatory bacterial 
­components and their modes of action
Component
Mode of action
Carbohydrates in cell 
walls (O-antigen of 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS))
Activation of complement 
via alternative pathway
Endotoxin (Gram - ve 
organisms)
Engage macrophage 
receptors (CD14) to 
induce inflammatory 
cytokine production 
(mainly IL-1, IL-6 and 
TNFα)
Peptidoglycan (Gram + ve 
organisms)
Activate T cells, production 
of immune cytokines
Superantigens, e.g. 
enterotoxin of
Staphylococcus aureus
Exotoxins, e.g. anthrax lethal 
toxin
Enzymic properties induce 
cytokines via various 
mechanisms
598	
Clinical biochemistry
response has been initiated, stopping it becomes in-
creasingly difficult – even removal of the bacteria may 
not affect the outcome.
Diagnosis and monitoring of infections
The diagnosis of infection is based on clinical find-
ings, but microbiological investigation is often required 
to identify the organism responsible and information 
about antibiotic resistance may help guide treatment. 
However, there are situations when the clinical signs of 
infection may be masked, for example in patients who 
are immunosuppressed. In these situations, markers of 
acute phase response and, in particular, measurement of 
C-reactive protein (CRP) concentrations may be use-
ful to give an independent marker of the presence of 
infection or inflammation and to monitor the response 
to treatment.
C-reactive protein and markers of the  
acute phase response
Measurement of the erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
(ESR) is one of the oldest ways of detecting the acute 
phase response. It is still frequently requested but has 
important limitations, including its slow response and 
insensitivity to small changes in disease activity. Plasma 
viscosity measurements have also been used to monitor 
the acute phase response but suffer from the same limita-
tions as the ESR.
C-reactive protein is produced by the liver on stimu-
lation with the inflammatory cytokines IL-6, IL-1 and 
TNFα. There is a rapid increase in CRP concentrations, 
with changes detectable as quickly as 6 h after the inflam-
matory insult, with a half-life of 19 h. C-reactive protein 
is the most widely measured acute phase protein, with 
raised concentrations occurring in both bacterial infec-
tions and inflammation. A raised CRP concentration 
is unequivocal evidence of an inflammatory response. 
However, viral infections do not usually cause a raised 
CRP and neither do some autoimmune diseases, for exam-
ple SLE and scleroderma. Minimal inflammation causes 
a significant increase in CRP concentration but most an-
alytical methods lack the sensitivity to detect this. There 
are also marked variations in quoted reference ranges, 
for example, <0.1 mg/L, <1 mg/L and <10 mg/L. The 
concentration of CRP is related to the extent and sever-
ity of inflammation, with concentrations of 10–40 mg/L 
occurring in mild inflammation, ­40–200 mg/L in acute 
inflammation and bacterial infections, and >300 mg/L 
in extensive trauma and severe sepsis. In patients with 
bacterial infections, daily measurement of CRP may be 
useful to monitor response to treatment. Appropriate 
antibiotic therapy should result in the CRP falling by ap-
proximately 50% every 24 h. If the fall in CRP is slower 
than this, it suggests that the antibiotic regimen may not 
be appropriate. Patients with severe systemic inflamma-
tory responses, for example the critically ill, often have 
infection on top of a marked inflammatory response, 
and in these situations, a fall in CRP of >20% in 24 h 
is consistent with successful treatment of the infection, 
whereas a rise in CRP of >20% in 24 h is consistent with 
a new infection. In chronic inflammatory diseases, for 
example rheumatoid arthritis, a falling CRP concentra-
tion precedes clinical and radiological improvements in 
disease.
Some laboratories are measuring CRP using as-
says with improved sensitivity (0.1–5 mg/L, so-called 
‘highly-sensitive CRP’) for use as a marker of chronic 
low-grade inflammation to predict risk of coronary 
heart disease and progression of unstable angina. The 
combination of high analytical imprecision and high 
bio­logical variation at low concentrations makes this 
difficult in a ‘one-off’ analysis, but if the analytical sys-
tems improve, CRP may become more widely appli-
cable in predicting risk of cardiovascular disease. The 
major clinical applications of CRP measurement are 
shown in Table 30.35.
Procalcitonin (PCT) is a peptide that undergoes 
post-translational proteolysis into the mature hormone 
calcitonin. High plasma PCT concentrations are seen 
in patients with severe bacterial and fungal infections 
but also during the acute phase response post surgery. 
There is considerable interest in the possible use of this 
protein as a marker of acute sepsis, particularly in neo-
nates, but it has not been shown to be clearly superior 
to CRP.
TABLE 30.35  Clinical applications of C-reactive 
protein measurements
Disease category
? Unwell
Raised CRP concentration is 
unequivocal evidence of 
inflammation. Normal CRP 
concentration does not  
exclude significant  
inflammation
Bacterial infection
Major elevations normally seen in 
bacterial infections
Useful to monitor response to 
antibiotic treatment
Viral infections
Only minor elevations seen – 
unless complicated by secondary 
bacterial infection
Fungal infections
Only minor elevations with localized 
infections; marked elevations 
when systemic
Transplantation
Raised concentrations reported 
during organ rejection  
episodes – but also in  
infection
Raised concentrations help to 
distinguish bacterial infections 
from graft-versus-host disease 
(GVHD) in bone marrow
Chronic 
inflammatory 
states
Raised concentrations in many 
inflammatory conditions, 
therefore diagnostically  
useful
Useful to monitor disease 
progression and treatment (RA 
particularly)
Useful to detect intercurrent infection 
(SLE particularly)
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
599
TRANSPLANTATION
Transplantation of organs or tissues is a complex proce-
dure undertaken to restore a damaged or missing func-
tion, or to replace a lost, removed or absent ‘tissue’. 
Transplants may be autologous (within same person, 
e.g. stem cell transplant post-chemotherapy), syngeneic 
(identical genetics, i.e. from a twin) or allogeneic (from 
a different person). Table 30.36 shows the major types 
of transplantation currently performed in the UK, and 
some of the requirements applicable to each type of 
transplant. (General information about transplantation 
can be found at: www.histocompatibilityandimmunoge-
netics.com)
Immunological issues in transplantation include re-
jection due to the graft being recognized by the immune 
system as foreign, graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) and 
infection secondary to the immune suppression required 
to prevent or control rejection or GvHD (see Box 30.4). 
The key issue, however, remains rejection of the graft. 
This can happen by three different mechanisms, shown 
in Box 30.5. The risk of rejection or GvHD can be re-
duced by matching the donor and recipient for ABO 
blood group and HLA type. This is particularly impor-
tant for renal and stem cell transplants. A longer-term 
complication of modulating the immune system to ac-
commodate transplanted tissue is an increased risk of 
malignancy.
Organ transplantation
Patients waiting for an organ transplant are registered, 
together with their HLA type, on a waiting list. As 
potential donors become available their HLA type is 
compared with those of the patients on the waiting list. 
Potential donor–recipient matches need to be further in-
vestigated using a specific test of the reactivity of the re-
cipient’s serum against the donor. This is particularly to 
check whether the recipient has any pre-formed antibod-
ies to the donor that could cause hyperacute rejection. 
Transplant patients usually need long-term immunosup-
pression to prevent graft rejection; the most ­common 
immunosuppressants with their modes of action are 
shown in Table 30.37.
TABLE 30.36  Organ transplantation in the UK, 
April 2011–March 2012
Organ/tissue
Number in UK
Kidney
2801
Heart/lung
321
Liver
791
Pancreas
249
Cornea
3520
Intestine
22
Stem cell transplantation (prepared 
from peripheral blood, umbilical cord 
or bone marrow)
Not available
Taken from NHS Blood and Transplant Activity Report 2011–2012: 
www.organdonation.nhs.uk
BOX 30.4	
Immunological complications of 
transplantation
1.	 Rejection: controlled by HLA and blood group match-
ing and immunosuppression. For ‘solid’ organ transplan-
tation, the aim is to prevent the recipient immune system 
from attacking the transplanted organ. With stem cell 
transplantation, the recipient’s immune system will have 
been destroyed by conditioning, thus reducing the risk of 
rejection.
2.	 Graft versus Host Disease (GvHD): the main cause of 
morbidity and mortality post-stem cell transplantation. 
Donor immune cells attack the recipient, particularly in 
the skin, gut and liver. The severity depends on the de-
gree of HLA matching but the risk is reduced by T cell 
depletion of the stem cell preparation before infusion 
into the donor. Some T cells may have a graft versus leu-
kaemia (GvL) effect, which can be beneficial.
3.	 Infection 
secondary 
to 
immune 
suppression: 
Suppressing the immune system to prevent rejection or 
GvHD increases the risk of infection. Suspected infec-
tions must be treated promptly with broad spectrum 
antibiotics, antiviral or antifungal drugs. In stem cell 
transplantation, conditioning causes profound myelosup-
pression, so cell counts, particularly of neutrophils and 
platelets, are monitored closely as immune reconstitution 
by the donor stem cells takes place. Additional infection 
control measures are used, including nursing the patient 
in air-filtered isolation room and providing specially ster-
ilized food until the neutrophil count is >0.5 × 10
9 cells/L. 
Prophylactic antibiotics, antivirals and anti-fungals may 
also be used to minimize the risk of infection with organ-
isms such cytomegalovirus (CMV), Epstein–Barr virus 
(EBV), adenovirus, Candida and Aspergillus.
BOX 30.5	
Types of rejection
•	 Hyperacute rejection: this is caused by the recipient 
having pre-formed antibodies to the donor’s cells. This 
can be due to previous blood transfusion, multiple preg-
nancies or transplantation and the antibodies can be to 
blood group or HLA antigens. The antibodies bind to 
their antigenic target in the graft blood vessels as the graft 
is perfused by the recipient’s blood. This activates the 
complement cascade, damages the blood vessels, activates 
platelets and causes blockage of the graft microvascula-
ture, resulting in graft failure in minutes to hours. The 
risk can be minimized by HLA typing and pre-transplant 
cross-matching.
•	 Acute rejection: this is caused by recipient T cells rec-
ognizing donor antigen presented by antigen-presenting 
cells in the draining lymph nodes of the graft. The T cells 
attack the graft, resulting in graft failure within days–
weeks. Production of anti-donor antibodies may also be a 
consequence of this process compounding the damage by 
an antibody-mediated response. Compatible HLA typing 
minimizes the risk of acute rejection but the immune sup-
pression is focused on preventing it.
•	 Chronic rejection: the cause is poorly understood but 
there is gradual (over months to years) occlusion of blood 
vessels resulting in local tissue necrosis and ­ultimately 
graft rejection. Cellular and antibody mechanisms are 
both thought to contribute.
600	
Clinical biochemistry
Stem cell transplantation
This is the re-population of the bone marrow to res-
cue and restore an immune system ablated as a result 
of high dose chemo- or radiotherapy or to treat ge-
netic diseases. Stem cells are undifferentiated cells that 
are capable of self-renewal and differentiation into 
more specialized cells. Stem cells can be harvested for 
transplant from cord blood or bone marrow but are 
now most commonly obtained from peripheral blood 
(see Table 30.38). The relative ease with which stem 
cells can be collected from peripheral blood and safely 
stored has made autologous (from the patient) periph-
eral blood stem cell transplant (PBSCT) a common 
‘rescue’ treatment following high dose chemotherapy, 
e.g. for malignancy. Allogeneic (from a donor) stem 
cell transplants may be required to treat haematologi-
cal malignancies, e.g. leukaemias, and bone marrow 
disorders such as thalassaemias, aplastic anaemia and 
severe combined immunodeficiency.
There are registers for people willing to be bone 
marrow or stem cell donors, which contain details of 
their HLA types. When a patient requires an allogeneic 
stem cell transplant (and a suitable family member is 
not available), their HLA type is used to search donor 
databases to try to find an appropriate match. If a do-
nor is identified, their HLA type is double-checked and 
the potential recipient’s sample cross-matched with the 
potential donor. The transplant typically involves ‘con-
ditioning’ with chemotherapy or radiotherapy to eradi-
cate disease (depending on the reason for transplant) 
and the recipient’s functioning bone marrow. The 
donor stem cells are infused like a blood transfusion; 
they ‘home in’ to the bone marrow where they start 
to develop and multiply. The patients are immuno-
suppressed to prevent rejection and GvHD. The main 
immunological complications of PBSCT are shown in 
Box 30.5.
CONCLUSION
The immune system is complex and the diseases as-
sociated with abnormalities of the immune system can 
affect almost every part of the body. The common 
symptoms where the immune system is involved are 
shown in Table  30.39, together with the appropriate 
investigations and relevant disease. The list is not ex-
haustive but covers the most important immunological 
investigations.
TABLE 30.37  Major immunosuppressive drugs and their actions
Drug
Action
Comments
Ciclosporin A
Inhibits T cell activation
Nephrotoxic, so minimize use in renal 
transplant
Serum concentrations monitored
Tacrolimus (FK506)
Inhibits T cell activation
Nephrotoxic, so minimize use in renal 
transplant
Serum concentrations monitored
Sirolimus (rapamycin)
Inhibits cell proliferation by blocking cell cycle
 
Steroids
Suppress expression of inflammatory genes, 
e.g. cytokines
 
Azathioprine
Purine analogue that inhibits proliferation
 
Mycophenolate mofetil (MMF)
Inhibits proliferation by targeting inosine 
monophosphate dehydrogenase
 
TABLE 30.38  Sources of stem cells
Source of stem 
cells
Cord blood
Peripheral blood
Bone marrow
Preparation
None
GCSF is used to mobilize stem cells 
from bone marrow into blood – 
small risk of malignancy
None
Collection
Painless; would be wasted 
otherwise
Minimal discomfort; no hospital 
stay or anaesthesia
Painful collection
Requires hospital admission
General anaesthesia
Storage
Can be stored, so readily 
available when required
Collected on day of transplant, so 
requires coordination
Collected on day of transplant, 
so requires coordination
Yield (CD34+ 
cells/kg)
Approx. 0.5–1 × 10
6
Approx. 7 × 10
6
Approx. 2–3 × 10
6
Function
Does not confer immunity as 
immunologically naive – 
reduced risk of GvHD but lack 
of GvL
Can confer immunity
Can confer immunity
GCSF, granulocyte colony stimulating factor; GvHD, graft-versus-host disease; GvL, graft-versus-leukaemia.
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
601
Further reading
The following texts provide good accounts of more specialized areas of 
immunology.
Dimopoulos M, Kyle R, Fermand J-P et al. Consensus recommendations 
for standard investigative workup: report of the International 
Myeloma Workshop Consensus Panel 3. Blood 2011;117:4701–5.
Gahrton G, Durie BGM, Samsom DM, editors. Multiple myeloma and 
related disorders. London: Arnold; 2004.
Gompels MM, Lock RJ, Abinum M et  al. C1 inhibitor deficiency: 
consensus document. Clin Exp Immunol 2005;139:379–94.
Graziani M, Merlini G, Petrini C. Guidelines for the analysis of Bence 
Jones protein. Clin Chem Lab Med 2003;41:338–46.
International Union of Immunological Societies Expert Committee 
on Primary Immunodeficiencies. Primary immunodeficiencies: 2009 
update. J Allergy Clin Immunol 2009;124:1161–78.
Keren DF. Protein electrophoresis in clinical diagnosis. London: 
Arnold; 2003.
TABLE 30.39  Clinical features and investigations in immunological diseases
Organ or clinical feature
Investigation(s)
Disease, pathological process or comments
Recurrent infections
Immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA and IgM)
Primary immune deficiency, e.g. common 
variable immunodeficiency (CVID)
Secondary immune deficiency, e.g. B cell 
malignancy (+ urine for BJP)
CRP
To support diagnosis and monitor response 
to treatment
Complement (CH50)
Complement deficiency – Neisserial 
infections, meningitis
Liver
α1-Antitrypsin
α1-Antitrypsin deficiency (especially in 
neonates)
Antinuclear antibodies
Autoimmune hepatitis
Smooth muscle antibodies
Autoimmune hepatitis
Mitochondrial antibodies
Primary biliary cirrhosis (M2 variant, IgM 
concentrations usually raised)
Kidney
Antinuclear antibodies
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Antinuclear cytoplasmic antibodies
Vasculitis
Glomerular basement membrane antibodies
Goodpasture syndrome (GBM disease)
Serum immunoglobulins and serum and urine 
electrophoresis
B cell malignancy (with renal damage due to 
AL amyloid, cast formation etc.)
Cryoglobulins
Immune complex deposition in the kidneys 
causing renal impairment
C3 and C4
Immune complex disease and nephritis (SLE, 
cryoproteins etc.)
Respiratory system
Total and specific IgE
Allergy
Antinuclear cytoplasmic antibodies
Vasculitis
GBM antibodies
Goodpasture syndrome (GBM disease)
α1-Antitrypsin
COPD
Anaphylaxis
Serum tryptase
Type I hypersensitivity
Total and specific IgE
Allergy
C1 esterase inhibitor, C3 and C4
Hereditary angioedema
Skin
Antibodies to skin basement membrane and 
intercellular cement
Pemphigus and pemphigoid
Cryoglobulins (with serum and urine paraprotein 
studies)
Deposition of cryoproteins in the skin 
because of their precipitation in the cold
Deposition of immune complexes in the skin 
causing vasculitis
C1 esterase inhibitor, C3 and C4
Hereditary angioedema
Urticaria
Antinuclear antibody
SLE
Systemic sclerosis
Total and specific IgE
Allergy
Gut
Total and specific IgE
Food allergy
C1 esterase inhibitor, C3 and C4
Hereditary angioedema
Immunoglobulins (IgG, IgA and IgM)
Immune deficiency
Endomysial antibodies (or anti-tissue 
transglutaminase antibodies)
Coeliac disease
Bone and joint pain
Serum and urine paraprotein studies
Myeloma
Rheumatoid factor
Rheumatoid arthritis (CRP for monitoring)
Anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP) antibodies
Earlier predictor of rheumatoid arthritis
Antinuclear antibodies
SLE
Thyroid
Anti-thyroid peroxidase antibodies
Present in autoimmune hypothyroidism
TSH receptor antibodies
Present in Graves disease
Pancreas
Glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies
Present in type I diabetes
Islet cell antibodies
Present in type I diabetes
Anaemia
Serum and urine paraprotein studies
Myeloma
Endomysial antibodies (or anti-tissue 
transglutaminase antibodies)
Coeliac disease
Gastric parietal cell antibodies and intrinsic factor 
antibodies
Pernicious anaemia
602	
Clinical biochemistry
Milford Ward A, Sheldon J, Rowbottom A et al. editors. PRU handbook 
of clinical immunochemistry. 9th ed. Sheffield: PRU Publishing; 
2007.
Milford Ward A, Sheldon J, Wild DG, editors. PRU handbook of 
autoimmunity. 10th ed. Sheffield: PRU Publishing; 2007.
Morgan BP. Complement. In: Collier L, Balows A, Sussman M, editors. 
10th ed. Topley and Wilson’s microbiology and microbial infections, 
vol. 3. London: Hodder Arnold; 2004. p. 1–23.
Mygind N, Dahl R, Pedersen S et al. editors. Essential allergy. 2nd ed. 
Oxford: Blackwell Scientific; 1996.
Peakman M, Vergani D. Basic and clinical immunology. 2nd 
ed.Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 2008. 
An excellent textbook of immunology that will give a good foundation to 
the subject.
Rich R, Fleisher TA, Shearer WT et al. editors. Clinical immunology: 
principles and practice. In: 3rd ed. London: Mosby; 2008.
A comprehensive account of the subject at postgraduate level.
Rose NR, Mackay IR. The autoimmune diseases. London: Academic 
Press; 1998.
Spickett G. Oxford handbook of clinical immunology. 3rd ed. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press; 2013. 
An up-to-date ‘ready reference’ summary.
APPENDIX 30.1: IMMUNOLOGICAL  
INVESTIGATIONS
Quantitative assays should be calibrated against available 
international reference preparations; be sensitive, specific, 
precise and where available, validated by adequate perfor-
mance in external quality assurance (QA) schemes. It is 
important to mention these factors because there is a trend 
towards moving immunoglobulins and complement mea-
surements from dedicated immunoassay analysers to main 
clinical chemistry analysers and we must not compromise 
our ability to detect immune deficiencies or the overall 
quality of the assays by losing precision and sensitivity. It is 
also worth remembering that babies and children will be a 
group of patients often investigated for immune deficiency 
and saving any ‘left-over’ samples for further analysis can be 
very useful.
Quantification of total immunoglobulin 
concentrations
Methods for the quantification of serum IgG, IgA and 
IgM concentrations are readily available. Quantification 
of serum immunoglobulin concentrations should be ac-
companied by serum protein electrophoresis and, in 
adults, by urine protein electrophoresis.
There is marked variation in immunoglobulin concen-
trations with age, and results must be interpreted using 
appropriate age-related reference ranges and the poten-
tial impact of transfusion of any blood products, maternal 
IgG and prematurity.
IgG subclasses
The IgG1 and IgG3 subclass concentrations mature first, 
with IgG2 and IgG4 concentrations maturing more slowly. 
There is considerable debate among immunologists about 
the value of IgG subclass measurements. It is likely that 
many IgG subclass requests are of negligible value; e.g. a 
patient with a low total serum IgG will have low IgG con-
centrations of subclasses. There may be a small number of 
patients where the subclass measurements may be useful 
but increasingly, quantitative specific antibody responses 
are being used.
Quantification of specific antibody responses
These assays quantify the antigen-specific IgG. Ideally, 
every individual should be vaccinated against tetanus and 
should have measurable IgG concentrations to ­tetanus. 
There are assays for IgG to Haemophilus ­influenza B, 
Pneumococcus and tetanus but the assays can be vari-
able and the external QA programmes show marked 
variability in performance. Analysis of pre- and post-­
vaccination samples helps to limit the effect of inter-
assay ­variability. Patients with a low specific antibody 
concentration should be re-vaccinated and the con-
centrations re-checked 4–6 weeks later. Unfortunately, 
antibody production and concentration are not neces-
sarily good correlates of immunological protection so 
the interpretation of the results needs particular care.
Quantification of IgE
Reliable assays for IgE are becoming increasingly avail-
able on immunoassay analysers. It is interesting to note 
that in the investigation of immune deficiency (e.g. hy-
per IgE syndrome), immunologists now tend to look for 
raised IgE concentrations (into many thousands of kU/L) 
rather than low concentrations.
Complement
It is possible to quantify all the complement compo-
nents but only C3 and C4 assays are readily available. 
Concentrations of other proteins, e.g. C1 esterase inhibi-
tor can be easily measured but tend only to be available in 
more specialized centres. The functional assays are also 
vital in the investigation of immune deficiencies; these 
are variations on total haemolytic complement assays (for 
the classical and alternative pathways).
Enumeration of cell numbers
The total white cell count and differential is a vital inves-
tigation that will include total lymphocyte count and total 
neutrophil count but it cannot, for example, distinguish T 
lymphocytes from B lymphocytes. The various white cell 
types can be defined using flow cytometric assays that look 
at the size and granularity of the cells and the binding of 
fluorescent conjugated antibodies to the cell surface mark-
ers. The assays are usually done in immunology or haema-
tology departments. Table  30.3 shows the common CD 
antigens, many of which are used in the investigation of sus-
pected immune deficiency. Reference ranges are age-related 
and the results reported as either percentages or as absolute 
numbers.
Functional assays
There are immune deficiencies, where the various cell 
types are present but they lack any functional ability. Assays 
of lymphocyte function are laborious and complex and 
	
30  Immunology for clinical biochemists	
603
typically rely on the proliferation of cells after stimulation 
with mitogens, antigens or stimulation via specific recep-
tors. These assays are often run over 3–5  days, so need 
careful planning, and the interpretation of the results needs 
great expertise, therefore they are only done in specialized 
centres.
Neutrophil function tests
Neutrophil functions tests are also complex and like lym-
phocyte function tests, the cells need to be alive for them 
to work. The most common analysis is for detection of 
the neutrophil respiratory burst, either by a flow cyto-
metric assay (using dihydrorhodamine) or by looking at 
neutrophils under the microscope after being incubated 
with the redox dye, nitroblue tetrazolium.
Autoantibodies
The analytical problems with autoantibody testing are 
many and include the source, type and preparation of 
antigen, the method used and variation between each pa-
tient’s antibodies. Autoimmune serology, in comparison 
with general clinical biochemistry, is poorly standardized 
and this is compounded by large numbers of companies 
producing kit reagents for these tests. External quality 
assurance schemes are in place but they can make scary 
reading for a laboratory scientist!
604
C H A P T E R  3 1
Metabolic bone disease
Timothy Cundy  •  Ian R. Reid  • Andrew Grey
CHAPTER OUTLINE
BONE BIOLOGY  604
Anatomy of bone  604
Bone matrix proteins  605
Cellular elements of bone  607
Biochemical markers of bone turnover  609
OSTEOPOROSIS  613
Causes of osteoporosis  614
Investigation and diagnosis  615
Treatment  617
OSTEOMALACIA  620
Calciopenic osteomalacia  620
Phosphopenic osteomalacia  622
Osteomalacia and acidosis  623
Defective osteoblast function and 
osteomalacia  623
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE – MINERAL AND 
BONE DISORDER  624
Aetiology  624
Clinical features  625
Investigations  625
Treatment  627
Bone disease after renal transplantation  628
BONE DISEASE IN PRIMARY 
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM  628
Clinical, biochemical and histological 
features  628
Treatment  629
PAGET DISEASE OF BONE  629
Epidemiology  629
Aetiology  629
Natural history  629
Pathology  630
Clinical features  630
Investigations  630
Responses to treatment  631
BONE TURNOVER AND BONE DISEASE  
IN CHILDREN  632
GENETIC BONE DISEASES  632
Osteogenesis imperfecta  632
High bone mass  634
Other disorders  634
CONCLUSION  634
APPENDICES  635
BONE BIOLOGY
The principal role of the skeleton is a structural one, 
maintaining body shape, providing protection for inter-
nal organs and, together with the neuromuscular system, 
making locomotion possible. It also has an important 
secondary role in mineral homoeostasis, functioning as 
a reservoir for calcium ions in particular. Metabolic bone 
diseases can affect both these functions.
Anatomy of bone
Macroscopic
The anatomist classifies bones as being either flat (e.g. 
skull, scapula, mandible, ilium) or long (e.g. the limb 
bones). Flat bones result from intramembranous ossifi-
cation; long bones predominantly from endochondral 
ossification. A long bone consists of a shaft (diaphysis) 
broadening at either end into an epiphysis. The transi-
tional zone between the diaphysis and the epiphysis is 
termed the metaphysis. On sectioning a long bone, two 
patterns of organization of bone tissue are found. The 
elements of bone can be packed together without inter-
vening marrow spaces to form cortical or compact bone, 
or they can form an interlacing meshwork of trabeculae 
referred to as cancellous or trabecular bone. The diaph-
ysis of the long bone consists mainly of cortical bone, 
whereas the metaphysis and epiphysis have a greater 
quantity of trabecular bone, enclosed within a thin corti-
cal envelope. Some 80% of the weight of an adult human 
skeleton consists of cortical bone. However, the surface-
to-volume ratio of trabecular bone is very much higher 
than that of cortical bone and it is metabolically much 
more active.
Microscopic
At a microscopic level, bone consists of matrix (~35% by 
volume), mineral (~60%) and cells (<5%). The matrix is 
predominantly type I collagen fibres, usually organized 
in layers within which the fibres are parallel to one an-
other. In adult bone, the fibre orientation varies from 
one layer to the next and this is referred to as lamellar 
bone. If deposited along a flat surface, the lamellae will 
be parallel to that surface, but in cortical bone they are 
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
605
concentrically oriented around a central blood vessel to 
form the Haversian canal system. When bone formation 
is rapid (e.g. during growth or fracture healing) collagen 
fibres may be laid down with more random orientation, 
producing woven bone.
The mineral phase of bone is hydroxyapatite 
(Ca10(PO4)6 (OH)2). This forms spindle-shaped crystals, 
which are found in association with the collagen and 
ground substance. Their orientation is usually parallel to 
that of the collagen fibres.
There are two general cell types in bone: osteoblasts 
and osteoclasts. Both are found on the bone surface at 
sites of active remodelling. Osteoblasts are also thought 
to be the precursor of two cells types that are more wide-
spread: bone lining cells, which are found over inactive 
bone surfaces, and osteocytes, which are found in lacunae 
scattered throughout bone. They are thought to be os-
teoblasts that have been engulfed by the bone that they 
have formed. They have long cell processes, which are in 
contact with similar processes arising from other osteo-
cytes or with those of the bone lining cells. The cell pro-
cesses lie in an interconnecting network of canaliculi that 
extends throughout bone tissue. The bone lining cells 
and osteocytes thus delineate an extracellular fluid (ECF) 
space that is in contact with the bone surface. This space 
has a volume of 1–1.5 L and a surface area of several thou-
sand square metres. This is the site of mineral exchange 
between ECF and bone. The size and nature of this ex-
change is unknown but the fluid within this space, the 
bone ECF, has an ionized calcium concentration of only 
0.5 mmol/L – less than half of that elsewhere in the ECF.
Bone matrix proteins
Collagen
Almost 90% of the protein in bone matrix is type I 
­collagen, which is synthesized by osteoblasts. It is a large 
molecule (MW >300 000 Da) with a trimeric helical 
structure. Type I collagen is initially synthesized in the 
rough endoplasmic reticulum (RER) as a precursor mol-
ecule (type I procollagen) that combines two proα1(I) 
and one proα2(I) peptide chains (coded by COL1A1 and 
COL1A2, respectively) in a triple helix. Proα1(I) and 
proα2(I) have similar structures with a core triple heli-
cal domain of 1014 amino acids composed of uninter-
rupted ­Gly-X-Y tripeptide repeats, where Gly is glycine 
and X and Y are often proline or lysine, flanked by pro-
peptides at both N- and C-terminal ends. During and 
after translation, the three chains undergo extensive 
modification. ­Prolyl-4-hydroxylase converts virtually 
all Y-position proline residues to 4-hydroxyproline, an 
alteration that is essential for thermal stability of the as-
sembled trimer. In the absence of this modification the 
trimer melts (that is the individual chains unfold from 
the stable triple helix, at about 27°C, whereas with 
full hydroxylation, the melting temperature is about 
42°C). Some Y-position lysine residues within the triple 
­helical domain are hydroxylated by the enzyme lysyl 
­hydroxylase-1, and glucose and galactose groups added 
by glycosyltransferases (Fig.  31.1). Hydroxylation of 
these triple helical residues is part of the pathway to form 
stable complex intermolecular crosslinks that provide the 
tensile strength in tissues. Most of these modifications 
are completed during translation and occur on the in-
dividual chains. If there is a delay in triple helix ­folding, 
the process can continue and the physical properties of 
the chains and molecules are altered and contribute to an 
osteogenesis imperfecta phenotype.
The three chains that form a [proα1(I)2 proα2(I)] trimer 
interact through regions in the carboxyl-terminal propep-
tide of each chain. The full length chain must be main-
tained in an unfolded state while the carboxyl-­terminal 
propeptides fold, associate, and then begin the process of 
triple helix formation. Propagation of the collagen triple 
helix requires a number of enzymes and molecular chaper-
ones to ensure correct folding and trimerization. These in-
clude peptidyl disulfide isomerase (PDI), which also forms 
part of the prolyl 4-hydroxylase complex, and is likely to 
involve prolyl peptidyl cis-trans isomerase B (also known 
as cyclophilin B). This protein can act on its own, to assist 
in the folding around prolyl residues, such as those in the 
carboxyl-terminal propeptide adjacent to cysteine residues, 
and as part of a complex that includes two additional pro-
teins, cartilage-related protein and prolyl 3-hydroxylase, to 
modify certain triple helical prolines. The function of this 
last process is not yet entirely clear but when the complex 
is missing, the propagation of the triple helix is altered and 
modification of the chains increased.
Disulphide bonds between the carboxyl-terminal re-
gion of the chains act to secure the three chains in a tri-
mer, a process requiring protein-disulphide isomerase. 
Lysine residues outside the major triple helical domain 
of type I collagen, needed for the formation of mature 
intermolecular crosslinks, are hydroxylated by lysyl 
­hydroxylase-2. These complex modifications, which are 
necessary for correct folding, assuring thermal stability 
of the triple helix and crosslink formation between col-
lagen molecules once they are secreted into the matrix, 
need to take place in an orderly and timely sequence, 
and various chaperone proteins, including HSP47 and 
FKBP65, help regulate this process. Procollagen trimers 
are then transported via the Golgi network and pack-
aged into membrane-bound organelles where lateral ag-
gregation, the initial phase of fibril formation, occurs. As 
secretion occurs, the procollagen molecules are further 
processed into mature type I collagen molecules by pro-
teolytic cleavage of the N- and C-terminal propeptides 
(by the enzymes ADAMTS-2 (a disintegrin and metal-
loproteinase with thrombospondin motifs 2) and BMP1 
(bone morphogenetic protein 1), respectively). Finally, 
the trimers are assembled into collagen fibrils and fi-
bres and anchored in those positions by intermolecular 
lysine-derived crosslinks in a process that is begun by 
modification of specific residues by lysyl oxidase. These 
cross-links are initially reducible, but as tissue matura-
tion proceeds, they are converted into non-reducible 
compounds including hydroxylysylpyridinoline (derived 
from three hydroxylysine residues) and the less abundant 
lysylpyridinoline (derived from two hydroxylysine resi-
dues and one lysine residue). The latter (also known as 
deoxypyridinoline) is present in the body almost exclu-
sively in bone tissue and dentine, where it accounts for 
21% of the total mature cross-links.
606	
Clinical biochemistry
Non-collagenous proteins
The non-collagenous proteins of bone (proteoglycans, 
glycosylated proteins, RGD (arg-gly-asp)-containing 
glycoproteins and γ-carboxylated proteins) account for 
only 10–15% of bone protein mass but, because of their 
very much smaller size, are as common as collagen in 
bone on a molar basis. Most are synthesized by osteo-
blasts, but a number are produced elsewhere in the body 
and arrive in bone via the circulation. The latter proteins, 
which include albumin and platelet-derived growth fac-
tor, are usually negatively charged and become bound to 
hydroxyapatite. The most abundant of the bone-derived 
non-collagenous proteins are osteocalcin, also known as 
bone Gla-protein, and osteonectin, both of which have a 
high affinity for bone mineral.
Osteocalcin is synthesized by osteoblasts as a 75-amino 
acid precursor known as pro-osteocalcin. The amino-
terminal propeptide includes the substrate recognition 
site for the vitamin K-dependent γ-carboxylase enzyme 
which γ-carboxylates three glutamic acid residues (17, 
21 and 24) in the central region of the osteocalcin mol-
ecule, following which the amino-terminal propeptide 
is cleaved, leaving the 49-residue osteocalcin molecule. 
The γ-carboxyglutamic acid residues are strongly calcium 
binding and allow the molecule to bind to hydroxyapa-
tite. The process of γ-carboxylation seems to be impaired 
in the elderly.
The physiological role of osteocalcin is uncertain, 
but it probably contributes to the regulation of bone re-
modelling, since deletion of the osteocalcin gene in mice 
leads to increased bone density. Its synthesis is regulated 
by 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D, calcitriol) and 
cortisol, and it is incorporated into bone matrix, being 
especially abundant in cortical bone.
Recently, its uncarboxylated form has been implicated 
in the regulation of intermediary metabolism, including 
fat mass, glucose tolerance and insulin secretion. The rel-
evance to human physiology of these findings in geneti-
cally modified mice remains to be determined.
Other bone proteins
Several proteoglycans, macromolecules that contain 
acidic polysaccharide side chains, are present in bone. In 
the early stages of bone formation, versican, a dermatan 
sulphate proteoglycan, and the glycosaminoglycan, hyal-
uronan, are present and may act to delineate areas that are 
destined to become bone. Subsequently, two chondroitin 
Procollagen molecule
Collagen molecule
N-terminal
propeptide
C-terminal
propeptide
Glc
s-s
s-s
HO
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
OH
HO
HO
HO
s-s
s-s
s-s
s-s
s
s
-
s
s
-
s
s
-
s
s
-
s-s
s-s
s-s
s-s
s-s
Globular
domain
Triple-helical domain
Triple-helical domain
(20nm)
(150nm)
(3000 nm)
(100 nm)
(100 nm)
(Man)n
GlcNac
(Man)n
GlcNac
(15 nm)
Nontriple-helical
domain
Gly
Nontriple-helical domain
Nontriple-helical
domain
Gal
Gal
Glc
Gal
Gal
s-s
s-s
s-s
s-s
s-s
s-s
s-s
FIGURE 31.1  ■ Type I collagen synthesis. Upper panel: schematic representation of the structure of the procollagen molecule, showing 
cleavage of the amino and carboxy terminal peptides. Glc, glucose; Gal, galactose; Man, mannose; GlcNac, N-acetylglucosamine. 
Lower panel: view along the axis of the triple helical structure of the collagen backbone, with every third amino acid a glycine residue 
forming the inner circle.
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
607
sulfate proteoglycans, decorin and biglycan, are expressed 
and may influence cellular proliferation and differentia-
tion in the newly forming bone. Fibromodulin, osteogly-
cin and osteoadherin are other proteoglycans that are 
expressed in bone matrix, but their functions are less well 
characterized.
The major glycoproteins present in bone are alkaline 
phosphatase (ALP), which is highly expressed on the 
osteoblast cell surface, and osteonectin, a phosphory-
lated glycoprotein that is also present in several other 
tissues that undergo rapid remodelling. In bone, osteo-
nectin may regulate both cellular activity and matrix 
mineralization.
At least eight non-collagenous glycoproteins expressed 
in bone contain the arginyl-glycyl-aspartate (RGD) 
tripeptide as the consensus cell-attachment sequence 
(Table 31.1). Some are specific to bone (e.g. bone sialo-
protein), but most are more ubiquitously expressed (e.g. 
fibronectin, osteopontin, thrombospondins, vitronectin). 
Although the role(s) of each individual protein in skeletal 
physiology is(are) uncertain, it seems very likely that they 
collectively serve to promote attachment of bone cells to 
bone matrix (and perhaps thereby regulate their func-
tion). The components of the matrix–cell interactions are 
clearly dependent upon the maturational stage of the re-
modelled bone. Three matrix non-collagenous proteins, 
matrix Gla-protein, protein S and osteocalcin (bone Gla-
protein), undergo post-translational γ-carboxylation, a 
process that enhances calcium binding. These proteins 
may function physiologically as inhibitors of mineral 
deposition.
Cellular elements of bone
Osteoblasts
Osteoblasts are the cells responsible for the synthesis and 
maintenance of bone matrix. They are derived from plu-
ripotent mesenchymal progenitor cells that also give rise 
to adipocytes, chondrocytes and myocytes. Expression 
of the transcription factors cbfa1 and osterix is critical for 
commitment to the osteoblast lineage, while expression of 
peroxisome proliferation activating receptor-γ (PPAR-γ) 
favours adipocytic over osteoblastic differentiation.
A key molecular event in osteoblast proliferation, 
and perhaps survival, is signalling through the wnt-low 
density lipoprotein-related receptor 5 (LRP5)-β-catenin 
pathway. In this system, secreted wnt proteins bind to and 
activate LRP5 on the cell surface, which in turn activates 
a series of intracellular events that result in translocation 
of cytoplasmic β-catenin to the nucleus, where it activates 
transcription of genes critical for osteoblast growth and 
function. The pathway is further regulated by secreted 
proteins that inhibit wnt-induced activation of LRP5, 
such as sclerostin, Dickkopf (DKK) and frizzled. Thus, 
humans carrying mutations of components of this sig-
nalling pathway that decrease nuclear translocation of 
β-catenin have decreased bone mass and fractures as a 
result of impaired bone formation (e.g. WNT1 and most 
LRP5 ­mutations), while constitutive activation of the 
pathway (e.g. LRP5 mutations affecting one particular 
­extracellular domain or SOST mutations) increases bone 
mass. Other LRP family members are also important in 
bone physiology. Mutations affecting one particular region 
of the extracellular domain of LRP4 result in impairment 
of the ability of sclerostin to inhibit bone formation, and 
thereby cause increased bone mass (sclerosteosis type 2).
Mature osteoblasts are metabolically very active and 
intimately involved in bone formation. They synthesize 
many of the matrix proteins referred to above. They have 
very high levels of alkaline phosphatase (ALP) activity 
associated with their cell membranes. This enzyme is 
necessary for normal bone mineralization to take place. 
Osteoblasts express receptors for parathyroid hormone 
(PTH) and 1,25(OH)2D, as well as a number of cyto-
kines, growth factors and sex hormones. Osteoblasts also 
play a key role in regulating osteoclastic bone resorption, 
ensuring that the components of bone remodelling, for-
mation and resorption are coupled. A critical mechanism 
by which osteoblasts regulate bone resorption is via the 
RANK–RANKL–OPG system (see below).
Osteocytes
Osteocytes and bone lining cells are terminally differ-
entiated osteoblasts derived from mature osteoblasts 
that are no longer involved in active bone formation, 
and have become entrapped within the canaliculi of the 
bone matrix that they have produced. This process of 
osteocytogenesis is probably an active one, requiring 
cleavage of matrix proteins: mutations of the metallo-
proteinase MT1-MMP lead to osteocytes with fewer 
and shorter dendritic processes. As osteocytogenesis 
occurs, the osteoblast changes from a cuboidal cell to 
a typical osteocytic morphology, characterized by a stel-
late appearance and numerous cytoplasmic projections 
that permit the cell to communicate with cells on the 
bone surface and other osteocytes living within adjacent 
bone. Concurrently, the genetic signature of the cell 
changes from a typically osteoblastic one to that which 
reflects a mature osteocyte, in particular the expression 
TABLE 31.1  Major glycoproteins containing the 
arginyl-glycyl-aspartate (RGD) cell-attachment 
motif in skeletal tissue
Protein
Proposed function
Thrombospondins
Cell attachment, bind heparin, 
collagens, thrombin, 
fibrinogen, plasminogen
Fibronectin
Binds to cells, collagen, fibrin, 
heparin, gelatin
Vitronectin
Cell attachment, binds collagen 
and plasminogen
Fibrillin
Regulation of elastic fibre 
formation
Osteopontin
Binds to cells, inhibits 
mineralization, regulates cell 
proliferation and tissue repair
Bone sialoprotein
Binds cells, may inhibit 
mineralization
BAG-75
Binds calcium,?cell attachment
Dentin matrix 
phosphoprotein 1
Osteocyte-derived, regulates 
osteocyte maturation and 
FGF23 production
608	
Clinical biochemistry
of DMP1, SOST and FGF23. Osteocytes play a key 
role in the regulation of bone remodelling. At sites of 
skeletal microdamage, osteocytes undergo apoptosis 
and ­release apoptotic bodies expressing RANKL (see 
below), ­promoting the recruitment of osteoclasts to 
the area to initiate remodelling to allow repair of the 
damaged bone. Osteocytes also produce and release 
sclerostin, an endogenous inhibitor of osteoblast differ-
entiation and function that acts to inhibit wnt-induced 
activation of LRP5. They also act as mechanosensory 
cells in bone, perhaps in tandem with osteoblasts lin-
ing the bone surface, with which they communicate. 
Finally, osteocytes are critically important for bone 
mineralization, by regulating phosphate metabolism at 
a whole ­organism level, principally by production of 
the phosphaturic hormone fibroblast growth factor 23 
(FGF23), a process that involves the osteocyte products 
phosphate-­regulating endopeptidase (PHEX) and den-
tine matrix phosphoprotein 1 (DMP1).
Osteoclasts
Osteoclasts are the cells that resorb bone. They are de-
rived from cells of the monocyte/macrophage series. 
They are multinucleated and are usually found singly or 
in small numbers within resorption lacunae of their own 
making. They have large numbers of mitochondria and 
lysosomes. Activated osteoclasts possess a ‘ruffled’ border, 
adjacent to the bone being resorbed. The ruffled border 
is delimited by a ‘sealing zone’ at which the osteoclast is 
attached to the underlying bone. Bone resorption occurs 
as a result of the secretion of protons and proteolytic en-
zymes into the space between the ruffled border and the 
bone surface. Among these enzymes are tartrate-resistant 
acid phosphatase (a useful histological marker of osteo-
clasts) and cathepsin K.
Osteoclast development and function are regulated by 
osteoblast and osteocyte-derived cytokines, in particular 
osteoprotegerin (OPG) and receptor activator of nuclear 
factor-κB ligand (RANKL), which are members of the 
tumour necrosis factor (TNF) receptor superfamily. 
RANKL expressed on the osteoblast and osteocyte sur-
face binds to, and activates its receptor – receptor activa-
tor of nuclear factor-κB (RANK) – which is expressed on 
the surface of osteoclast precursors. RANKL is also shed 
from the cell surface, and this soluble form of the pro-
tein may confer osteoclastogenic activity distant from the 
cell of origin, in particular the osteocyte. Interaction be-
tween RANKL and RANK promotes osteoclastogenesis. 
Osteoprotegerin is a secreted osteoblast product that acts 
as a decoy receptor for RANKL, and thereby functions as 
an endogenous inhibitor of osteoclastogenesis. Thus, the 
relative levels of expression by the osteoblast of RANKL 
and OPG determine the rate at which osteoclastogenesis 
occurs. Many of the systemic factors that alter bone re-
sorption, such as PTH and 1,25(OH)2D (which increase 
osteoclast function) and sex hormones (which decrease 
it), do so by changing osteoblastic production of RANKL 
and/or OPG. An exception is calcitonin, whose receptor 
is expressed on osteoclasts, and which therefore inhibits 
bone resorption directly.
A number of other critical cellular and molecu-
lar events are now recognized to underpin osteoclastic 
bone resorption. The intracellular tyrosine kinase c-src 
regulates osteoclast motility and aspects of cytoskeletal 
function that are critical to formation of a functional re-
sorption space; the αvβ3 integrin (vitronectin receptor) 
plays a key role in osteoclast attachment to bone; the cys-
teine protease cathepsin K and the type 7 transmembrane 
chloride channel (ClCN7) are each required for proteo-
lytic degradation of bone matrix.
Bone remodelling and its regulation
In mature bone, there is a continuous process of re-
moval and replacement of pockets of old bone. This is 
termed bone remodelling and is shown in schematic form 
in Figure  31.2. The process occurs at discrete sites on 
the bone surface and, in the mature skeleton, is prob-
ably an adaptive response to skeletal microdamage. Bone 
remodelling is achieved by teams of osteoclasts and os-
teoblasts acting within the anatomical structure known 
as the ­basic multicellular unit (BMU). Osteocytes play a 
critical role in initiating bone remodelling, and probably 
also in regulating the coordination of formation and re-
sorption within the BMU. Thus, apoptotic osteocytes in 
an area of skeletal microdamage produce RANKL that 
directs osteoclastogenesis and initiation of bone remodel-
ling to the damaged bone. At that site, the osteoclasts ex-
cavate a resorption pit, the depth of which is determined 
by the number and activity of the osteoclasts present. 
The motile osteoclasts are then replaced by osteoblasts, 
which proceed to fill the resorption pit with bone matrix. 
Mineralization of this new bone then occurs, lagging be-
hind matrix synthesis by a period of about three weeks. 
Once the resorption pit has been filled, the osteoblasts 
either undergo apoptosis, return to their quiescent state 
as bone lining cells or survive as osteocytes within the 
bone lacunae.
An increase in bone turnover is characterized by a 
faster bone remodelling cycle initiation rate, rather than 
an increase in the duration of the cycle. The histological 
consequence of such an increase is that a greater propor-
tion of bone surface is involved in remodelling at any one 
time. The time required to complete a full cycle of re-
sorption and formation (σ) is in the order of 6–12 months. 
Inhibiting bone resorption, for example with pharmaceu-
tical agents, rapidly reduces the initiation rate of new 
remodelling cycles, but those cycles already initiated go 
to completion. Thus there is a period (‘a transient’) of 
duration σ, when the bone formation rate exceeds the re-
sorption rate. This ends when all those cycles initiated 
before the inhibition of bone resorption took place have 
completed their formation period. The bone formation 
rate at this stage will have fallen to match the new, lower, 
resorption rate.
Bone resorption and formation are thus very closely 
linked in normal bone and also in many metabolic 
bone disorders. As outlined earlier, the osteoclasts and 
osteoblasts clearly ‘communicate’ with each other. 
Osteoblastic regulation of osteoclast function is mediated 
in large part by the RANK–RANKL–OPG system, but 
the nature of the osteoclast-derived signal(s) that recruits 
and activates osteoblasts is not yet fully characterized. 
Osteocyte-derived sclerostin, an inhibitor of osteoblast 
differentiation, probably contributes to the regulation 
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
609
of the bone formation component of the remodelling 
cycle. Matrix-associated growth factors that are released 
from resorbed bone, such as transforming growth fac-
tor β (TGFβ), bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) 
and platelet-derived growth factor, may also constitute 
part of this signal. Finally, genetic evidence suggests that 
communication from osteoclasts to osteoblasts occurs 
via members of the ephrin (Eph) family of signalling 
proteins, specifically osteoclast-expressed ligand ephrin-
B2 signalling through the osteoblast-expressed receptor 
EphB4 to activate osteoblast differentiation and bone 
formation.
During growth, the amount of bone deposited ex-
ceeds that which is removed and there are also changes 
in the size and configuration of bones (modelling). In se-
nescence, because of factors including sex hormone de-
ficiency, reduced physical activity and various endocrine 
and inflammatory diseases, the balance of formation and 
resorption is reversed and bone is lost. Age-related bone 
loss affects both cortical and trabecular bone, but early 
after the menopause, bone loss is particularly rapid from 
the axial skeleton, which has a greater proportion of tra-
becular bone.
A large number of factors have been found to influ-
ence bone remodelling (discussed in Chapter 6).
Biochemical markers of bone turnover
Bone turnover is a term referring to both osteoblastic 
bone formation and osteoclastic bone resorption. These 
processes can be assessed by bone histomorphometry, 
skeletal scintigraphy and by analysing the kinetics of in-
travenously administered isotopes of calcium. There are 
numerous biochemical markers of bone turnover, repre-
senting either products of bone cells or degradation prod-
ucts from the breakdown of bone collagen (Box  31.1). 
The number of potential markers available has increased 
considerably in recent years. In a small number of rare 
conditions (e.g. hypophosphatasia, osteopetrosis, Bruck 
syndrome and mild osteogenesis imperfecta), a specific 
pattern of bone turnover markers can be helpful in di-
agnosis. However, the main use of markers is to estab-
lish whether a high bone turnover state exists. High bone 
turnover, with its various adverse consequences, is a fea-
ture of many of the more common metabolic bone dis-
orders, and a key target of currently available therapies.
Markers of bone formation
Alkaline phosphatase. Alkaline phosphatase is wide-
spread in human tissues. Enzymes with this activity are 
coded for by genes at three separate loci, their ­respective 
products being referred to as intestinal, placental and 
bone/liver/kidney (or tissue non-specific) ALP. The ­latter 
gene is located on chromosome 1p36. The gene tran-
script has a number of glycosylation sites, and the bone, 
liver and kidney isoenzymes differ in their carbohydrate 
side chains.
The major limitation of total ALP as an index of bone 
formation is its multiple tissues of origin and hence its lack 
of sensitivity at low values. In health, plasma ALP activ-
ity is principally derived from the liver and osteoblasts in 
approximately equal proportions. If the activity of other 
Cement line
Quiescence
Developing
osteocyte
Sclerostin
Completion
Osteoblasts
Unmineralized
matrix (osteoid)
Formation
Osteoclasts
Resorption
pOC
Apoptotic
osteocyte
RANKL
OC
Initiation
Bone lining
cells
Osteocyte
Mineralized
bone
Quiescence
FIGURE 31.2  ■ The bone remodelling cycle. Bone remodelling is in­
itiated in response to skeletal microdamage, sensed by adjacent 
osteocytes which undergo apoptosis and produce the osteoclas-
togenic cytokine, receptor activator of nuclear factor-κB ligand 
(RANKL). Osteoclastic resorption of the damaged bone ensues, ­after 
which mature osteoblasts progressively fill the resorption cavity with 
osteoid, and coordinate its subsequent mineralization. Some of the 
osteoblasts develop into osteocytes within the lacunae of the newly 
formed bone. Sclerostin is produced by osteocytes adjacent to the re-
modelling space: it signals inhibition of bone formation and a return 
to a quiescent state. In skeletal homeostasis, the amount of new bone 
formed equals that resorbed during each remodelling cycle. OC, 
osteoclast; pOC, pre-osteoclast. (Courtesy of Dr Andrew Grey.)
610	
Clinical biochemistry
hepatic canalicular cell enzymes is normal, then elevated 
total ALP activity usually reflects osteoblastic activity (or, 
more precisely, the number of active osteoblasts). If un-
certainty persists in determining the origin of increased 
plasma ALP, then isoenzyme studies may be undertaken. 
The bone and liver isoenzymes have differing stabilities 
to heating (the bone fraction being more sensitive to heat 
inactivation) and different mobilities on electrophoresis. 
Immunoassays for bone-specific ALP use isoform-specific 
monoclonal antibodies; even so, there is up to 20% cross-
reactivity with the liver isoform in these assays. Thus very 
high plasma activities of liver ALP, as occur in hepatobi-
liary disease, can still interfere with the measurement of 
bone-specific ALP. The activity of the bone isoenzyme has 
a diurnal variation in plasma, with peak values occurring 
around midnight and being some 25% higher than early 
morning values. Although the half-life in plasma of the 
bone isoenzyme is very short (~2 days), in metabolic bone 
disorders changes in ALP activity reflect slower processes – 
the acceleration or deceleration of the remodelling cycle – so 
the rate of change of plasma ALP is also much slower.
The marked elevation in plasma ALP activity seen in 
childhood and adolescence is due to an increase in the 
bone fraction. The plasma ALP activity closely paral-
lels the growth velocity curve (Fig. 31.3). A significant 
(40–50%) rise in plasma ALP activity occurs at the meno-
pause because of accelerated bone turnover. Plasma ac-
tivity of the enzyme can also be increased after major 
fractures and reflects the increased cellular activity asso-
ciated with healing. After hip fracture, for example, ALP 
activity reaches a peak at around four weeks, with values 
approximately double those on admission to hospital. 
Total plasma ALP activity is increased during pregnancy 
because of the appearance of the placental isoenzyme.
The entity of familial benign hyperphosphatasia is 
­characterized by asymptomatic high ALP activities 
(predominantly of intestinal isoform) and dominant 
­inheritance, but with no clinical evidence of bone disease. 
Benign transient hyperphosphatasaemia is a condition char-
acterized by high concentrations of both bone and liver 
isoenzymes, first identified in children but now recog-
nized in adults (see Chapter 13).
There are a number of causes of low ALP activities 
(hyophosphatasaemia), including vitamin C deficiency, 
­hypothyroidism, starvation, zinc or magnesium defi-
ciency, Cushing syndrome, Wilson disease and the ge-
netic disorder, hypophosphatasia (discussed below).
Osteocalcin. Osteocalcin is produced by osteoblasts, and 
is generally regarded as a marker of bone formation, but 
it seems to be involved in the process of mineralization 
FIGURE 31.3  ■  Bone turnover markers during growth. Mean val-
ues of plasma alkaline phosphatase (ALP) and osteocalcin in 
males ([closed circle]) and females ([open circle]) through child-
hood and adolescence. Peak values are reached at an average 
age of 12  years in girls and 14 in boys, coinciding with peak 
growth velocity. As growth velocity falls, both these indices 
decline toward adult values. (Data from Round JM 1973 Plasma 
calcium, magnesium, phosphorus and alkaline phosphatase con-
centrations in normal British school children. British Medical Journal 
3: 173–140, and Johansen JS, Riis BJ, Podenphant J, Skakkeboek 
NE, Christiansen C 1987 Plasma bone Gla protein: a specific marker 
of bone formation. In: Christiansen C, Johansen JS, Riis BJ (eds). 
Osteoporosis, vol 2. Copenhagen: Osteopress ApS: 677–681.)
BOX 31.1	
Biochemical markers of bone 
turnover
Formation markers
Blood
•	 Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) (total or bone specific)
•	 Osteocalcin (OC)
•	 Procollagen 1 carboxy-terminal extension peptide (P1CP)
•	 Procollagen 1 amino-terminal extension peptide (P1NP)*
Resorption markers
Blood
•	 Cross-linked C-telopeptide of type I collagen (ICTP)
•	 N-telopeptide of collagen cross-links (NTX)
•	 C-telopeptide of collagen cross-links (CTX)*
•	 Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP)
•	 Cathepsin K
Urine
•	 Hydroxyproline
•	 Hydroxylysine
•	 Pyridinoline (total and free)
•	 Deoxypyridinoline (total and free)
•	 N-telopeptide of collagen cross-links (NTX)
•	 C-telopeptide of collagen cross-links (CTX)
* P1NP and CTX have been endorsed by the International Osteoporosis 
Foundation for use in clinical trials of osteoporosis treatments.
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
611
rather than matrix production. Plasma concentrations of 
intact osteocalcin are markers of bone formation, and cir-
culating concentrations generally correlate well with his-
tological measures of bone formation rate. Around 25% 
of circulating osteocalcin consists of intact osteocalcin, the 
remaining immunoreactivity comprising N-terminal, mid-
region, mid-region-C-terminal and C-terminal fragments. 
When bone is resorbed, osteocalcin fragments are released, 
and the plasma concentrations of these fragments may thus 
reflect bone resorption. These fragments are cleared pre-
dominantly by the kidneys, so there is considerable immu-
nological heterogeneity in plasma osteocalcin in patients 
with renal impairment. These factors may limit the useful-
ness of osteocalcin as a marker of bone formation.
Osteocalcin has a particular advantage in having greater 
sensitivity than ALP in the detection of low rates of bone 
formation. As with plasma ALP activity, plasma osteocalcin 
and growth rate are closely correlated (see Fig. 31.3), and 
there is a two-fold rise in plasma osteocalcin concentration 
at the menopause. Plasma osteocalcin concentrations fall 
markedly during pregnancy. Cord blood concentrations 
are two to three times higher than adult values. The half-
life of intact osteocalcin in the circulation is about 5 min.
Plasma osteocalcin concentrations exhibit a diurnal 
variation with the peak in the early morning being about 
15% higher than the nadir value, which occurs in the af-
ternoon. Concentrations may also be depressed (by about 
10%) by alcohol intake and are markedly suppressed (by 
about 50%) by glucocorticoids. Plasma concentrations 
rise when osteoblasts are stimulated by the administra-
tion of 1,25(OH)2D.
Procollagen 1 extension peptides. Antibodies have been 
raised to both the soluble C-terminal and N-terminal 
­propeptides of procollagen, which appear in the circulation 
after cleavage from the newly formed collagen molecule. 
Their concentrations in the plasma thus reflect osteo-
blastic collagen synthesis. As they are not filtered by the 
kidney, variations in renal function should not affect their 
plasma concentrations. Degradation of the proteins takes 
place in hepatic endothelial cells (through the mannose 
6-phosphate receptor in the case of procollagen 1 carboxy-
terminal extension peptide (P1CP), and by scavenger 
receptors in the case of procollagen 1 amino-­terminal 
­extension peptide (P1NP)).
Procollagen 1 carboxy-terminal extension peptide is usu-
ally measured by enzyme linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA). It has a diurnal variation, with peak concentra-
tions occurring at 04.00–08.00 h, and the nadir in the af-
ternoon. There may be some contribution to circulating 
P1CP from non-osseous sources.
Procollagen 1 amino-terminal extension peptide has been 
more widely studied. It appears to be a more dynamic 
marker than P1CP or other formation markers. The 
peptide is stable, and the available assays are precise and 
responsive to common interventions in metabolic bone 
diseases. It is now regarded as the marker of choice to as-
sess osteoblast activity. Of the various assays available for 
P1NP, some measure the intact propeptide (intact P1NP) 
while others (total P1NP) also detect a smaller antigen 
in serum. In many clinical situations, these assays give 
similar information, but renal insufficiency increases the 
concentrations of the smaller antigen, influencing both 
the apparent concentration of P1NP and assay calibration.
Markers of bone resorption
Hydroxyproline. Hydroxyproline is a major component 
of fibrillar collagen of all types, comprising ~14% of the 
total amino and imino acid content. It is produced by the 
post-translational modification of proline by the enzyme 
4-prolyl hydroxylase. In plasma, hydroxyproline exists 
in protein-bound, peptide-bound and free forms. Most 
hydroxyproline is oxidized in the liver but a small pro-
portion (~10%) is excreted in the urine. Approximately 
90% of collagen-derived hydroxyproline excretion is in 
the form of peptides resulting from collagen degradation, 
with the remainder in the form of fragments of the N- and 
C-terminal procollagen peptides cleaved during collagen 
synthesis. When bone resorption is increased, urinary hy-
droxyproline excretion rises, because of the increased rate 
of catabolism of type 1 bone collagen. When bone turn-
over is low, urinary hydroxyproline is not a ­reliable index 
of bone resorption, since the other sources (for example 
C1q complement component) can contribute up to 50% 
of the total urinary hydroxyproline.
Like all urinary collagen breakdown products, hy-
droxyproline excretion can be measured in a 24 h urine 
collection or, more conveniently, in fasting, second 
voided morning samples, expressed as a ratio to the cre-
atinine concentration. Dietary sources of hydroxyproline 
(e.g. gelatin) need to be eliminated immediately before 
and during the collection. The major limitations of hy-
droxyproline estimation as an index of bone resorption 
are interference from sources other than type 1 collagen, 
its lack of sensitivity at low concentrations, its day-to-day 
variability and its partial origin from bone formation.
Glycosylated hydroxylysine. Hydroxylysine – another 
amino acid unique to collagen-like peptides – is produced 
by the post-translational modification of lysine residues. 
These amino acids can then undergo further modification 
by glycosylation – giving rise to galactolysyl-­hydroxylysine 
and glucosylgalactolysyl-hydroxylysine. The former pre-
dominates in the type 1 collagen of bone. Galactolysyl-
hydroxylysine is not significantly ­metabolized before 
excretion in the urine (10% in free form, 90% peptide 
bound), and the urinary concentrations are not affected by 
diet, so it is a good marker of bone resorption. It can be 
measured by HPLC, but the assay is technically demanding.
Collagen cross-links. The amino acids hydroxylysyl-
pyridinoline and lysylpyridinoline (also known as pyridi-
noline and deoxypyridinoline, respectively) are created 
by the covalent cross-linking that takes place when ma-
ture collagen molecules stabilize after forming the triple 
helical structure (Fig.  31.4). Since the cross-links are 
formed only in extracellular collagen fibrils, they ap-
pear in the circulation and the urine only as degradation 
products of mature matrix and do not reflect new col-
lagen synthesis. In contrast to hydroxyproline, neither 
pyridinoline nor deoxypyridinoline occur in the collagen 
of normal skin. Pyridinoline is present in other connec-
tive tissues, notably cartilage and tendon, whereas the 
612	
Clinical biochemistry
N-telopeptide (NTX)
C-telopeptide (CTX)
930
87
OH
N
C
OH
Gal
Gal
α1(I)N(Y)DEKSTGG(I)
α2(I)NQYDGKGVG(L)
α1..EKAHDGGR..
N
N
Glc
FIGURE 31.5  ■  Intermolecular cross-linking in type I collagen and the location of the peptide sequences of the N-terminal (NTX) and 
C-terminal (CTX) immunoassays.
less abundant deoxypyridinoline is more specific to bone 
and dentine.
In urine, both pyridinoline and deoxypyridinoline are 
present as both free amino acid derivatives (~40%) and 
as oligopeptide-bound fractions (~60%). The free forms 
can be measured directly, but the conjugated form has 
to be hydrolysed before assay. After acid hydrolysis, total 
urinary pyridinoline and deoxypyridinoline can be mea-
sured by HPLC, but ELISA immunoassays for the free 
amino acids or peptides containing the cross-links are 
now available.
The pyridinoline:deoxypyridinoline molar ratio in 
urine is similar to that found in bone (7:2), and the urinary 
excretion rate of the cross-links agrees well with radioiso-
topic and histomorphometric measures of bone resorp-
tion. The cross-links do not undergo further metabolism 
once released, and their rate of excretion is not influenced 
by dietary intake or moderate renal impairment. Random 
urine measurements (expressed relative to creatinine 
concentration) correlate closely with 24 h estimates. 
The elderly tend to have relatively greater excretion of 
the larger peptide-bound forms, and a correspondingly 
smaller proportion of the free pyridinoline and low mo-
lecular weight peptide forms.
Urinary pyridinoline and deoxypyridinoline concen-
trations appear to be good markers of bone resorption, 
and more sensitive than hydroxyproline in distinguishing 
small increases in bone resorption from normal. For ex-
ample, when normal premenopausal and postmenopausal 
women are compared, hydroxyproline excretion in the 
latter group is about 50% above that of premenopausal 
women, whereas for urinary pyridinoline and deoxypyr-
idinoline, excretion is increased by 100%.
Collagen telopeptides. Collagen cross-links form mainly 
between the short non-helical peptides at both ends of the 
collagen molecule (the N- and C-terminal telopeptides), 
which link via pyridinium or pyrrole compounds to the he-
lical portion of an adjacent collagen molecule (Fig. 31.5). 
During collagen breakdown, N- and C-terminal telo-
peptide fragments, still attached by the pyridinium cross-
link to the helical fragments of the nearby molecule, are 
released into the circulation and are cleared by the kid-
neys. Within the C-telopeptides of type I collagen is an 
aspartyl-glycine motif that can undergo β-isomerization to 
isoaspartyl-glycine. This process is believed to be linked 
to protein ageing, with younger bone having a greater 
proportion of the non-isomerized α-C-telopeptides, and 
older bone having a greater proportion in the β-isomerized 
C-telopeptide form. Various immunoassays have been de-
veloped to detect epitopes specific to particular fragments.
The urinary N-telopeptide (NTX) assay is an ELISA 
based on a monoclonal antibody that recognizes a con-
formational motif in the α2-chain that is linked to a 
pyridinium cross-link. Although it does not recognize 
the pyridinoline or deoxypyridinoline cross-link itself, 
R1
CH2
HO
H
+
N
H
R2
R3
OH
CH
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
Pyridinoline
CH2
CH2
R2
R3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH2
H
HO
H
CH2
R1
+
N
Deoxypyridinoline
FIGURE  31.4  ■  Molecular structure of pyridinoline cross-links. 
R1 and R2 are telopeptide sequences and R3 a helical fragment 
sequence; for free crosslinks, R1, R2 and R3 are: −CH(COOH)NH2.
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
613
it is specific for the cross-linking site of bone collagen. 
The  assay requires no hydrolysis. The measurement is 
usually performed on a second void, morning urine sam-
ple, and the results are expressed as bone collagen equiv-
alent, corrected for urinary creatinine concentration. A 
serum assay has also been developed, which correlates 
well with urinary concentrations.
Immunoassays for the C-terminal telopeptide cross-
linked region of type I collagen (CTX) have also been 
developed. The monoclonal antibody recognizes an oc-
tapeptide sequence of the α1 chain containing the lysine 
in the C-terminal telopeptide that is involved in intermo-
lecular cross-linking. Immunoassays that are specific for 
either α-CTX or β-CTX have been developed, and can 
measure these fragments in both serum and urine. Serum 
β-CTX is generally regarded as the marker of choice for 
assessing bone resorption. It should be measured fasting 
at 08.00–09.00 h, since it shows diurnal variation and is 
suppressed by food.
Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase. The acid phos-
phatases are lysosomal enzymes that hydrolyse phospho-
monoesters at low pH, releasing phosphoric acid. They 
are produced in a number of tissues, including bone, 
prostate, platelets and erythrocytes. Five isoenzymes are 
detectable in plasma. The different acid phosphatase iso-
enzymes differ in tissue of origin, chromosomal origin, 
molecular size and electrophoretic mobility. Based on the 
latter, the plasma isoenzymes have been classified as types 
1–5. According to their sensitivity to inhibition by l(+)-
tartrate, the isoenzymes are further classified as tartrate 
sensitive (TSAP) and tartrate resistant (TRAP).
Prostatic acid phosphatase (type 2b) activity is typi-
cally raised in plasma in carcinoma of the prostate. Type 5 
acid phosphatase is produced by macrophages (TRAP5a) 
and osteoclasts (TRAP5b). TRAP5a activity in plasma is 
elevated in Gaucher disease and hairy cell leukaemia.
Tartrate resistant 5b differs from TRAP5a by not hav-
ing sialic acid residues. It can be measured in serum by a 
variety of kinetic assays or by immunoassay. Measurement 
has some value in the diagnosis of osteoclast-rich forms of 
osteopetrosis. In most forms of this disorder, the number 
of osteoclasts in bone is actually increased – although they 
are ineffective at resorbing bone – and plasma activities 
of TRAP5b are increased. In most other bone disorders, 
TRAP5b plasma concentrations correlate well with other 
indices of bone resorption and with histological measure-
ments of osteoclastic activity. Unlike other resorption in-
dices, TRAP5b reflects osteoclast number and/or activity, 
rather than matrix breakdown. It may find a particular 
role in situations where these are dissociated, such as in 
examining the actions of drugs that inhibit osteoclast ac-
tivity without reducing their number (e.g. cathepsin K 
inhibitors). Plasma acid phosphatase concentrations are 
also increased in bisphosphonate-induced osteosclerosis.
New markers. It is now possible to measure circulating 
cathepsin K concentrations. Preliminary reports indicate 
that these are higher in subjects with fractures, and are re-
lated to other turnover markers. Assays are also available for 
circulating osteoprotegerin, soluble RANKL, and scleros-
tin. These factors all act locally in bone, and the relevance 
of circulating concentrations to judging their bioactivity in 
the bone micro-environment remains to be determined. 
These new markers are used mainly for research purposes 
at present, and their clinical utility is uncertain.
Variation in bone turnover markers. Many of the mark-
ers described are now widely used in research, and are 
finding a place in the management of some metabolic bone 
diseases. In general, they correlate well with assessments of 
turnover based on histomorphometry or calcium kinetic 
studies. The newer assays are more specific to bone and, in 
some cases, are more sensitive to perturbations, but their 
usefulness is limited by the day-to-day biological vari-
ability (as well as analytical imprecision). Stability is also 
an important issue for some analytes. In general, plasma 
markers of bone resorption show less day-to-day variabil-
ity than urinary markers. Urinary resorption markers are 
usually measured on fasting second void urine samples to 
minimize the effect of diet and results expressed as a ra-
tio to creatinine concentration. Thus, artefact can arise if 
muscle mass is significantly ­altered from normal.
Most markers of bone turnover show significant di-
urnal variation with highest values in the early morning 
hours and lowest values during the afternoon or night. 
The amplitude of this variability is around 15–30%. 
Therefore, resorption markers are best assessed in the 
early morning, after overnight fasting.
Bone turnover may also vary with the menstrual cycle: 
formation markers are higher in the luteal phase, whereas 
resorption markers are higher during the follicular phase. 
The amplitude of these changes is ~10%. After the meno-
pause, there is an increase in bone turnover – resorption 
markers increase by 30–50% within 12  months of the 
menopause, and there are similar, but later, increases in 
formation markers. A less marked increase in bone turn-
over markers is also seen in men after the age of 50 years. 
Compared with adult values, all turnover markers are 
much higher during childhood and puberty, because the 
skeleton is growing and modelling, as well as remodel-
ling (see below). It is thus important that age-appropriate 
reference ranges are used for all these assays.
Bone markers increase by ~50% two to four weeks af-
ter a fracture, and can take six to nine months to return 
to normal.
OSTEOPOROSIS
Osteoporosis is a reduction in bone density to the point 
that fractures occur as a result of the minor trauma that 
is a normal part of everyday life. At the microscopic level, 
osteoporotic bone is normally mineralized but reduced 
in volume. There is a generalized thinning of trabecular 
elements with the total loss of some trabeculae, greatly 
reducing the strength of bone (Fig. 31.6) and a reduction 
in cortical width in long bones. This loss of the normal 
microarchitecture emphasizes the need for prevention of 
bone loss, since restoration of the lost structure is un-
likely to be achievable with pharmacological agents.
Osteoporosis can also be defined using bone mineral 
density (BMD) criteria. Thus, osteoporosis is defined 
as a BMD T-score less than −2.5, a BMD that is more 
614	
Clinical biochemistry
BOX 31.2	
Risk factors for osteoporosis
Physiological
•	 Heredity: race, stature, family history
•	 Leanness
•	 Nutritional: very low calcium intake, hypovitaminosis D
•	 Inactivity
•	 Age
Pathological
•	 Endocrine: hypogonadism, hyperthyroidism, Cushing 
syndrome, primary hyperparathyroidism, adult growth 
hormone deficiency
•	 Gastrointestinal: partial gastrectomy, malabsorption
•	 Nutritional: prolonged undernutrition, e.g. anorexia 
nervosa
•	 Chronic liver disease
•	 Drugs: glucocorticoids, ciclosporin, thiazolidinedio-
nes, anticonvulsants, heparin, alcohol, tobacco
•	 Inflammatory disorders: rheumatoid arthritis, systemic 
lupus erythematosus, inflammatory bowel disease
•	 Haematological: myeloma, monocytic leukaemia, 
mastocytosis
than 2.5 standard deviations below the mean value in the 
young healthy population. Using this diagnostic crite-
rion, ~50% of women have osteoporosis by the age of 
80 years. Osteopenia is defined as a BMD T-score that 
is 1–2.5 standard deviations below the mean value in the 
young healthy population. Low bone mineral density is 
an important predictor of future fractures. Loss of BMD 
is sometimes pathological, but more frequently occurs 
as a normal part of ageing. With age, the efficiency with 
which osteoblasts refill resorption cavities is reduced, and 
there is also an increase in bone resorption associated 
with hypogonadism.
The important clinical consequence of osteoporosis is 
fracture. Common osteoporotic fractures include those 
of the hip, forearm, vertebral body, humerus, ribs and 
pelvis, while digital, skull, facial and fibular fractures are 
generally not osteoporotic in origin. The epidemiology 
of osteoporotic fractures reflects the importance of age 
and sex in the pathogenesis of the disease. The incidence 
of vertebral and hip fractures increases exponentially in 
later life in both men and women, although fracture rates 
at these sites in men increase about 10 years later (at age 
75) than those in women.
Causes of osteoporosis
Box 31.2 sets out a list of risk factors for, and causes of, 
osteoporosis. Some of these (for example age and family 
history) are not modifiable. Whether or not an individual 
will develop osteoporosis depends on two factors: the 
peak bone mass, typically attained by age ~20 years, and 
the rate of loss of bone in later life. Probably the stron-
gest influence on peak bone density is genetic – there is a 
close relationship between an individual’s BMD and that 
of his parents, and bone density is reduced in the children 
of patients with osteoporosis.
Because of the evidence for a strong heritable compo-
nent to peak BMD, there has been intense interest in iden-
tifying genes that regulate skeletal health. Thus, a large 
number of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) 
have been performed in recent years. These analyses have 
identified more than 20 genes that are associated with 
FIGURE 31.6  ■  Low-power scanning electron micrographs of iliac crest biopsies at the same magnification. (A) Taken from a healthy 
47-year-old woman; (B) from an osteoporotic woman of 75 years. In comparison with (A), there has been thinning of the trabeculae 
with loss of some trabecular elements and discontinuity (arrowed) of some of those which remain. (From Dempster D W et al. 1986 A 
simple method of correlative light and scanning electron microscopy of human iliac crest bone biopsies. Journal of Bone and Mineral Research 
1:21–25, with permission.)
A
B
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
615
alterations in BMD. Several of these genes cluster into 
four biological pathways: the vitamin D endocrine path-
way, the oestrogen endocrine pathway, the wnt-β-catenin 
signalling pathway and the RANKL–RANK–OPG path-
way. However, collectively these genes account for only a 
few percent of the variability in BMD. So, at present, it 
seems unlikely that genetic testing will improve the pre-
dictive power of algorithms used to identify patients at 
high fracture risk. Genetic factors may also underlie the 
significant racial differences in bone density and fracture 
incidence. Individuals of African or Polynesian ancestry 
have higher bone mass than Europeans and Asians.
Body weight is an important influence on bone den-
sity, with heavier people having greater bone mass, and 
lower fracture risk than those who are thin and/or under-
weight. The relationship between body weight and bone 
density is probably mediated in several ways, including 
mechanical loading of bone, the skeletal actions of hor-
mones affected by nutritional status, and the actions of 
adipokines produced by adipose tissue.
Despite continued argument as to what constitutes an 
adequate calcium intake at different stages of life, the im-
pact of calcium intake on bone density and fracture risk is 
probably slight at intakes >10 mmol (400 mg)/24 h (popu-
lations in Asia and Africa appear to maintain satisfactory 
bone health on intakes of <10 mmol/24 h). Vitamin D 
insufficiency (plasma 25-hydroxyvitamin D <50 nmol/L), 
or deficiency (<25 nmol/L), which is common in the con-
texts of skin pigmentation and sunlight deprivation, may 
contribute to reduced bone mass.
There has been extensive study of the relationship of 
physical activity to bone density. Cross-sectional studies 
are subject to various biases, but most prospective inter-
vention studies indicate that this variable contributes only 
moderately to the differences in bone density that exist 
in postmenopausal women. However, prospective studies 
do indicate that weight-bearing exercise increases bone 
mass in the pre-pubertal skeleton.
Age has an important effect on bone density in both 
sexes, and also contributes to skeletal fragility, indepen-
dently of BMD. In the proximal femur, loss of BMD 
begins in both sexes in the third and fourth decades, 
whereas in women BMD in the lumbar spine is probably 
stable until the perimenopause.
The loss of sex hormones has a deleterious effect on 
bone mass at whatever time it occurs. In both men and 
women it is oestradiol deficiency that appears to be criti-
cal. Men with inactivating mutations in the genes encod-
ing either the aromatase or the oestrogen receptor have 
low BMD, despite the presence of normal or high tes-
tosterone concentrations. In women, late menarche and 
episodes of amenorrhoea with oestrogen deficiency re-
duce bone mass in much the same way as early meno-
pause. Amenorrhoea with oestrogen deficiency can arise 
from a number of causes (Box 31.3). In the underweight, 
the low body weight itself has an effect on bone density. 
Adipose tissue is an important site of oestrone produc-
tion, and high fat mass is associated with higher circulat-
ing concentrations of a number of bone anabolic factors 
including insulin, amylin and leptin. Cigarette smoking 
accelerates the metabolism of oestrogens to biologically 
inactive forms, is associated with reduced body weight 
and early menopause and may directly inhibit osteoblas-
tic function: consequently, BMD tends to be lower in 
smokers than in non-smokers.
Various pathological conditions can also have ­significant 
effects on BMD (see Box 31.2). Alcohol ­appears to act as an 
osteoblast toxin and high intakes are also associated with 
both liver disease and ­hypogonadism. Glucocorticoids 
cause bone loss through inhibition of osteoblastic and 
osteocytic activity, intestinal calcium absorption and re-
nal tubular calcium reabsorption. Glucocorticoids may 
directly or indirectly stimulate both hyperparathyroidism 
and bone resorption and, in men, are associated with re-
duced plasma testosterone concentrations.
Investigation and diagnosis
In recent years, there has been a move to characterize os-
teoporosis as a disease, principally so that it will be taken 
seriously by doctors, patients and regulatory authorities. 
However, this can be counterproductive to an under-
standing of the nature of the condition, since the process 
of bone loss is universal. Therefore, the key issue is often 
not so much one of diagnosis (required in the context of a 
disease), but one of assessing fracture risk, and then deter-
mining which interventions are cost-effective for a given 
level of risk. Fracture risk can be assessed from clinical 
risk factors (discussed above) and measurement of BMD.
Clinical risk factors for fracture
The risk factors of greatest importance include age, 
weight, family history and smoking. However, the most 
powerful predictor of future fractures is a past history of 
fracture. The presence of a deformed vertebra on a lat-
eral spine or chest X-ray increases future fracture risk as 
much as five-fold, and a similar effect is seen with a past 
history of fractures at other sites. Therefore, treatment is 
sometimes indicated following fracture, even if the BMD 
is not particularly low.
Bone densitometry
There is a continuous, inverse, relationship between 
fracture risk and BMD. The best validated methodology 
for assessing BMD is dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry 
BOX 31.3	
Causes of amenorrhoea and 
­oestrogen deficiency in young 
women that are associated with 
reduced bone density
Ovarian failure
•	 Premature menopause
•	 Oophorectomy
•	 Chemotherapy
Hypothalamo–pituitary dysfunction
•	 Weight-related amenorrhoea
•	 Hyperprolactinaemia
•	 Drugs: long-acting gonadotrophin-releasing hor-
mone agonists, depot medroxyprogesterone acetate 
contraception
616	
Clinical biochemistry
TABLE 31.2  Potential uses of bone turnover 
markers in osteoporosis
Clinical question
Utility of test
Diagnosis of osteoporosis 
or prediction of bone 
mass
None
Prediction of fracture and 
selection of patients for 
therapy
Possibly useful, but not yet 
validated
Selection of type of 
therapy
Theoretically appealing, 
not yet validated
Monitoring adherence to 
treatment
Useful
Monitoring effectiveness 
of therapy
Possibly useful, in 
conjunction with bone 
mass measurement
Predicting change in bone 
mass on treatment
Reasonable correlation in 
some studies
Determining duration 
of ‘drug holiday’ in 
patients on long-term 
antiresorptive therapy
Useful
(DEXA). Using this technology, a difference in bone den-
sity of one population standard deviation (about 10%) 
is associated with a two-fold difference in fracture risk. 
Most sites of bone density measurement give comparable 
prediction of global fracture risk. However, fracture at a 
given site is best predicted by bone density measurement 
at that site: for example, hip bone density predicts hip 
fracture risk better than measurements elsewhere. The 
sites most commonly assessed are the hip and spine. The 
fact that hip fractures are numerically the most important 
osteoporotic fractures argues in favour of using the hip as 
the preferred measurement site. However, the precision 
of measurement is greater in the spine, and the trabecu-
lar bone of the spine is more rapidly responsive to both 
disease and to therapeutic interventions. With advancing 
age, the value of vertebral scans diminishes because of ar-
tefacts associated with degenerative joint and disc disease. 
Because of these conflicting issues, it is common practice 
to measure bone density in both the lumbar spine and 
proximal femur. In the past, the forearm was a common 
site for measurement because that was all that was tech-
nically feasible. Modern densitometers can also measure 
the forearm, but there is no reason to prefer it to the spine 
and hip when these measurements are available.
Absolute values of bone density are not comparable 
between different anatomical sites, measurement tech-
niques and make of densitometer. This problem has been 
addressed by reporting bone densities in terms of the 
young healthy population range, using standard deviation 
units (T-scores). The DEXA-based ‘definition’ of osteo-
porosis can be used as the threshold for intervention. 
However, it does not take into account the fact that clini-
cal risk factors are multiplicative with the risk estimated 
from bone density measurement. For example, a T-score 
of −2.5 in an 80-year-old woman with a history of verte-
bral fracture is associated with a considerably higher risk 
of fracture over the next year than is the same density in a 
50-year-old woman with no fracture history.
It is now standard practice to combine clinical risk fac-
tors with BMD in algorithms that produce estimates of 
absolute fracture risk. Examples, freely available via the 
internet, include the WHO-sponsored FRAX and the 
Garvan Fracture Risk Predictor. A 10-year hip fracture 
risk of >3% or an osteoporotic fracture risk of >15–20% 
are typically taken as indications for pharmaceutical inter-
vention, but these thresholds are obviously influenced by 
the cost and safety of the interventions, balanced against 
their effectiveness. Of the other modalities available for 
assessment of BMD, computerized tomography (CT) 
scanning is rarely used because of the higher radiation 
exposure involved and ultrasound-based methods (e.g. of 
the os calcis) have not been as extensively validated.
Biochemical investigation
The investigations necessary in a patient who has osteo-
porosis will depend upon the extent to which the low 
bone mass can be accounted for by information already 
available. Thus, in an elderly subject or someone who 
has received long-term high-dose glucocorticoid therapy, 
there may be very little need for further investigations. 
However, in a younger individual whose bone density is 
clearly subnormal without apparent cause, a more exten-
sive investigation for an underlying abnormality is ap-
propriate. The investigation thus depends on the clinical 
context (see Box  31.2). Measurements of sex hormone 
concentrations (particularly in men), thyroid, renal and 
liver function tests, plasma and urinary cortisol, plasma 
calcium, albumin and phosphate, 25-hydroxyvitamin D 
(25(OH)D), serum and urine protein electrophoresis, co-
eliac disease markers, serum tryptase (to diagnose masto-
cytosis) and full blood count may be appropriate.
There remains much debate about the utility of mea-
suring bone turnover markers in the management of os-
teoporosis (Table 31.2). The potential uses include both 
prognosis (prediction of fracture, selection of patients 
for treatment, prediction of response to treatment) and 
therapeutics (selection of treatment, monitoring adher-
ence to, and effectiveness of treatment). At present, there 
is little convincing evidence for use of biochemical mark-
ers in most clinical settings, but these are active areas of 
research and more data will emerge.
There has been concern that long-term suppression 
of bone turnover with potent bisphosphonates might 
increase the risk of osteonecrosis of the jaw and subtro-
chanteric femoral fractures. While the significance of 
these issues continues to be debated, ‘drug holidays’ after 
5–10 years of bisphosphonate therapy are now commonly 
recommended; bone turnover markers have a role in de-
ciding when treatment should be reintroduced.
There is limited value in measuring 24 h urine cal-
cium in patients with osteoporosis. The urine calcium 
excretion reflects an interaction of dietary calcium in-
take, fractional intestinal absorption, bone resorption 
and renal tubular reabsorption, and it is not possible 
to tease these apart without other investigations. The 
calcium:creatinine ratio in a fasting, second-voided urine 
sample in the morning is a poor guide to the rate of bone 
resorption, but does permit calculation of indices of renal 
calcium handling – though these are seldom needed in 
managing osteoporosis.
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
617
In a few centres, the efficiency of intestinal calcium 
absorption is measured. However, there are practical dif-
ficulties in the performance of these tests (see Chapter 6) 
and there is no clear evidence that this approach is a use-
ful guide to treatment selection or improves treatment 
outcomes.
Other investigations
The clinical history should include an assessment of re-
cent and past dietary calcium intake. The presence of 
fractures should be confirmed radiologically and the ra-
diographs scrutinized for evidence of other abnormali-
ties, particularly the possibility of malignancy. Isotope 
scanning is also useful in detecting metastases. Bone 
biopsy is needed rarely, to diagnose pathologies such as 
osteomalacia or mastocytosis, and is reserved for patients 
with atypical presentations in whom there is a high in-
dex of suspicion of some other underlying abnormality 
(Appendix 31.1).
Treatment
Treatment of osteoporosis involves a number of strate-
gies, all of which are aimed at reducing the individual’s 
future risk of fracture. They can be divided into lifestyle 
changes (many of which are applicable to the whole pop-
ulation), oral calcium and vitamin D supplementation (in 
subjects with low intakes) and pharmacological measures. 
The latter are more expensive and more likely to be as-
sociated with side-effects, so are reserved for those with 
a moderately high absolute risk of fracture. In addition, 
minimization of exposure to drugs (particularly glucocor-
ticoids) that are toxic to the skeleton is important.
Lifestyle modifications
Lifestyle interventions that can be recommended to 
all patients include maintenance of ideal body weight 
throughout life, maintenance of normal sex hormone 
concentrations from puberty until the late forties (as 
evidenced in women by regular menstruation), regu-
lar weight-bearing exercise, avoidance of smoking and 
avoidance of high alcohol intake. Exercise may be par-
ticularly important during childhood and adolescence, 
when the skeleton is very responsive to the loads placed 
upon it. Vigorous exercise interventions in postmeno-
pausal women produce changes in bone density of only 
a few percent, but regular exercise, by increasing fitness, 
may also decrease an individual’s risk of falling.
Calcium and vitamin D
While the fundamental building block of bone is col-
lagen, calcium is also an important constituent, and its 
supply in the diet has been suggested to be a limiting 
factor for bone growth and maintenance. The average 
calcium intake in Western postmenopausal women is 
17.5–22.5 mmol (700–900 mg)/24 h, and there is evidence 
that increasing this by a further 25 mmol (1 g)/24 h slows 
postmenopausal bone loss by ~50%, though calcium 
supplementation alone is not able completely to prevent 
postmenopausal bone loss. Fracture risk appears to be re-
duced by ~10% with calcium supplements. However, the 
trials which suggest this fracture prevention also demon-
strate an increase in risk of myocardial infarction of about 
25% and of stroke of about 15%, effectively negating 
any potential benefit. These risks have not been demon-
strated with dietary calcium intake, so modest augmenta-
tion of the diet may be a safer course to follow than the 
use of mineral supplements.
Vitamin D deficiency is extremely common among the 
frail elderly as a result of low levels of exposure to sun-
light. If severe, it sometimes accelerates bone loss and it 
may also contribute to muscle weakness, increasing the 
risk of falls. If suspected, it can be confirmed by mea-
surement of serum 25(OH)D. The current consensus is 
that optimum plasma concentrations of this compound 
are at least >50, and probably >70 nmol/L, although 
some authorities advocate concentrations as high as 
100 nmol/L. Vitamin D deficiency can be prevented or 
treated with oral calciferol (at least 500–1000 U/day or, 
more conveniently, 50 000 U/month). There is evidence 
from randomized controlled trials in markedly deficient 
frail elderly subjects, that the provision of calcium and 
calciferol supplementation reduces hip fracture risk by 
more than a quarter. The use of the potent metabolites 
of vitamin D, such as calcitriol, is more expensive, more 
likely to cause hypercalcaemia or hypercalciuria and is of 
uncertain clinical benefit.
Pharmacological management
Bisphosphonates. The pharmacological management 
of osteoporosis is currently dominated by the bisphos-
phonates. These are relatively simple phosphate salts 
that have a very high affinity for the surface of bone but 
are very poorly absorbed from the gastrointestinal tract. 
Thus, only 1–2% of an oral dose is absorbed, about half 
of which is rapidly deposited on the bone surface, the bal-
ance being excreted unchanged in the urine. When os-
teoclasts resorb bone, they ingest the bisphosphonate and 
are effectively poisoned by it. This reduces the amount of 
bone resorption (bone resorption markers fall by 50–80%) 
with a consequent redressing of the imbalance between 
bone formation and resorption. Bisphosphonate remains 
present on the bone surface for many years and is gradu-
ally incorporated into the structure of the bone, so that it 
can inhibit remodelling cycles that occur years after the 
time of dosing. Thus, bisphosphonates have a long dura-
tion of action and intermittent administration is effective. 
Zoledronate, for instance, can be given as infrequently 
as once every 2–3 years by intravenous infusion and pro-
duces changes in bone density comparable to or greater 
than those seen after weekly oral dosing with alendronate.
The low oral bioavailability of bisphosphonates is 
a critical issue in their use. They must be taken fast-
ing, with water alone, if they are to be absorbed at all. 
Aminobisphosphonates, such as alendronate and rise-
dronate, can cause oesophagitis and gastric ulceration, so 
patients should not lie down for 30–60 min after oral dos-
ing, since this may permit reflux of the tablet into the oe-
sophagus. This does not appear to be such a problem for 
the less potent, non-amino bisphosphonate, etidronate. 
618	
Clinical biochemistry
A common phenomenon after first exposure to intrave-
nous (and occasionally oral) nitrogen-containing bisphos-
phonates is an ‘acute phase response’ of fever, myalgia 
and headache that lasts 24–48 h. This is mediated by the 
release of TNFα and interleukin (IL)-6 from peripheral 
blood T cells. While sometimes unpleasant, the reaction 
is transient, and tends not to recur with subsequent doses.
Potent bisphosphonate use in postmenopausal women 
results in an increase in bone density comparable to that 
produced by hormone replacement therapy. Bone re-
sorption is reduced by more than one half, and the risk 
of hip, spine and forearm fractures is lowered by ~50%. 
While there are a number of trials assessing the effects 
of bisphosphonates on fracture risk over periods of three 
to four years, there are only limited data available from 
longer-term studies. The available data suggest that anti-
fracture efficacy is maintained with long-term use.
Of the currently available bisphosphonates, the 
evidence for anti-fracture efficacy is strongest for 
­alendronate (most conveniently given as a weekly dose), 
risedronate (weekly) and intravenous zoledronate (annu-
ally), each of which has been demonstrated to prevent 
both vertebral and non-vertebral fractures in osteopo-
rotic and glucocorticoid-treated patients and in men as 
well as postmenopausal women. Thus, these bisphospho-
nates are currently the first choice therapy in all forms of 
osteoporosis.
Following discontinuation of bisphosphonates, bone 
resorption rises to some extent, but even several years 
after discontinuation of long-term use of alendronate 
and zoledronate, bone turnover markers do not return to 
baseline. The same is true of bone density, which declines 
only slowly after withdrawal of these agents. This pro-
longed duration of action is a consequence of the long 
residence time of bisphosphonates in bone, and it raises 
important (as yet unanswered) questions about the op-
timal duration of continuous therapy. There is general 
agreement that these agents should be used continuously 
for periods of up to five years. Beyond that, some experts 
reduce the dose, whereas others opt either for no change 
or for a period off treatment. There is no clear evidence 
at present to determine what is optimal. Risedronate and 
ibandronate have a more rapid offset of effect, and will of-
ten require re-institution of therapy within 6–12 months 
of treatment cessation.
Hormone replacement therapy. Hormone replace-
ment therapy (HRT) was the most widely used interven-
tion for the prevention and treatment of osteoporosis for 
many years, but was displaced by the aminobisphospho-
nates, because of their demonstrated anti-fracture efficacy, 
and because the Women’s Health Initiative produced a 
marked change in attitudes to hormone replacement ther-
apy. On the one hand, it clearly demonstrated that HRT 
reduces the incidence of fractures, including hip fractures. 
On the other, it raised concerns regarding safety, particu-
larly with respect to cardiovascular and cerebrovascular 
disease, breast cancer and venous thromboembolism. 
Public and professional enthusiasm for the use of HRT in 
the management of osteoporosis waned, because the older 
age group in whom osteoporotic fracture risk is high is the 
same group in whom vascular disease is a major concern. 
If early postmenopausal women require interventions 
for osteoporosis, HRT may still be a reasonable option, 
although the balance of risks and benefits of HRT in 
younger (<50 years) postmenopausal women is uncertain, 
and the bisphosphonates are also suitable for use in this 
context. The cardiovascular and skeletal effects of trans-
dermal oestrogen preparations have not been assessed in 
large randomized studies. Unlike the bisphosphonates, 
oestrogen effects on bone disappear within months of 
treatment discontinuation, so long-term reductions in 
fracture risk are unlikely to occur.
Selective oestrogen receptor modulators. Selective 
oestrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) are a newer 
class of pharmaceuticals with mixed oestrogen ago-
nist/antagonist activities that vary from tissue to tis-
sue. Thus, the prototypic SERM, raloxifene, acts as an 
oestrogen agonist on bone, but as an antagonist in the 
breast and endometrium. Raloxifene reduces bone re-
sorption and increases bone density, but is less potent 
than either oestrogen or bisphosphonates in this regard. 
It decreases the incidence of vertebral fractures but it 
has not been shown to have any effect on ­non-vertebral 
fractures. It substantially reduces the incidence of 
breast cancer, and does not significantly influence risk 
of vascular disease. Basodoxifene has similar effects and 
is being developed for co-administration with oestro-
gen, thus augmenting its bone effects, while the anti-
oestrogen actions of the SERM block the proliferative 
effects of the oestrogen on breast and endometrial cells. 
Lasofoxifene is the only SERM to be shown to reduce 
risk of non-vertebral factors, but it is not clear that this 
drug will reach the market.
Parathyroid hormone. Parathyroid hormone (PTH) 
preparations, 
either 
PTH(1-34) 
(teriparatide) 
or 
­PTH(1-84), were the first anabolic therapies to be 
­approved for treatment of osteoporosis. When given as 
a daily injection, they produce substantial increases in 
BMD at skeletal sites containing predominantly trabecu-
lar bone, with less marked increases in cortical BMD, and 
reductions in fracture incidence that tend to be greater 
than are seen with other currently available agents. PTH 
use is restricted to a period of 1.5–2 years because of the 
high incidence of osteosarcoma in rat toxicology studies, 
although this problem has not been an issue in human 
use. Unlike the antiresorptive agents, it causes ­sustained 
increases in markers of both formation and resorption. 
Practices for combining PTH with antiresorptives 
vary; co-administration with alendronate may blunt its 
­anabolic effects, though this appears not be the case for 
combination with zoledronate. The anabolic effects dis-
sipate rapidly after treatment discontinuation, so locking 
in gains in BMD with subsequent antiresorptive therapy 
is important.
Other pharmacological treatments. The divalent cat-
ion strontium (in the form of strontium ranelate) has been 
shown to prevent both vertebral and non-vertebral frac-
tures, though effects on hip fracture were only seen in 
post hoc analyses. The mechanism of action of strontium 
on bone is not understood, but some of the increase in 
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
619
BMD it produces is artefactual, resulting from replace-
ment of calcium ions by the heavier strontium ions in the 
hydroxyapatite. BMD measurements in strontium-treated 
patients, should be adjusted for skeletal strontium content.
Denosumab is a monoclonal antibody against the os-
teoclastogenic factor, RANKL. It produces profound 
reductions in both bone resorption and bone formation, 
resulting in increases in BMD and decreases in fracture 
rates comparable to those resulting from the use of potent 
bisphosphonates. It is given by six-monthly subcutaneous 
injection but there is a rapid loss of effect 6–8 months after 
an injection, with an overshoot in bone turnover during 
this time. Therefore, maintaining continuity of treatment 
is very important to achieve anti-fracture efficacy.
Cathepsin K is the principal osteoclastic enzyme in-
volved in the degradation of type I collagen. It is there-
fore an obvious target for an antiresorptive agent. Several 
early studies in this area were abandoned because of 
insufficient specificity of the investigation compounds. 
The cathepsin K inhibitor odanacatib, has demon-
strated sustained year-on-year increases in bone density 
in phase 2 studies. A large phase 3 study to determine 
anti-fracture efficacy is nearing completion. Tartrate re-
sistant 5b concentrations are not suppressed (as osteo-
clasts remain numerous on the bone surface, although 
their bone resorbing activity is markedly curtailed) and 
the suppression of bone turnover markers with odana-
catib is less marked than seen with other antiresorptive 
agents; in particular the suppression of bone formation 
appears to diminish after 2–3 years. Discontinuation of 
treatment is accompanied by a rapid rise in bone turn-
over markers.
In recent years, the wnt-LRP5 pathway has emerged 
as a critical regulator of bone formation. Activity of this 
pathway is regulated by sclerostin, an inhibitor secreted 
by the osteocyte. A number of studies are exploring the 
efficacy of monoclonal antibodies directed against scleros-
tin as bone anabolics. Phase 1 and 2 studies suggest that 
these could be the most effective bone anabolic drugs yet 
developed; results of phase 3 trials are awaited.
In the past, sodium fluoride and calcitonin were widely 
used to treat osteoporosis but good evidence of anti-
fracture efficacy is lacking for both and fluoride interferes 
with normal bone mineralization. As a result, both agents 
have dropped out of common usage.
Biochemical responses to treatments
Antiresorptive agents such as HRT, SERMs and the 
bisphosphonates produce an early (within weeks) reduc-
tion in indices of bone resorption, followed by a slower 
fall in indices of bone formation (Fig. 31.7). Similar ef-
fects are observed in hypogonadal men treated with tes-
tosterone replacement. These effects are sustained for 
the duration of therapy and, in the case of potent bisphos-
phonates, which have long skeletal retention times, may 
persist for considerable periods of time (months or years) 
after therapy is stopped. The most potent currently avail-
able bisphosphonates may reduce markers of bone re-
sorption by up to 80% from baseline levels. Denosumab 
can produce even larger decreases in bone resorption, 
most patients having undetectable resorption markers in 
the first weeks after injection. In contrast, the cathepsin K 
inhibitor odanacatib only reduces resorption markers by 
about 50%, with smaller declines in formation markers. 
Plasma calcium and phosphate concentrations can also 
fall during the early phase of antiresorptive therapy but 
usually recover without specific intervention.
Intermittent PTH treatment produces biochemical 
changes characterized by an initial increase in markers of 
bone formation (P1NP, e.g. typically doubling), reflect-
ing primary activation of osteoblasts. A smaller increase in 
osteoclastic activity follows as a secondary, coupled phe-
nomenon. Plasma 1,25(OH)2D concentration increases by 
~25% and there may be small falls in 25(OH)D. Plasma 
calcium concentration may increase and plasma phos-
phate decrease during treatment because PTH also stimu-
lates renal tubular calcium reabsorption and phosphaturia 
(directly) and intestinal calcium absorption (indirectly). 
Occasionally, a reduction in PTH dose may be required 
because of mild hypercalcaemia. Early data with anti-
sclerostin antibodies demonstrate large early increases in 
formation markers and, surprisingly, some inhibition of 
bone resorption markers. Over a period of months, both 
changes tend to revert towards baseline values.
Months
AIk Phos
Formation
Resorption
120
%
100
80
0
6
12
Months
FU Ca/Cr
140
%
100
60
0
6
12
FU Hypro/Cr
100
%
80
60
Osteocalcin
100
%
80
60
FIGURE  31.7  ■  Changes in mean (±SD) biochemical indices of 
bone formation and resorption in postmenopausal women 
receiving either placebo ([closed circle]) or a regimen of con-
tinuous oestrogen and progesterone ([open circle]). The group 
receiving active treatment show significant suppression of both 
bone resorption and formation. There is a tendency to reach a 
plateau in these indices as a new steady state is reached. Note 
that the variance in fasting urine calcium/creatinine ratios (FU 
Ca/Cr) is considerably greater than that in fasting urine hydroxy-
proline/creatinine (FU Hypro/Cr). (Data from Christiansen C, Riis 
BJ 1990 17β estradiol and continual norethisterone: a unique treat-
ment for established osteoporosis in elderly women. Journal of 
Clinical Endocrinology & Metabolism 71:836–841.)
620	
Clinical biochemistry
Treatment with strontium produces inconsistent 
changes in markers, smaller in magnitude than most 
agents discussed above. Notably, strontium interferes in 
many routinely available assays for calcium concentration.
Growth hormone replacement in adults who are defi-
cient improves bone mass, primarily by stimulating corti-
cal bone accretion. Growth hormone treatment induces 
an early increase in bone resorption markers, and later 
increases (~two-fold) in bone formation markers that 
reach a peak after a year of treatment, and then gradually 
decline. The peak in osteocalcin is delayed relative to the 
other formation markers.
OSTEOMALACIA
Osteomalacia is the term used to describe the disorder 
arising from defective mineralization of bone. It is a 
­histological diagnosis, based on the volume of unminer-
alized osteoid, its extent over bone surfaces, its thickness 
and the rate of mineralization, as assessed by tetracycline 
labelling. If a mineralizing defect is a diagnostic possibil-
ity in an unusual case, then biopsy should be undertaken 
(Appendix 31.1). In adults, the radiographic appearances 
are generally non-specific, showing generalized osteope-
nia or (in severe cases) vertebral collapse. Looser zones 
(short radiolucent lines through the cortex, at right an-
gles to the shaft) are very suggestive of osteomalacia, but 
occur in only a minority of patients.
When osteomalacia arises before growth is complete, 
the clinical and radiographic features differ from those 
seen in adulthood, and the condition is termed rickets. 
The histological processes occurring in osteomalacia 
and rickets are similar. In order for newly formed oste-
oid to mineralize, adequate supplies of mineral (calcium 
and phosphate) must be available and the function of the 
osteoblasts that regulate the mineralization process must 
be normal. The causes of osteomalacia are conveniently 
categorized into those where there is inadequate supply 
of mineral and those where osteoblast function is defec-
tive. The former group may be further categorized into 
those where inadequate calcium supply is the critical fac-
tor (calciopenic) and those where inadequate phosphate 
supply is critical (phosphopenic). Calciopenic forms are 
frequently associated with abnormalities of vitamin D 
metabolism. Biochemical investigations can suggest that 
osteomalacia is present and indicate possible aetiologies, 
but cannot prove its presence. However, the biochemical 
findings in calciopenic and phosphopenic forms of osteo-
malacia are often very characteristic, so that bone biopsy 
is not necessary in routine cases.
Calciopenic osteomalacia
The major causes of calciopenic osteomalacia are sum-
marized in Box 31.4.
Vitamin D deficiency
Rickets and osteomalacia were endemic in the UK and 
many other European countries from the 17th century 
until the mid-20th century. Crucial scientific observations 
made in post-war Vienna in 1919–1922 established the 
role of vitamin D in the aetiology of privational osteoma-
lacia. Although it was clearly demonstrated at that time 
that it was possible to cure privational rickets by expos-
ing children to sunlight, as well as by the administration 
of a fat-soluble food factor, the dominance of nutritional 
theory led to the active factor being termed a vitamin, 
that is, an obligatory food component that the body can-
not synthesize. It is now clear that under the influence of 
ultraviolet light, the skin can synthesize vitamin D3 (cho-
lecalciferol), the precursor of the prohormone 25(OH)D, 
and that dietary sources of vitamin D (mainly vitamin D2, 
ergocalciferol) are critical only when exposure to sunlight 
is significantly limited.
Diminished exposure to ultraviolet light through in-
dustrial pollution and the practice of infant swaddling 
may have been important during the years that rickets 
was endemic, and would account for its greater preva-
lence in more northerly cities in the UK. In the pres-
ent day, vitamin D-deficient osteomalacia is observed 
most commonly in individuals who are sunlight deprived 
because of skin pigmentation, whose cultural practices 
involve sunlight deprivation, the malnourished and the 
institutionalized elderly. Osteomalacia occurring in pa-
tients with malabsorption syndromes or after partial gas-
trectomy is not so easily explained, but does suggest that 
a nutritional factor is important. This factor is most prob-
ably calcium.
Reduced intake of calcium, or impaired calcium ab-
sorption, initially causes a small fall in plasma ionized 
calcium concentration and compensatory secondary hy-
perparathyroidism. As a consequence of this, a greater 
proportion of 25(OH)D is metabolized to 1,25(OH)2D – 
the active hormone – rather than to inactive metabolites 
such as 24,25(OH)2D3 and 25,26(OH)2D3. In the short 
term, the increased 1,25(OH)2D production, by increas-
ing fractional absorption of calcium from the intestine, 
corrects the hypocalcaemia at the expense of modest 
­hyperparathyroidism. However, 1,25(OH)2D has an 
­additional effect upon the hepatic metabolism of 25(OH)
D, accelerating the metabolic clearance of 25(OH)D to its 
inactive dihydroxylated forms (see Fig. 6.3, p. 97). In the 
chronic situation, the sustained increase in 1,25(OH)2D 
BOX 31.4	
Causes of calciopenic osteomalacia
Low 25(OH)D, normal 1,25(OH)2D synthesis
•	 Low calcium intake
•	 Binding of dietary calcium by phytate and other factors
•	 Lack of exposure to sunlight
•	 Post-gastrectomy
•	 Malabsorption syndromes (small intestinal disease, 
hepatobiliary disease, pancreatic disease)
•	 Anticonvulsants
•	 Mutation in gene for 25-hydroxylase (CYP2R1)
Normal 25(OH)D, reduced 1,25(OH)2D synthesis
•	 Chronic kidney disease
•	 Vitamin D-dependent rickets type I
Normal 25(OH)D, normal 1,25(OH)2D synthesis
•	 Vitamin D-dependent rickets type II
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
621
production eventually depletes the available 25(OH)D 
pool. Once the concentrations of 25(OH)D have fallen 
beyond a critical point, 1,25(OH)2D synthesis itself may 
become insufficient to sustain adequate calcium absorp-
tion, so that there is overt hypocalcaemia. Plasma phos-
phate is also reduced because of diminished intestinal 
absorption and the renal effects of hyperparathyroidism. 
With insufficient calcium and/or phosphate available for 
mineralization, osteomalacia follows.
Osteomalacia and low plasma 25(OH)D concentra-
tions are also found in some patients on long-term an-
ticonvulsant therapy. Hepatic enzyme induction by 
the anticonvulsant drugs and accelerated clearance of 
25(OH)D are important, but the people most likely to 
develop this syndrome are institutionalized patients who 
also have limited exposure to sunlight. Intestinal calcium 
transport can be impaired directly by phenytoin. A pa-
tient from Nigeria with severe rickets/osteomalacia and 
a very low serum 25(OH)D concentration was found to 
be homozygous for an inactivating mutation in the gene 
CYP2R1, that encodes the enzyme mainly responsible for 
25-hydroxylase activity.
Osteomalacia in people of South Asian origin is 
multifactorial. As well as diminished dermal synthe-
sis of vitamin D, the traditional diet has a high content 
of calcium-binding factors such as phytate, which limit 
the bioavailability of dietary calcium. In groups with a 
high prevalence of osteomalacia, the disease may be ex-
acerbated by lack of sunshine in winter and at times of 
increased vitamin D requirements: infancy, adolescence 
and pregnancy.
The clinical features of privational osteomalacia in 
adults include bone pain, proximal myopathy and frac-
tures. Bone pain and myopathy are often overlooked and 
their severity only appreciated when a cure has been ef-
fected. The aetiology of the myopathy is unknown. It is 
not a feature of hypocalcaemia, and does not invariably 
occur in other types of osteomalacia. In children, rickets 
may additionally result in difficulty with walking, growth 
retardation, bowed legs and enlargement of the costo-
chondral junctions.
Defects in 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D synthesis  
or action
Osteomalacia and rickets can result from deficiency 
of the renal 1α-hydroxylase enzyme and thus failure 
to synthesize 1,25(OH)2D, or from defective action of 
1,25(OH)2D, owing to abnormalities of the receptor. 
Deficiency of the renal 1α-hydroxylase enzyme can be ac-
quired, as in chronic kidney disease (CKD, see below), or 
can occur as a rare autosomal recessive disorder known as 
vitamin D-dependent rickets (VDDR) type I. Clinically, 
these children develop florid rickets in the first two years 
of life. The syndrome of VDDR type II is also a rare au-
tosomal recessive disorder, often associated with alope-
cia totalis, but otherwise with a clinical picture similar to 
VDDR type I. It is caused by an abnormality in the re-
ceptor for 1,25(OH)2D, arising from mutations either in 
the DNA-binding or the hormone-binding domain, and 
there is target organ resistance to the hormone. Acquired 
resistance to 1,25(OH)2D has been seen in untreated coe-
liac disease, where the intestinal mucosa is very abnormal 
and the absorption of calcium and phosphate impaired.
Laboratory investigation
The relevant laboratory investigations are summarized in 
Table 31.3. It is important to note that the plasma calcium 
concentration may be normal in the early phase of priva-
tional vitamin D deficiency. Hypophosphataemia due to 
hyperparathyroidism and reduced intestinal phosphate 
absorption can occur in any type of calciopenic osteoma-
lacia. However, there are occasional patients with an ap-
parent renal resistance to the effects of PTH who do not 
become hypophosphataemic when deficient in 25(OH)D. 
These patients have marked hypocalcaemia and hyper-
phosphataemia with increased plasma ALP activities.
All bone turnover markers, apart from plasma osteocalcin, 
are increased in vitamin D deficiency osteomalacia. When 
assessing plasma phosphate and ALP concentrations, it is 
important to bear in mind the normal age-related ranges for 
these indices. The key diagnostic investigation in privational 
TABLE 31.3  Typical biochemical and histological findings in calciopenic and phosphopenic forms of 
osteomalacia and rickets
 
Plasma 
calcium
Plasma 
phosphate
Urinary 
TmP/
GFR
Plasma 
PTH
Plasma 
alkaline 
phosphatase
Plasma 
25(OH)D
Plasma 
1,25(OH)2D
Bone 
histology
Vitamin D  
deficiency:
  early
N
↓/N
↓
↑
↑
↓
↑
HPT
  late
↓
↓/N
↓
↑↑
↑↑
↓↓
↓/N
OM, HPT
Vitamin D-dependent 
rickets type I
↓
↓/N
↓
↑↑
↑↑
N
↓↓
OM, HPT
Vitamin D-dependent 
rickets type II
↓
↓/N
↓
↑↑
↑↑
N
↑↑
OM, HPT
Renal phosphate leak 
(high FGF23)
N
↓↓
↓↓
N
↑
N
↓
OM
Renal phosphate leak 
(low FGF23)
N
↓↓
↓↓
N
↑
N
↑
OM
Antacid-induced 
hypophosphataemia
↑/N
↓↓
↑
↓
↑
N
↑
OM
FGF, fibroblast growth factor; HPT, hyperparathyroidism; N, normal; OM, osteomalacia.
622	
Clinical biochemistry
vitamin D deficiency is measurement of serum 25(OH)D 
concentration. Measurement of 1,25(OH)2D is indicated in 
infants with rickets who have no medical or social risk fac-
tors for privational vitamin D deficiency and who are hypo­
calcaemic despite normal plasma 25(OH)D concentrations.
Responses to therapy
Vitamin D deficiency should be treated with calciferol. 
Single high-dose treatment (300 000–600 000 units orally 
in an adult) may be more effective than low-dose long-
term replacement and reduces problems of adherence to 
therapy. Patients with chronic conditions can be given 
weekly or monthly treatment with smaller doses, or an-
nual prophylaxis in mid-autumn. There is a marked ten-
dency for spontaneous improvement in the spring and 
summer. Attention needs also to be directed to underly-
ing problems such as malabsorption. Vitamin D therapy 
is ineffective if the dietary calcium content is very low.
Effective therapy is followed by changes in the plasma 
biochemistry. Plasma calcium concentration rises and hy-
perparathyroidism is corrected. A marked rise in plasma 
phosphate concentration occurs after initiation of ther-
apy and peaks at 3–5 weeks; thereafter plasma phosphate 
gradually declines, reaching the concentration which is 
normal for that individual after about 6–9 months. Plasma 
1,25(OH)2D concentration is also supranormal dur-
ing this period, but there is no clinical need to measure 
1,25(OH)2D in this circumstance. Plasma ALP activity 
often flares during the first two to three weeks but then 
declines exponentially with a half-time of 50–100 days. A 
similar early increase in plasma concentrations of procol-
lagen 1 extension peptides can also be seen. Osteocalcin 
concentrations also rise transiently, and peak about two 
weeks after treatment is started.
Vitamin D-dependent rickets type I is best treated with 
oral calcitriol (50 ng/kg per day) or alfacalcidol (100 ng/
kg per day). Vitamin D-dependent rickets type II may re-
spond to a combination of calcium supplementation and 
treatment with very high doses of calcitriol (60 μg/kg per-
day) or alfacalcidol (100 μg/kg per day).
Any patient being treated continuously with pharmaco-
logical doses of any form of vitamin D is at risk of vitamin 
D toxicity, and plasma calcium concentrations need to 
be monitored and dosages adjusted accordingly. Toxicity 
is particularly liable to occur as bone disease heals and 
therapeutic requirements fall.
Phosphopenic osteomalacia
In this group of conditions, the low plasma phosphate 
concentration is the main factor underlying the osteoma-
lacia. Very rarely, this may result from the ingestion of 
phosphate-binding antacids, but most commonly it is due 
to renal tubular dysfunction and phosphaturia (manifest 
as a low TmP/GFR, see Table 31.3). The disorders can be 
classified into genetic and acquired forms and by whether 
or not there are other associated renal tubular defects 
(aminoaciduria, bicarbonate loss with systemic acidosis, 
glycosuria and hypokalaemia: the Fanconi syndrome). 
The most frequently encountered forms are listed in 
Box 31.5, and their aetiology discussed in Chapter 6.
The presentation of the inherited syndromes is usu-
ally in infancy with a clinical picture similar to that of 
rickets due to privational vitamin D deficiency. The most 
common form of inherited hypophosphataemic rickets, 
the X-linked type, is exceptional in that myopathy is ab-
sent and that marked ligamentous calcification can occur. 
Male children are more severely affected than females 
and short stature is a prominent feature.
Adult onset hypophosphataemic osteomalacia is usu-
ally associated with mesenchymal tumours (oncogenic 
osteomalacia) that are often difficult to identify because 
of their small size. These tumours secrete phosphatonins, 
such as FGF23, that act on the renal tubules to induce 
phosphaturia. If a tumour is solitary and can be removed 
Numbers in brackets after genetic disorder indicate numbering on 
Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM); the gene for each 
disorder is in italics.
BOX 31.5	
Osteomalacia and rickets resulting 
from renal tubular phosphate loss
Isolated phosphate leak
Hereditary
•	 X-linked hypophosphataemic rickets – X-linked domi-
nant (307800 – PHEX)
•	 Autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic rickets 
(193100 – FGF23)
•	 Hypophosphataemic rickets with hypercalciuria – 
­autosomal recessive (241530 – SLC34A3)
•	 X-linked hypophosphataemic rickets (Dent disease) – 
X-linked recessive (182309 – CLCN5)
•	 Hypophosphataemic rickets – autosomal recessive 
(241520 – DMP1)
Acquired
•	 Tumour-associated: 
mesenchymal 
cell 
tumours, 
polyostotic
•	 Fibrous dysplasia, neurofibromatosis
•	 Drug-associated: imatinib, ifosfamide, saccharated fer-
ric oxide
Generalized tubular disorders (Fanconi syndrome)
Hereditary – many different types with dominant, 
­recessive or X-linked inheritance, such as:
•	 Cystinosis (219800 – CTNS)
•	 Wilson disease (277900 – ATP7B)
•	 Tyrosinaemia, type I (276700 – FAH)
•	 Oculocerebrorenal syndrome/Dent disease-2 (300555 – 
OCRL)
•	 Hereditary fructose intolerance (229600 – ALDOB)
•	 Fanconi–Bickel syndrome (227810 – GLUT2)
Acquired
•	 Renal tubular acidosis (type 1 and type 2)
•	 Heavy metal toxicity: lead, cadmium, mercury, 
­platinum, uranium
•	 Drugs: out-dated tetracycline, cisplatin, ­6-mercaptopurine, 
amphotericin, trimethoprim, pentamidine, toluene
•	 Dysproteinaemias: myeloma, light chain disease, 
amyloidosis
•	 Autoimmune-mediated: systemic lupus erythemato-
sus, Sjögren syndrome, rheumatoid arthritis
•	 Interstitial nephritis, renal transplantation
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
623
surgically, then complete resolution of the osteomalacia 
occurs. Tumours can be identified by either magnetic res-
onance imaging (MRI) or scintiscanning using isotope-
labelled somatostatin or sestamibi, but in a significant 
minority of cases even these sophisticated techniques 
may be inadequate. Plasma concentrations of FGF23 are 
usually increased, and fall after successful resection of the 
tumour.
Heavy metal nephropathy or light chain deposition in 
the renal tubules can cause an acquired form of the Fanconi 
syndrome with hypophosphataemic osteomalacia.
Laboratory investigation
The occurrence of rickets or osteomalacia in an indi-
vidual without evidence of vitamin D deficiency should 
prompt consideration of phosphopenia as a cause. A key, 
and often overlooked, investigation is measurement of 
the plasma phosphate which, if low, should prompt evalu-
ation of renal phosphate handling. The typical laboratory 
findings are listed in Table 31.3. The critical biochemical 
features that distinguish osteomalacia caused by hypo-
phosphataemia due to a renal phosphate leak from that 
caused by vitamin D deficiency are:
•	 normal plasma 25(OH)D concentration
•	 low TmP/GFR, which persists after treatment of 
the bone disease
•	 absence of hyperparathyroidism.
Plasma FGF23 measurements are helpful in the diag-
nosis of oncogenic osteomalacia and some of the genetic 
disorders. Plasma calcitriol concentrations are usually 
low in hypophosphataemic osteomalacia that is the result 
of excess FGF23 activity, but high in conditions such as 
Dent disease or hereditary hypophosphataemic rickets 
with hypercalciuria, where the primary defect lies in renal 
tubular phosphate transporters.
Special tests are required for the diagnosis of the rare 
inherited and acquired metabolic disorders in which hy-
pophosphataemic osteomalacia is part of a more general-
ized Fanconi syndrome.
Treatment
When hypophosphataemic osteomalacia occurs with in-
appropriately low concentrations of calcitriol (usually in 
the context of increased FGF23 activity) then it is best 
treated with phosphate supplements and 1α-hydroxylated 
vitamin D derivatives. Commercial preparations of so-
dium dihydrogen phosphate, are available but the pre-
cise form of phosphate is not important. Phosphate (total 
30–120 mmol/day) has to be given frequently through 
the day to be effective, because of its rapid loss through 
the kidneys. Phosphate therapy alone induces hyperpara-
thyroidism, so vitamin D therapy, which offsets this and 
enhances intestinal phosphate absorption, is also used. 
These patients are vitamin D resistant, so if calciferol 
(vitamin D2) is used, pharmacological doses are required 
and there is a danger of prolonged vitamin D toxicity. 
Alfacalcidol or calcitriol are therefore preferred to the 
parent compound. The histological responses to alfacal-
cidol or calcitriol also seem to be superior to those seen 
with calciferol. The therapy should aim to keep plasma 
phosphate around 1.0 mmol/L (measured 1–2 h after a 
dose), but to avoid hypercalciuria and hypercalcaemia. 
There is an increased risk of metastatic calcification, par-
ticularly in the kidney. The risk of nephrocalcinosis is re-
lated primarily to the amount of phosphate given, and its 
occurrence suggests that the dose of phosphate should be 
reduced (or stopped in the X-linked form when growth is 
complete). Healing of the bone disease is accompanied by 
a fall in plasma ALP activity.
Hereditary hypophosphataemic rickets with hypercal-
ciuria is caused by mutations in the renal tubular phos-
phate transporter NaPi2c. FGF23 concentrations are 
not increased and plasma calcitriol is appropriately raised 
(given the hypophosphataemia). The bone disease can 
be cured with phosphate alone. In some conditions, the 
Fanconi syndrome responds to treatment of the underly-
ing disorder (e.g. Wilson disease).
Antacid-induced hypophosphataemic osteomalacia is 
treated by withdrawal of antacids and the short-term pre-
scription of phosphate supplementation.
Osteomalacia and acidosis
Longstanding metabolic acidosis is also associated with 
osteomalacia. The clinical situations in which this occurs 
most commonly are types 1 and 2 renal tubular acidosis 
and patients with bladder resection and ureterosigmoid-
ostomy. The physiological basis of the osteomalacia is 
incompletely understood. At high [H+], the renal 1α-
hydroxylase enzyme is inhibited, so the increase in plasma 
1,25(OH)2D concentrations induced by phosphate deple-
tion is less than expected. However, metabolic acidosis 
reduces TmP/GFR and, in the short term, stimulates 
1,25(OH)2D synthesis. The mechanism of induction of 
osteomalacia may thus be similar to that seen in simple vi-
tamin D deficiency. In keeping with this, plasma 25(OH)
D concentrations have been reported to be low in many 
of the published cases of osteomalacia associated with ure-
terosigmoidostomy. In type 2 renal tubular acidosis, the 
hypocalcaemia and hypophosphataemia accompanying 
the Fanconi syndrome could also be important contribu-
tory factors. Treatment with alkali alone (sodium bicar-
bonate) can improve the osteomalacia, but in the limited 
studies published, has not produced complete healing.
Defective osteoblast function and 
osteomalacia
Osteomalacia can arise from either congenital or acquired 
abnormalities of osteoblast function. The acquired forms 
relate to aluminium or the use of high-dose etidronate in 
the treatment of Paget disease. In both these conditions, 
osteoblast numbers are reduced, plasma ALP activity is 
low and the osteomalacia is resistant to treatment with 
vitamin D.
Fluoride therapy, or endemic fluorosis, produces a 
mineralization defect despite abundant osteoblasts being 
present.
Hypophosphatasia. This is a rare familial disorder with 
autosomal recessive inheritance arising from mutations 
in the tissue non-specific ALP gene (ALPL). There are 
varying degrees of clinical severity, depending on the 
624	
Clinical biochemistry
Calcium and 1α-hydroxylated vitamin D derivatives
Hyperparathyroidism
Low bone
turnover
High bone
turnover
Osteomalacia
Adynamic bone
Normal bone
formation
Mild HPT
Osteitis fibrosa
Mixed lesion
Aluminium accumulation
FIGURE 31.8  ■  Chronic kidney disease mineral and bone disorder 
is a dynamic process. The main influences determining the na-
ture of the bone histology are the degree of hyperparathyroid-
ism (HPT) and the degree of aluminium accumulation in bone. 
Hyperparathyroidism can be suppressed to varying degrees by 
the manipulation of dietary and dialysate calcium and the use 
of 1α-hydroxylated vitamin D derivatives, or by parathyroidec-
tomy. Aluminium accumulation also favours low bone turnover 
and, in significant quantities, can cause osteomalacia.
types of mutation and the residual activity of the enzyme. 
The clinical presentation can vary from a lethal perinatal 
form through to a relatively benign disorder presenting 
in adulthood (Table 31.4). Heterozygous carriers can be 
asymptomatic or have a mild form of the disease. In the 
childhood form, the diagnosis is made usually after the 
age of six months of age because of orthopaedic abnor-
malities that resemble rickets. Other features include pre-
mature loss of the deciduous teeth, premature closure of 
the cranial sutures and growth retardation.
The characteristic biochemical findings are reduced 
plasma ALP activity (both total and bone ALP) with 
concomitant increases in endogenous substrates of the 
enzyme. These include plasma pyridoxal 5′-phosphate, 
inorganic pyrophosphate and phosphoethanolamine. An 
elevated plasma pyridoxal 5′-phosphate concentration is 
specific to hypophosphatasia (provided the patient is not 
taking vitamin B supplements), but urine phosphoethanol-
amine excretion can be modestly increased in a variety of 
other disorders. Severely affected children may have hy-
percalcaemia and hypercalciuria. Plasma phosphate con-
centrations also tend to be above average for age (due to 
an increase in the TmP/GFR), and PTH concentrations 
relatively low. Antenatal diagnosis of the severe form is 
possible by measurement of amniotic fluid ALP.
The bone shows osteomalacia with reduced osteoblast 
numbers. Treatment options are limited, but there are case 
reports of improvement of bone disease with parathyroid 
hormone treatment, and in severe infantile disease with 
bone marrow transplantation. The most promising treat-
ment for severe hypophosphatasia is ­enzyme-replacement 
therapy, using a fusion protein (named asfotase alfa) that 
comprises the TNSALP ectodomain, the constant region 
of the human IgG1 Fc domain and a deca-aspartate motif.
CHRONIC KIDNEY DISEASE – MINERAL AND 
BONE DISORDER
Bone diseases complicating CKD emerged as major 
problems with the development of dialysis programmes, 
which permitted the prolonged survival of patients with 
established renal failure. The major aetiological factors 
are disturbances of the parathyroid hormone–calcitriol 
axis and skeletal retention of aluminium. Renal bone 
disease is not uniform in its features because the effects 
and interactions of these factors differ at various stages 
of its evolution. The disease can be modified substan-
tially by a variety of treatments, from changes in dialy-
sate composition, diet or drugs to renal transplantation. 
Chronic kidney disease – mineral and bone disorder 
(CKD-MBD), previously called renal osteodystrophy, 
can be regarded as a dynamic process that is affected by 
both patient characteristics and a number of pathophys-
iological and iatrogenic factors. These are illustrated in 
Figure 31.8.
Aetiology
Parathyroid hormone–calcitriol–FGF23 axis
Mild hyperparathyroidism can be detectable when the 
glomerular filtration rate falls to <50 mL/min. The hy-
perparathyroidism is secondary to a modest fall in plasma 
ionized calcium, resulting from a reduction in intestinal 
calcium absorption that, in turn, is due to a decline in 
the production of 1,25(OH)2D because of reduced renal 
1α-hydroxylase activity. This arises initially not because 
of the loss of functioning nephrons, but because of phos-
phate retention. Plasma phosphate concentrations are 
not increased and may even be low because of secondary 
hyperparathyroidism, but there is saturation of the intra-
cellular phosphate pool that ‘senses’ phosphate require-
ments. The high intracellular phosphate is responsible 
for the reduction in renal 1α-hydroxylase activity and 
therefore 1,25(OH)2D synthesis. Rising FGF23 concen-
trations in response to phosphate retention may mediate 
this early reduction in 1α-hydroxylase activity: increases 
in plasma FGF23 concentrations seem to precede the de-
velopment of hyperparathyroidism. Reduction in the in-
take or the intestinal absorption of phosphate at this early 
TABLE 31.4  Clinical syndromes of 
hypophosphatasia
Presentation
Clinical features
Perinatal
Stillbirth or neonatal death; 
absence of mineralized 
skeleton
Infantile
Diagnosed <6 months; rickets, 
flail chest, hypercalcaemia/
hypercalciuria, pyridoxine-
responsive seizures
Childhood
Premature loss of 
primary teeth, rickets, 
hypercalcaemia/
hypercalciuria
Adult
Middle age; recurrent stress 
fractures; pathological 
fractures
Odontohypophosphatasia
Premature loss of primary 
teeth only
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
625
stage reverses all these abnormalities: 1,25(OH)2D con-
centration in the blood rises, intestinal calcium absorp-
tion increases and hyperparathyroidism is suppressed.
As kidney disease progresses, the disturbances in the 
PTH-1,25(OH)2D axis become more marked. When the 
glomerular filtration rate falls to <30 mL/min, hyperphos-
phataemia develops, as the number of functioning neph-
rons becomes too low to cope with the phosphate load, 
despite lowering of the TmP/GFR. Progressive nephron 
loss and metabolic acidosis further impair 1,25(OH)2D 
synthesis. Hypocalcaemia develops and hyperparathy-
roidism worsens, so by this stage, bone histology in most 
subjects will show signs of hyperparathyroidism that can-
not be reversed by restricting the intake and absorption 
of phosphate.
Untreated, ~40% of patients reaching established re-
nal failure will have significant parathyroid bone disease, 
as judged by the presence of marrow fibrosis on bone 
biopsy. If there is coincident vitamin D deficiency, then 
florid osteomalacia with hyperparathyroidism can arise.
The interactions between PTH and 1,25(OH)2D are 
complex. 1,25(OH)2D modifies PTH secretion indirectly 
through its actions on plasma ionized calcium, but it can 
also act directly on the parathyroids and inhibit the tran-
scription of pre-pro-PTH mRNA. In established renal 
failure there are fewer receptors for 1,25(OH)2D in the 
nuclei of the parathyroid cells, as well as reduced circulat-
ing concentrations of 1,25(OH)2D. The loss of this direct 
effect upon the parathyroids is an important factor in the 
development of parathyroid hyperplasia. An additional 
effect of importance is the change in the ‘set point’ for 
PTH secretion. This is defined by the concentration of 
plasma ionized calcium that will suppress PTH secretion 
by 50% as calculated from calcium infusion experiments. 
Calcitriol deficiency shifts the set point to the right, that 
is, a higher ionized calcium has to be achieved before 
PTH secretion is suppressed.
Aluminium retention
Aluminium retention was recognized as a significant cause 
of skeletal disease in the late 1970s, when an unusual type 
of osteomalacia became endemic in haemodialysis units 
in certain geographical locations, such as Newcastle-
upon-Tyne. Aluminium sulphate is added to water as 
a flocculent during the purification process in order to 
precipitate organic matter. The quantity of aluminium 
required for this process varies with environmental fac-
tors, so the concentration in tap water may range from 
5–30 μmol/L. When the dialysate aluminium content is 
>2 μmol/L, there is a substantial transfer from dialysate to 
plasma. Aluminium is normally excreted by the kidneys, 
so, in a patient with no renal function, it accumulates in 
various tissues, including the brain, bone and the para-
thyroids. The aluminium content of the dialysate can be 
reduced to <2 μmol/L by reverse osmosis treatment and 
it is now standard to use dialysates prepared this way. The 
oral ingestion of aluminium hydroxide as a phosphate-
binding agent can also contribute to aluminium loading.
In bone, aluminium is taken up at the bone–osteoid 
interface and has a marked toxic effect upon osteoblasts, 
inhibiting the rate of new matrix synthesis and, at higher 
doses, inhibiting mineralization. Aluminium can also ac-
cumulate in the parathyroids, and patients with severe 
aluminium-related disease often have low plasma PTH 
concentrations.
Clinical features
Hyperparathyroidism in the early stages of CKD-MBD 
is asymptomatic, but with advanced disease, bone pain 
and proximal myopathy are the predominant symp-
toms. Because of its insidious onset, it tends to be 
under-­reported and patients may only notice that they 
have had it when adequate treatment is given and the 
pain relieved. Fractures are rare in parathyroid disease, 
but in adolescents and children, horrifying deformi-
ties can develop very rapidly as a result of the erosion 
and weakening of the metaphyses of the long bones. 
Hyperparathyroidism can impair the effectiveness of 
erythropoietin therapy.
The full-blown syndrome of aluminium-induced os-
teomalacia comprises generalized skeletal pain, frequent 
fractures and disabling proximal myopathy. With very 
high total body aluminium loads, hypochromic anaemia 
and dementia (‘dialysis dementia’) may occur. Because 
of increased awareness of aluminium, this presentation 
is uncommon nowadays. Milder degrees of aluminium-
related bone disease and a mixed form of aluminium 
and parathyroid disease are recognized. These forms of 
disease give rise to fewer symptoms. Aluminium accu-
mulates more readily in the bones of children and ado-
lescents with CKD than in older patients, and also more 
readily in the bones of patients with CKD secondary to 
type 1 diabetes.
In recent years, changes in the therapy for CKD-MBD, 
and changes in dialysis techniques resulting in more ac-
tive suppression of hyperparathyroidism, have meant that 
the more florid forms of CKD-MBD have become less 
common. A consequence of therapeutic measures to sup-
press hyperparathyroidism has been the emergence of a 
low turnover state called ‘adynamic bone disease’. The 
clinical sequelae are not clear, but there are suggestions 
that the risk of fracture is higher and that, in children, 
growth may be impaired. The strategy of maintaining 
higher plasma calcium concentrations to suppress hyper-
parathyroidism also increases the ECF [calcium] × [phos-
phate] product, and thus the risk of metastatic or vascular 
calcification. With an increasing number of older patients 
being taken onto dialysis programmes, osteoporosis with 
a high incidence of fractures has also emerged as a signifi-
cant clinical issue.
Investigations
Biochemical measurements in serum are useful in as-
sessing renal bone disease, but even with the help of 
radiographic assessments they cannot always provide 
an unequivocal account of events in bone. CKD-MBD 
is still, therefore, the commonest indication for bone 
biopsy, which remains the reference standard for other 
tests.
Calcium. Plasma calcium concentration (either total or 
ionized) is usually normal in early renal impairment but 
626	
Clinical biochemistry
falls as renal function deteriorates (glomerular filtration 
rate <30 mL/min). Dialysis partially corrects the hypo-
calcaemia. In long-term dialysis patients, hypercalcaemia 
may develop and can arise from one or more of a num-
ber of causes (Box 31.6). With the move away from using 
aluminium-based to calcium-based phosphate binders, the 
prevalence of hypercalcaemia in dialysis-treated patients 
has increased.
Phosphate. Plasma phosphate concentration is ­normal 
or reduced in early renal disease, but hyperphospha-
taemia occurs when renal impairment is advanced. In 
­dialysis-treated patients, hyperphosphataemia is inevitable 
and it is almost impossible to maintain ‘normal’ plasma 
phosphate concentrations (0.8–1.4 mmol/L). Phosphate 
should be kept in the range 1.4–2.0 mmol/L, although 
even this can be difficult. Phosphate concentrations 
<1.4 mmol/L can contribute to impaired bone mineral-
ization, whereas at >2.0 mmol/L there is a risk of meta-
static calcification (see Chapter  6). Failure to maintain 
plasma phosphate below this concentration can be due to 
a variety of reasons (see Box 31.6).
Parathyroid hormone. After secretion of the intact mol-
ecule, PTH undergoes cleavage into amino-terminal and 
carboxy-terminal fragments. The latter are metabolized 
and excreted predominantly by the kidney, so that im-
munoassays that are not specific for the intact molecule 
or the amino terminal are liable to detect high concentra-
tions of circulating PTH, whether or not glandular secre-
tion is increased (see Chapter 6). It may be difficult to 
interpret a single measurement of plasma PTH in an in-
dividual. Nonetheless, in population studies the patients 
with the most severe parathyroid bone disease have the 
highest plasma PTH concentrations, irrespective of the 
assay used, and plasma PTH correlates well with histo-
logical indices of bone resorption (and formation). The 
newer assays for ‘intact’ PTH perform well in established 
renal failure but these assays also measure a large PTH 
fragment (probably PTH 7-84). New two-site chemilu-
minescence and immunoradiometric assays specific for 
PTH 1-84 are increasingly used in patients with renal 
impairment.
FGF23. By the time patients reach dialysis, plasma 
FGF23 concentrations are extremely elevated (commonly 
~1000 times normal). This may reflect delayed clearance 
as well as increased production of FGF23, but almost all 
the circulating FGF23 seems to be biologically active. 
The prognostic value of FGF23 measurements in pa-
tients with CKD is beginning to be explored, but at pres-
ent there is no indication for its routine measurement.
Alkaline phosphatase. The bone isoenzyme is neither 
dialysable nor filterable by the kidney, so its plasma con-
centration (and thus activity) is not modified by variations 
in renal function. Plasma alkaline phosphatase activity is 
increased when bone turnover is high and, in general, re-
flects the degree of hyperparathyroidism. If the plasma 
PTH concentration is clearly elevated, a high ALP is 
strongly predictive for high-turnover renal bone disease. 
Aluminium deposition affects osteoblast function so that 
plasma ALP activity is often normal, or only slightly 
above the reference range, in aluminium-related disease. 
The activity of ALP gives no indication of the severity of 
this type of bone disease.
Other markers of bone turnover. The markers of 
bone resorption based on urine measurements are 
obviously of limited use in CKD. Markers such as os-
teocalcin, hydroxyproline, pyridinoline, deoxypyridin-
oline and cross-linked C-telopeptide of type I collagen 
(ICTP) are wholly or partially cleared by the kidneys, 
so in CKD their plasma concentrations are greatly in-
creased because of accumulation of inactive fragments. 
In population studies, correlations with histological 
indices of bone resorption or formation can be dem-
onstrated, but in practice they are of little diagnostic 
value in individual patients. Concentrations of the for-
mation markers P1NP and P1CP are not so affected 
by CKD, but correlate less well than ALP with histo-
logical indices. Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 5b 
is unaffected by CKD and correlates with histological 
measures of bone resorption. It is elevated in high-
turnover bone disease.
Aluminium. Provided that care is taken in the collec-
tion and laboratory handling of specimens to avoid con-
tamination, aluminium concentrations in plasma reflect 
the recent level of exposure to this element. Because 
of the rapid uptake of aluminium into tissues, plasma 
concentrations do not reliably indicate the total body 
burden. The desferrioxamine test was developed in 
an attempt to measure the total body aluminium load. 
Desferrioxamine mobilizes aluminium from bone and 
other tissues, so after its intravenous administration to 
dialysis patients, plasma aluminium concentrations in-
crease (see Appendix 31.2 for protocol). The increment 
in plasma aluminium correlates reasonably (r = 0.6–0.7) 
with the degree of aluminium loading as assessed by 
bone biopsy, but the test has insufficient sensitivity and 
specificity to be used on its own. However, an increment 
of >7.5 μmol/L in the presence of low plasma PTH is 
very suggestive of aluminium loading and an indication 
for bone biopsy to establish the extent of aluminium ac-
cumulation. A recommended protocol for surveillance 
BOX 31.6	
Aetiology of hypercalcaemia and 
­hyperphosphataemia in ­dialysis-
treated patients
Hypercalcaemia (>2.7 mmol/L)
•	 Use of calcium-containing phosphate binders
•	 Therapeutic vitamin D toxicity
•	 Severe hyperparathyroidism
•	 Aluminium bone disease and mixed bone disease
•	 High dialysate calcium concentrations
Hyperphosphataemia (>2.0 mmol/L)
•	 Inadequate dialysis regimen
•	 Inadequate phosphate-binder therapy
•	 Poor adherence to dietary restrictions
•	 Therapeutic vitamin D toxicity
•	 Severe hyperparathyroidism
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
627
for aluminium overload in dialysis patients is to measure 
serum aluminium every 4–6 months, seeking to maintain 
plasma concentrations at <1.9 μmol/L.
Radiology, scintigraphy and densitometry. Radio­
logy is useful in the diagnosis of parathyroid bone 
disease. Subperiosteal erosions of the phalanges and/
or the ­distal ends of the clavicle are virtually pathog-
nomonic. Other radiographic manifestations of hyper-
parathyroidism ­include osteosclerosis (commonly in 
the spine) and, more rarely, periosteal new bone forma-
tion. Aluminium-related disease has no specific X-ray 
findings, but pathological fractures and radiolucency of 
bones are typical if there is osteomalacia. Spinal bone 
density measurements are often increased in hyperpara-
thyroid bone disease and reduced in aluminium-related 
disease, but these measurements are not of diagnostic 
value. The scintigraphic changes of hyperparathyroid-
ism add little to the information from other diagnostic 
modalities.
Bone histology. Bone biopsy after double tetracycline-
labelling, with the preparation of undecalcified sections 
for quantitative histomorphometry, remains an important 
investigation. Severe hyperparathyroidism can be dem-
onstrated satisfactorily by radiographic and biochemical 
means, but mineralization defects, low bone turnover 
and aluminium loading are difficult to quantitate accu-
rately without biopsy. Florid forms of aluminium-related 
disease are now uncommon, but a mixed form of bone 
disease with hyperparathyroidism and aluminium reten-
tion together, which can only be diagnosed by biopsy, is 
recognized. Bone histomorphometry permits classifica-
tion of an individual into one of several diagnostic cate-
gories described according to the parameters of turnover 
(low, normal or high), mineralization (normal or abnor-
mal) and volume (low, normal or high). CKD-MBD re-
mains one of the commonest indications for bone biopsy 
(Appendix 31.1).
Treatment
Hyperparathyroidism
Vitamin D derivatives. Abnormalities of vitamin D 
metabolism are critical in the genesis of hyperparathy-
roidism, and vitamin D, its metabolites or derivatives 
are successful in reversing hyperparathyroidism at least 
in the short term. All forms of vitamin D are effective, 
but forms that require 1α-hydroxylation (such as calcif-
erol or 25(OH)D) have to be given in pharmacological 
doses in order to achieve the desired effects. The 1α-
hydroxylated forms, 1,25(OH)2D, alfacalcidol (1αOHD3) 
or doxercalciferol (1αOHD2) are effective at much lower 
doses and are preferred. Their main advantages are their 
very quick onset and cessation of action: if vitamin D 
toxicity occurs with these compounds, it reverses rapidly. 
Although this is a distinct advantage, toxicity can also 
arise abruptly. Intestinal calcium and phosphate absorp-
tion are increased, the [calcium] × [phosphate] product in 
plasma increases and, with it, the risk of metastatic and 
vascular calcification. This can accelerate the decline in 
renal function in patients with moderate CKD who have 
not yet reached dialysis and increases the risk of cardio-
vascular disease.
How well hyperparathyroidism is suppressed de-
pends mainly on the increment in plasma calcium that 
can be safely attained. Patients who have high or high-
normal plasma calcium concentrations at the outset of 
therapy are therefore likely to tolerate only low dos-
ages. 1,25(OH)2D may be given intravenously (usually 
thrice weekly). The object is to obtain transiently high 
plasma 1,25(OH)2D concentrations and to maximize 
the directly suppressive effects of 1,25(OH)2D upon 
PTH synthesis. However, the degree of suppression 
of hyperparathyroidism obtained by this method re-
mains closely correlated with the increment in plasma 
calcium. In patients with established hyperparathyroid-
ism, successful treatment with vitamin D derivatives is 
accompanied by reductions in plasma PTH concentra-
tion and ALP activity. Alkaline phosphatase may rise in 
the first few weeks of therapy, but then declines expo-
nentially with a half-time of around 50 days. As healing 
takes place, vitamin D toxicity is likely to occur, so dos-
age reductions are required. All patients taking ­vitamin D 
derivatives require monitoring of plasma calcium, phos-
phate and ALP.
There is increasing use of an emerging group of bio-
active vitamin D analogues with supposedly less marked 
calcaemic activity than calcitriol (e.g. paricalcitol and 
maxacalcitol). It is hoped that these agents may allow 
more effective control of parathyroid gland hyperplasia 
with less hypercalcaemia, although as yet there is little 
evidence that they are superior to calcitriol, alfacalcidol 
or doxercalciferol.
Phosphate metabolism. Control of plasma phosphate is 
important in slowing the development of hyperparathy-
roidism and is approached by dietary restriction, the use 
of phosphate-binding agents and adequate dialysis. The 
concentration of calcium in the dialysate can also be ma-
nipulated to influence hyperparathyroidism.
Parathyroidectomy. Parathyroidectomy is very effective 
in patients with severe hyperparathyroidism and produces 
a quicker and more complete resolution of parathyroid 
bone disease than can be achieved with alfacalcidol or cal-
citriol. With the abrupt cessation of PTH-driven bone 
resorption after surgery, there follows a period when 
bone formation remains very rapid, before it, too, slows to 
match the new, lower resorption rate. During this period, 
calcium and phosphate are taken up very rapidly from the 
blood into bone and profound hypocalcaemia (and hypo-
phosphataemia) can occur – the ‘hungry bone syndrome’. 
This can be so severe as to cause hypocalcaemic fits. 
Patients undergoing parathyroidectomy are therefore 
treated pre- and postoperatively with 1α-hydroxylated 
forms of vitamin D and may require intravenous or oral 
calcium. After parathyroidectomy, plasma ALP activity 
may show an early rise but then suppresses rapidly, with 
a half-time of around 23 days, as bone disease heals. The 
more rapid suppression of ALP after parathyroidectomy 
than after alfacalcidol or calcitriol reflects the more rapid 
reduction in PTH.
628	
Clinical biochemistry
Hyperparathyroidism can recur after parathyroidec-
tomy and there is continuing debate over the choice of 
procedure – subtotal or total parathyroidectomy – and, 
in the subtotal procedure, about the size of the remnant 
and whether to leave it in situ or to transplant it to the 
sternomastoid or forearm muscles. One concern about 
the rapid suppression of parathyroid hormone, whether 
by parathyroidectomy or by the use of 1α-hydroxylated 
vitamin D compounds, is the ease with which alumin-
ium is retained in bone when turnover is very slow. The 
­aluminium–osteomalacia syndrome can certainly be pre-
cipitated by parathyroidectomy, hence the importance of 
making sure the bone is free of aluminium before under-
taking this procedure.
Calcimimetic agents. An important development in the 
treatment of hyperparathyroidism secondary to CKD 
has been the use of cinacalcet, an allosteric agonist of 
the ionized calcium-sensing receptor that is expressed on 
parathyroid cells. With cinacalcet treatment, reductions 
of ~40% in PTH concentrations are reached after about 
three months of treatment, and are maintained for at least 
two years. Reductions in plasma calcium and phosphate 
of 6–8% are seen and the [calcium] × [phosphate] prod-
uct decreases by ~15%.
Aluminium toxicity
Aluminium toxicity is treated by withdrawing all par-
enteral sources of aluminium and stopping aluminium-
containing phosphate binders. The chelating agent 
desferrioxamine effectively removes aluminium from 
bone and other tissues. In order to minimize the risk 
of desferrioxamine-related cerebral, auditory and ­visual 
side-effects, and siderophore-mediated opportunis-
tic ­infections, the chelator should be used at low doses 
(5 mg/kg) and administered only once weekly – typically 
for 4–6 months. In patients not requiring dialysis, most 
of the aluminium–desferrioxamine complex is excreted 
in the urine and can be monitored by urinary aluminium 
measurements. Prolonged desferrioxamine treatment can 
result in iron depletion.
Bone disease after renal transplantation
In the first two weeks following successful renal 
transplantation, plasma FGF23 concentrations fall 
very rapidly and 1,25(OH)2D concentrations rise. 
Hyperparathyroidism resolves slowly after trans-
plantation and may be expressed as post-transplant 
hypercalcaemia. 
Hyperparathyroidism, 
persistent 
FGF23 elevation and steroid treatment all contribute 
to hypophosphataemia in transplant recipients (see 
Chapter  6). Bone resorption, stimulated by hyper-
parathyroidism, may be high after transplantation, but 
corticosteroids, given for immunosuppression, sup-
press bone formation. Transplant recipients may thus 
lose bone and become osteoporotic. The suppressive 
effect of steroids on osteoblasts means that the mark-
ers of osteoblast function, ALP activity and osteocal-
cin are not reliable guides to bone resorption in these 
circumstances.
BONE DISEASE IN PRIMARY 
HYPERPARATHYROIDISM
Bone disease was one of the complications of primary 
hyperparathyroidism that led to the recognition of this 
disorder in the 1920s, but in Western countries florid 
parathyroid bone disease is now uncommon. The avail-
ability of plasma calcium measurements on modern bio-
chemical analysers has identified a large population with 
asymptomatic hyperparathyroidism, and early surgery in 
symptomatic patients probably accounts for the infre-
quency of severe skeletal manifestations.
Clinical, biochemical and histological 
features
Since bone is one of the target tissues for PTH, it is not 
surprising that the bones of almost all patients with hy-
perparathyroidism show some histological evidence of 
increased parathyroid activity. In asymptomatic or mildly 
affected individuals, this amounts only to increases in the 
extent of active formation and resorption surfaces. This 
is reflected in modest increases in biochemical markers of 
bone turnover. Mild primary hyperparathyroidism causes 
a preferential loss of cortical bone, and may be associ-
ated with an increased fracture risk. Both antiresorptive 
therapy and surgical correction of the disease prevent 
progressive bone loss.
Much less commonly, patients with primary hyper-
parathyroidism manifest overt parathyroid bone disease 
(osteitis fibrosa) characterized by marked increases in 
osteoclastic bone resorption and increases in bone for-
mation rate, with a resulting increase in osteoid surface 
extent and marrow fibrosis. Patients experience gen-
eralized bone pain, often worse when standing, bone 
tenderness and proximal myopathy. Radiographic signs 
can be helpful, subperiosteal erosions being pathogno-
monic of parathyroid bone disease. Spinal osteosclerosis 
can occur in primary hyperparathyroidism, but is seen 
less frequently than in uraemic hyperparathyroidism. 
Cystic lesions filled with osteoclasts, and marrow fibrosis 
(‘brown tumours’), are a feature of bone disease in severe 
primary hyperparathyroidism and can be sites of patho-
logical fracture.
The presence of bone abnormalities tends to be associ-
ated with more aggressive disease with a shorter duration 
of symptoms, higher plasma concentrations of calcium 
and PTH and larger, more rapidly growing brown tu-
mours. Occasionally primary hyperparathyroidism can 
enter an accelerated phase with a marked increase in the 
rate of bone resorption and disequilibrium hypercalcae-
mia (acute parathyroid crisis).
Vitamin D insufficiency occurs commonly in patients 
with primary hyperparathyroidism, and is probably as-
sociated with larger parathyroid adenomas and higher 
rates of bone turnover. Accelerated hepatic metabolism of 
25(OH)D may contribute to the lower vitamin D concen-
trations in this situation. Maintenance of vitamin D suf-
ficiency may restrain the progression of the parathyroid 
disease. In patients with mild hyperparathyroidism and 
low plasma 25(OH)D, supplementation with vitamin D 
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
629
does not usually exacerbate the hypercalcaemia and may, 
indeed, lower PTH and bone turnover.
Treatment
Most patients with mild primary hyperparathyroidism do 
not require specific therapy. All patients with severe pri-
mary hyperparathyroidism or osteitis fibrosa require para-
thyroidectomy to correct the disease, but these patients 
are at risk of developing the ‘hungry bone syndrome’ with 
postoperative hypocalcaemia and hypophosphataemia. 
This can be ameliorated by treatment for 1–2 weeks prior 
to surgery with low doses of 1α-hydroxylated vitamin D 
derivatives. Following successful surgery, plasma calcium 
concentrations fall, but there can be secondary hyperpara-
thyroidism as the remaining normal parathyroid glands re-
spond to the fall in plasma calcium. The changes in plasma 
calcium following surgery are therefore a better immedi-
ate guide to the success of the procedure than changes in 
plasma PTH concentration. Nonetheless, intraoperative 
measurement of PTH can provide useful information as 
to whether the abnormal parathyroid tissue has been 
resected – a fall of >50% in the PTH concentration within 
20 min of parathyroid gland removal is highly predictive 
of long-term surgical cure. Plasma ALP may flare in the 
1–2  weeks following surgery, and then falls in a similar 
manner to that seen after parathyroidectomy in uraemic 
hyperparathyroidism. The biochemical markers of bone 
resorption fall early after successful surgery.
PAGET DISEASE OF BONE
Epidemiology
Although Paget disease of bone is, next to osteoporosis, 
the metabolic bone disorder most frequently encoun-
tered in general medical practice, it is in many ways quite 
mysterious. The disease is characterized by extreme met-
abolic disturbance of one (monostotic) or more (polyos-
totic) bones in the skeleton, while the uninvolved bones 
are quite normal. This patchy, asymmetrical distribu-
tion of disease within the skeleton is unexplained, as is 
its striking geographical distribution. It is most com-
mon in people of European origin living in temperate 
zones and is common in the UK, the USA, Australia, 
New Zealand and western Europe. It has been described 
in African-Caribbean peoples living in the UK and in 
African-Americans, but it is rare in groups native to areas 
where it is common among whites, such as native North 
Americans, Australian aborigines and the Maori of New 
Zealand. Even in countries where the disease is wide-
spread, there are well-documented variations in preva-
lence. For example, in the UK, the prevalence in parts of 
Lancashire is two to three times greater than elsewhere. 
Families with many members affected, and a dominant 
pattern of inheritance, are not uncommon.
Aetiology
The cause of Paget disease is unknown, but both genetic 
and environmental factors appear to be important. In about 
a third of patients with a positive family history (and a much 
lower proportion of patients without a positive family his-
tory), Paget disease is associated with mutations in the gene 
SQSTM1. This gene encodes the p62 protein, which forms 
part of the scaffold linking the RANK receptor on osteo-
clasts to the nuclear transcription factor NF-κB. The ma-
jority of Paget disease-­associated mutations identified to 
date (currently numbering ~30) have been in the ubiquitin-
binding domain of the molecule. Patients with SQSTM1 
mutations tend to have disease that is more extensive, more 
symptomatic and is of earlier onset than in patients without 
such mutations. This is particularly the case with mutations 
that result in truncation of the p62 protein. The common-
est SQSTM1 mutation is P392L which is found all around 
the world. Haplotype evidence suggests this is a founder 
mutation distributed by European colonists. The rare 
dominantly inherited syndrome of inclusion-body myopa-
thy, Paget disease and frontotemporal dementia (OMIM 
605382) is associated with mutations in the VCP gene, en-
coding the valosin-containing protein. This protein is also a 
component of the scaffold linking RANK to NF-κB.
Genome-wide association studies of patients negative 
for SQSTM1 mutations have indicated that polymor-
phisms at a number of genetic loci are statistically associ-
ated with Paget disease. Several of the candidate genes 
encode proteins known to be important in osteoclast 
physiology, such as M-CSF, a cytokine essential for osteo-
clast differentiation, DC-STAMP, a cell surface protein 
essential for the formation of multinucleated osteoclasts 
and RANK, a receptor essential for osteoclast differentia-
tion and bone resorption.
Recent epidemiologic data indicate that in the past 
40  years, there has been a significant reduction in the 
prevalence of Paget disease in high-prevalence regions 
such as the UK and New Zealand, and that extensive 
polyostotic involvement has become less common. These 
observations suggest that in addition to genetic influences 
an important environmental factor is involved in the cau-
sation of Paget disease. Research has concentrated on a 
potential viral cause as the environmental agent. Both 
measles and canine distemper virus have been suggested 
as culprits, but the laboratory evidence is inconclusive.
Natural history
Many people have the disease without symptoms, as shown 
by the frequent incidental finding of either an isolated el-
evation in plasma ALP activity in ‘routine’ blood tests or 
pagetic changes in bone when radiographs are taken for 
other indications. Radiographic surveys have shown that in 
endemic areas of the world, the prevalence increases with 
age, and suggest that disease before the age of 40 is rare. 
It appears to arise more or less simultaneously at several 
skeletal sites. In some patients, distinct phases can be dis-
cerned. Bone lysis and progression of lytic lesions may 
predominate, particularly in the skull and long bones: 
this is presumed to be early disease. In the later stages, in 
some patients, osteoclast activity dies out, the bones be-
come intensely sclerotic and ultimately osteoblast activity 
declines too, leaving abnormal but metabolically quies-
cent bone. What proportion of patients go through this 
cycle and how long it takes are not known. The majority 
630	
Clinical biochemistry
of patients have mixed disease with similar increases in 
both resorption and formation of bone. Observations of 
plasma ALP activity in untreated subjects show an unpre-
dictable variation from year to year, with an overall ten-
dency to rise with time until it becomes stabilized within 
a range characteristic for an individual.
Pathology
Paget disease is characterized by massively increased 
turnover in affected bones. It is thought to be primar-
ily a disorder of osteoclasts. The number and size of the 
osteoclasts are greatly increased and they contain nu-
merous large nuclei. Resorption surfaces are increased 
in extent. The coupling of bone resorption to formation 
is, however, more or less maintained, and many of the 
histological features of Paget disease relate to the mas-
sive increase in bone formation. Osteoblast numbers, the 
extent of bone-forming surfaces and the rate of new bone 
formation are all increased. At very high rates of bone 
formation, collagen fibres are not laid down in the usual 
orderly lamellar pattern, but more randomly, resulting in 
new bone of abnormal structure (visible as a mosaic pat-
tern under polarized light), known as ‘woven bone’. This 
bone has a larger volume than lamellar bone, hence pag-
etic bone shows an increase in trabecular bone volume. 
Collagen fibres are also secreted by osteoblasts into the 
marrow space, giving rise to marrow fibrosis.
Clinical features
Bone pain is a common feature. Pagetic bone pain is char-
acteristically chronic and persistent rather than episodic, 
worse at rest and relieved by movement. It responds 
rapidly to antipagetic therapy. Because pagetic bone is 
soft and readily deforms, secondary osteoarthritis is very 
common. This is particularly so in the hip joints (from 
pelvic or femoral involvement). Pathological fractures of 
long bones (particularly in areas where lysis dominates) 
are common. Pagetic bone is very vascular and the high 
blood flow causes an elevation of skin temperature over 
the affected bone. In severe polyostotic disease in the el-
derly, the quantity of blood shunted through bone may 
precipitate heart failure. Spinal disease can cause a revers-
ible myelopathy through a vascular steal phenomenon. 
Involvement of the otic capsule causes deafness. The 
most feared complication is the development of osteosar-
coma, but fortunately this is rare. Osteosarcoma appears 
to arise from somatic mutations.
Investigations
Radiology
The radiographic appearances of bone reflect the histologi-
cal events. There are areas of focal bone resorption (lytic 
lesions). In long bones and in the skull, flare-shaped lytic 
fronts can progress through bone: typical rates of progres-
sion are 0.8–1.2 cm/year. The increased bone formation is 
reflected by loss of the normal trabecular pattern, sclerosis 
and an overall enlargement of bone dimensions. Deformity, 
arthritis and fracture are common secondary events visible 
on radiographs. Incomplete cortical ‘fissure’ fractures of 
the convex surface of deformed long bones often precede 
completed fractures. Isotope scanning is the best method of 
determining the extent of the disease.
Biochemical tests
Bone turnover markers. Biochemical tests are very use-
ful in monitoring the progress of Paget disease and its 
response to therapy. The markers in use are not specific 
to the disease, but are simply markers of increased rates 
of bone formation and resorption. The concentrations 
of plasma ALP and other markers reflect both the extent 
and the activity of the disease. Hence the greatest val-
ues are seen in patients with widespread active polyos-
totic disease. In such patients, the turnover markers are 
elevated to a greater extent than in any other metabolic 
bone disorder. In patients with monostotic disease, bone 
turnover markers need to be interpreted with caution; 
although increased for that individual, they may not be 
outside the reference range.
All bone turnover markers are increased proportion-
ately apart from osteocalcin, which is not increased to the 
extent expected from ALP measurements. Because of its 
rapid turnover, much of pagetic bone is ‘young’ and thus 
has a greater proportion of the linear, non-isomerized α-
C-telopeptide collagen cross-links, and a smaller propor-
tion of the β-isomerized C-telopeptides typical of older 
bone. This is reflected in the results of assays for α-CTX 
and β-CTX – patients with Paget disease having a greater 
than usual proportion of the former.
Alternative methods of monitoring disease activity can 
be employed. Over the lower limb and the forearm, skin 
temperature is a useful guide to disease activity, provided 
the disease is unilateral so that there is a normal limb for 
comparison. The skin temperature at the same point on 
opposite limbs in normal subjects does not differ by more 
than 0.5°C. The skin overlying a tibia affected by lytic 
Paget disease can be up to 4°C warmer than the unaf-
fected limb opposite. Alternatively, the uptake of isotope 
on a bone scintiscan gives a measure of disease activity.
Since bone resorption and formation are closely 
linked, there is, not surprisingly, a strong correlation be-
tween plasma ALP activity and bone resorption markers 
in the untreated state. It is arguable as to whether, in the 
presence of symptoms, signs and radiographic evidence 
of Paget disease, it is necessary for diagnostic purposes 
to measure resorption markers if the plasma ALP is el-
evated and other liver-derived enzymes are normal. The 
smaller coefficient of variation in ALP measurements at 
times when disease activity is stable (~10%), compared 
with that of urine resorption markers, is an additional ar-
gument in favour of using the former as the main index 
of disease activity. A potential advantage of measuring re-
sorption markers is the earlier detection of relapse after 
treatment, but the greater imprecision of the resorption 
markers means that in practice there is little advantage 
over measuring formation markers.
In response to treatment with potent bisphospho-
nates, the bone markers that appear to perform best (i.e. 
show the greatest changes) are total ALP, bone ALP 
and P1NP. The latter probably performs best in terms 
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
631
of pre-treatment values being clearly elevated in disease 
of limited extent, and showing the greatest changes with 
treatment and on relapse of disease. Using the same cri-
teria, the best performing resorption marker is the urine 
N-telopeptide/creatinine ratio.
Plasma and urinary calcium. Plasma and urinary con-
centrations of calcium (and phosphate) are usually nor-
mal in Paget disease, but patients with very extensive 
and active disease are prone to develop hypercalciuria 
and even hypercalcaemia if immobilized. This results 
from increased bone resorption and a relative fall in bone 
formation, detectable by an increase in bone resorption 
markers and a fall in ALP activity.
Responses to treatment
There is no cure for Paget disease, but the metabolic ac-
tivity of the affected bone can be reduced by the use of 
inhibitors of bone resorption – nowadays bisphospho-
nates are used almost exclusively. The main indication 
for treatment is bone pain. In practice, it can be diffi-
cult to distinguish pagetic from arthritic pain, so a trial 
of therapy may be given. Prompt (and prolonged) relief 
after treatment suggests that Paget disease was the main 
cause of pain. Myelopathy secondary to vascular steal is 
an indication for immediate treatment. Bisphosphonates 
are commonly give in preparation for joint replacement 
surgery, where one of the bones concerned is involved 
with Paget disease, in the hope that this will reduce the 
vascularity of the bone and make the surgery easier. There 
is, as yet, no clear evidence that aggressive treatment to 
reduce bone turnover to normal prevents fracture or the 
development of late complications such as deafness or 
arthritis, though it is probable (comparing radiographic 
series from the pre-bisphosphonate era and now) that de-
formity can be prevented.
In response to bisphosphonate treatment, there is an 
early fall in urine resorption markers reflecting the re-
duction in osteoclastic activity. This rapid fall is complete 
by four days after intravenous treatment. Bone formation 
falls secondarily to this, so that the decline in plasma ALP 
lags behind that of bone resorption markers by several 
months. Ultimately, a new steady state is reached where 
resorption and formation are matched (Fig. 31.9). When 
the treatment is with oral bisphosphonates, a similar pat-
tern is seen. Both bone resorption and bone formation 
markers fall in a monoexponential manner with a half-
time of around two weeks, but the response of the forma-
tion markers lags behind by two to three weeks.
During the period early after initiation of therapy where 
resorption has fallen but formation remains high, there is 
a considerable uptake of calcium and phosphate into bone, 
thus some degree of secondary hyperparathyroidism is 
182
91
63
28
10
0
Time (days)
0
600
1200
1800
2400
3000
3600
Urine a-CTX (mg/mmol creat)
*
*
*
*
*
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Serum b-CTX (nmol/L)
*
*
*
*
*
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Serum P1NP (ng/mL)
*
*
*
*
*
182
91
63
28
10
0
Time (days)
0
100
200
300
400
500
Total ALP (U/L)
*
*
*
*
*
Zoledronic acid
Risedronate
Zoledronic acid
Risedronate
Zoledronic acid
Risedronate
Zoledronic acid
Risedronate
FIGURE 31.9  ■ The treatment of Paget disease. Effects of a single infusion of zoledronate 5 mg or oral risedronate 30 mg/day for two 
months on bone turnover in patients with Paget disease. The very rapid drop in bone resorption markers (serum β-CTX and urine 
α-CTX) is followed by a slower fall in the formation markers (serum P1NP and ALP). Zoledronate produces a more profound and 
­sustained suppression of bone turnover. Hatched areas indicate normal reference intervals. (Based on data from Reid et al. 2005 in N 
Engl J Med 353: 898–908.)
632	
Clinical biochemistry
usual. Following intravenous bisphosphonates, this is evi-
dent some 2–4 weeks after the infusions but it is not of any 
great consequence in most patients. Plasma osteocalcin 
concentrations may actually increase by 30–40% within 
the first two weeks of treatment, probably because the 
secondary hyperparathyroidism stimulates an increase in 
1,25(OH)2D synthesis and this, in turn, stimulates osteo-
calcin production. Osteocalcin concentrations do subse-
quently decline with the fall in bone formation. Because 
of these disparate responses and the poor correlation with 
ALP in the untreated state, plasma osteocalcin measure-
ments are not used in the management of Paget disease.
Treatment with calcitonin produces reductions in both 
plasma ALP activity and urinary hydroxyproline excre-
tion to an average of 50% of the pretreatment values, 
within six months of starting treatment. Continued use 
of calcitonin produces no further improvement – the ‘pla-
teau’ phenomenon – and discontinuation of treatment is 
followed by prompt relapse.
The bisphosphonates have made the use of calcitonin 
and other treatments obsolete, since they are far more 
effective and have fewer side-effects. A large number of 
bisphosphonates have been used. The more recently de-
veloped, such as zoledronate, are substantially more potent 
and have a long duration of action. Patients whose turnover 
markers suppress to the lowest values are likely to remain in 
biochemical ‘remission’ the longest. For example, if plasma 
P1NP is suppressed to <40 μg/L six months after treatment 
with intravenous zoledronate, then >90% of patients will 
remain in biochemical remission 6 years later. If P1NP sup-
presses only to the ­60–80 μg/L range, then only ~60% will 
remain in remission. If treatment is discontinued, all pa-
tients seem ­ultimately to relapse – although in patients with 
limited disease, treatment with potent bisphosphonates can 
produce remissions of ten years or more.
Relapse is first detectable biochemically by an increase 
in markers of bone resorption. Retreatment when a re-
lapse has occurred produces a further suppression of bone 
turnover markers, but it is proportionately smaller, so the 
previous nadir is reached but concentrations are not usu-
ally reduced much further. The bisphosphonates, though 
effective orally, are poorly absorbed from the gut, so short 
intravenous regimens are frequently employed. The more 
potent amino-bisphosphonates (such as pamidronate, 
ibandronate and zoledronate), when given intravenously 
for the first time, often provoke an acute febrile reaction.
Etidronate, the first bisphosphonate to be developed, 
has a toxic effect upon osteoblasts and impairs mineral-
ization when given in high doses (>10 mg/kg per day) for 
>3 months. Etidronate also has a much greater effect on 
the TmP/GFR than the other bisphosphonates, so that 
hyperphosphataemia is not uncommon during treatment. 
It is little used nowadays as the newer bisphosphonates 
are significantly more effective and longer lasting.
BONE TURNOVER AND BONE DISEASE 
IN CHILDREN
In infants, children and adolescents, bone turnover, as 
assessed by biochemical markers, is at much higher lev-
els than in healthy adults. In general, the concentrations 
reflect growth velocity. Figure 31.3 illustrates age-related 
changes in ALP and osteocalcin: the mean values at peak 
growth velocity are 3–5-fold higher than mean adult val-
ues. For P1NP, mean values at peak growth velocity are 
6–10-fold higher than mean adult values. Turnover mark-
ers cannot accurately predict the accrual of bone during 
growth. The interpretation of bone marker data in indi-
vidual children is difficult as the growth rate, nutritional 
status, sex, age, pubertal stage and renal function of the 
child all need to be taken into account.
There is relatively little information about very early 
life, but in healthy infants the urine marker of bone re-
sorption NTX is low at birth, increases dramatically in 
the first ten days of life, remains very high for the next 
three months of life and then decreases to values similar 
to those at birth and one year of age.
Because new bone formed during growth is necessarily 
immature, the α-CTX isomer of the C-telopeptide pre-
dominates when this index is measured. Abnormalities in 
bone markers can be seen in various acquired and genetic 
disorders that affect bone directly or indirectly, and these 
are occasionally of diagnostic value (Tables 31.5 and 31.6).
GENETIC BONE DISEASES
There are numerous genetic bone diseases. The discus-
sion below refers only to those conditions not covered 
above, for which there is a clear role for the clinical bio-
chemistry laboratory in diagnosis (see Table 31.6).
Osteogenesis imperfecta
The term osteogenesis imperfecta (OI) encompasses a 
group of genetic disorders usually defined by recurrent 
fractures, low bone mass and skeletal fragility. Most cases 
are dominantly inherited and result from mutations in the 
genes encoding type I collagen (COL1A1 and COL1A2). 
The condition is not synonymous with type I collagen 
abnormalities, as a number of genetic disorders affecting 
type I collagen or its post-translational modification that 
have skeletal phenotypes are not usually included in the 
TABLE 31.5  Bone turnover abnormalities in 
­paediatric bone diseases
Disorder
Abnormalities
Prematurity
Bone ALP and osteocalcin 
relatively reduced, but increase 
after several weeks
Malabsorption/
malnutrition
All turnover markers relatively 
reduced
Growth hormone 
deficiency
Relative reduction in formation 
markers – which increase with 
growth hormone treatment
Glucocorticoid use
Relative reduction in both 
formation and resorption 
markers
Vitamin D deficiency
Increased ALP and P1NP, but 
osteocalcin relatively low: 
resorption markers  
increased
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
633
OI rubric. These include Caffey disease, and the type VI 
and VII variants of the Ehlers–Danlos syndrome. In addi-
tion, some genetic disorders of skeletal fragility included 
in classifications of OI are the consequence of mutations 
in key osteoblast genes (LRP5, WNT1 and SP7) that code 
for ­proteins concerned with matrix homeostasis, and are not 
­directly related to collagen metabolism and matrix structure.
More than 200 mutations in the collagen genes 
COL1A1 and COL1A2 that cause OI have been identi-
fied. All the mutations result in decreased synthesis and 
secretion of normal type I procollagen. When no abnor-
mal procollagen is synthesized, the phenotype is generally 
mild: this is the commonest form of the disease, arising 
where a mutation in one of the COL1A1 genes produces 
a null allele (haploinsufficiency). When abnormal mol-
ecules are synthesized in addition to normal type I col-
lagen, the phenotype can range from very mild to lethal, 
depending on the nature and location of the mutation.
The diagnosis of OI is predominantly based on clini-
cal assessment (including family history) and imaging. 
Biochemical tests are helpful with excluding differential 
diagnoses, but with a few exceptions are not generally 
specific. Ultrasound and radiographic examinations are 
useful for intrauterine diagnosis of severely affected fe-
tuses. The quantity and some structural characteristics of 
type I collagen produced by cultured skin fibroblasts can 
be assessed in vitro.
The usual biochemical indices of metabolic bone dis-
ease are normal in osteogenesis imperfecta, though re-
sorption markers are often increased when the patient is 
immobilized. In patients with haploinsufficiency, the bone 
formation markers plasma procollagen C-terminal peptide 
and procollagen N-terminal peptide (which are derived 
from type 1 collagen) are often relatively low compared to 
the other formation markers such as bone ALP.
The genetic bases of a number of recessively-inherited 
OI variants have been identified. The majority of the 
genes involved code for proteins that regulate the post-
translational modification of type I collagen, and there 
are some instances where specific biochemical tests can 
help. In patients with Bruck syndrome (OI with contrac-
tures), where there is defective cross-linking of collagen 
(owing to mutations in FKBP10 or PLOD2) the usual ratio 
of pyridinoline to deoxypyridinoline in urine is reversed. 
Another recessive OI variant results from mutations in 
SERPINF1 that encodes pigment epithelium-derived fac-
tor (PEDF), a secreted glycoprotein of as yet uncertain 
function in bone. Pigment epithelium-derived factor can 
be measured in normal serum and is undetectable in the 
serum of patients with this OI variant.
Bisphosphonate treatment is now widely used in 
children with more severe forms of osteogenesis im-
perfecta. During growth, osteoclasts remove bone from 
the ­endosteal surface of the diaphysis and the primary 
TABLE 31.6  Biochemical abnormalities in genetic bone diseases
Disease
Gene
Effects
Biochemical findings
Osteogenesis imperfectaa
Haploinsufficiency
COL1A1
Insufficient type I collagen 
produced
Low plasma P1NP and P1CP 
concentrations
‘Type VI’
SERPINF1
?
Low plasma concentrations of pigment 
epithelium-derived factor (PEDF)
Bruck syndrome and Kuskokwim 
disease
PLOD2
Impaired telopeptide 
cross-linking
Reversal of usual pyridinoline: 
deoxypyridinoline molar ratio in urine 
from ~9:1 to ~1:7
FKBP10
Ehlers–Danlos syndromea
 
 
 
  kyphoscoliotic type
  (VIA)/Nevo syndrome
PLOD1
Lysyl hydroxylase deficiency
Reversal of usual pyridinoline: 
deoxypyridinoline molar ratio in urine 
from ~9:1 to ~1:7
Osteopetrosis
Autosomal recessive (severe)
TCIRG1
Impaired acidification of 
extracellular compartment 
of the osteoclast
Increased TRAP
Autosomal recessive or dominant 
(severe)
CICN7
Increased TRAP and BB fraction of 
creatine kinase
Autosomal recessive with renal 
tubular acidosis (RTA)
CAII
 
RTA
Autosomal recessive (intermediate)
PLEKHM1
Impaired vesicular trafficking
Increased TRAP
Pycnodysostosis
CTSK
Cathepsin K deficiency
Cathepsin K concentrations low, ICTP/
CTX ratio increased
Osteosclerosis
Progressive diaphyseal dysplasia
TGFB1
Mutations affect latency-
associated peptide of 
TGFβ1
↑ TGFβ1 activity
ALP and other bone turnover markers 
modestly increased
Sclerosteosis and Van Buchem 
disease
SOST
Inactivating mutations in 
sclerostin
ALP and other bone turnover markers 
modestly increased
Juvenile Paget disease
TNFRSF11B
Osteoprotegerin deficiency
ALP and other bone turnover markers 
very high
Familial expansile osteolysis
TNFRSF11A
Activating mutations of 
RANK
ALP and other bone turnover markers 
increased significantly
Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia
GNAS1
Activating somatic mutations 
in Gsα
ALP and other bone turnover markers 
increased significantly
aNote: Only variants with distinctive biochemical findings are listed. Please refer to text for explanation of abbreviations.
634	
Clinical biochemistry
spongiosa in the metaphysis, as part of the modelling pro-
cess. Bisphosphonates inhibit this osteoclastic resorption, 
with the end result that cortices are thicker and trabecu-
lar number is increased. Bone pain is reduced, the bones 
are stronger and fracture less frequently. The benefit of 
bisphosphonates in children and adults with milder forms 
of osteogenesis imperfecta is less certain.
High bone mass
High bone mass disorders are classified according to 
whether there is excessive bone formation (osteosclero-
sis) or a failure of bone resorption (osteopetrosis).
Osteopetrosis
Osteopetrosis is further categorized according to whether 
there are normal or increased numbers of ­osteoclasts: 
osteoclast-rich (the majority of cases) or osteoclast-poor. 
Osteoclast-rich osteopetrosis arises ­because of mutations 
in a number of genes encoding proteins important in gen-
erating and excreting ­hydrogen ions onto the bone surface 
sealed beneath the ­osteoclast. The genes usually involved 
are TCIRG1, CICN7, PLEKHM1 or CAII. Osteoclasts are 
typically abundant, but their capacity to resorb bone is im-
paired. Severe osteopetrosis typically becomes manifest 
during infancy. The bone marrow space is occluded so the 
infant develops ­leukoerythroblastic anaemia with bruising 
and bleeding and extramedullary haematopoiesis. Growth 
is poor and blindness and deafness occur because of cranial 
nerve entrapment. The radiographic features are diagnos-
tic. The plasma calcium concentration may vary and seems 
to reflect the dietary calcium intake. Restriction of dietary 
calcium may precipitate tetany, presumably because of 
defective osteoclastic bone resorption. Urinary calcium 
excretion is often low. Plasma total and tartrate-resistant 
acid phosphatase activities are increased, although ALP is 
normal. This condition can be cured by successful bone 
marrow transplantation, which permits colonization of the 
host marrow by normal osteoclast precursors.
Carbonic anhydrase II deficiency, resulting from mu-
tation in the CAII gene, is a congenital disorder com-
prising osteopetrosis, renal tubular acidosis and cerebral 
calcification. Although haematopoiesis is not affected, 
cranial nerve entrapment may be a feature. The labo-
ratory findings include a metabolic acidosis and greatly 
reduced activity of the enzyme carbonic anhydrase II in 
erythrocytes. This enzyme is widely distributed and is 
found, among other places, in normal osteoclasts.
The osteoclast-poor forms arise from inactivating mu-
tations in TNSF11 (encoding RANKL) or TNFRSF11A 
(encoding RANK). Children with the latter also have hy-
pogammaglobulinaemia and commonly develop severe but 
transient hypercalcaemia after bone marrow transplantation.
Progressive diaphyseal dysplasia
This osteosclerotic condition results from mutations 
in the gene encoding TGFβ. It is characterized by new 
bone formation, affecting predominantly the diaphyses of 
the long bones and the skull. The clinical features may 
include difficulty in walking, muscle wasting and leg pain. 
Laboratory findings of note are increased plasma ALP ac-
tivity and other bone turnover markers.
Familial or idiopathic hyperphosphatasia  
(juvenile Paget disease)
This is a very rare, recessively inherited disease that re-
sults from deletion of, or inactivating mutations in, the 
gene for osteoprotegerin (TNFRSF11B). The onset is 
in infancy with skeletal abnormalities including dwarf-
ism, bone fragility, a large head and anterior bowing of 
the limb bones. The bone shows greatly increased cel-
lular activity. The characteristic biochemical changes are 
very high levels of plasma ALP activity and all other bone 
turnover markers.
Other disorders
Familial expansile osteolysis and related  
disorders
These rare, dominantly inherited conditions result from 
activating mutations in the signal peptide domain of 
RANK. Painful, progressively worsening expansile lytic 
lesions develop in bone. The characteristic biochemical 
changes are a sustained rise in plasma ALP activity and all 
other bone turnover markers.
Fibrogenesis imperfecta ossium
Fibrogenesis imperfecta ossium is a disorder of bone ma-
trix in which collagen is laid down in a haphazard fashion. 
The onset is after the age of 50 years and it presents with 
severe bone pain and tenderness. The plasma ALP activ-
ity is consistently elevated.
Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia
Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia is characterized by well-
circumscribed areas of marrow fibrosis that replace bone 
and give the radiographic appearance of cysts, through 
which pathological fractures may occur. Plasma ALP and 
urinary hydroxyproline are variably increased, depending 
on the extent of the disease. The major biochemical inter-
est in this disorder is its association with endocrine diseases 
such as thyrotoxicosis, acromegaly, Cushing syndrome, 
precocious puberty and hypophosphataemic osteomalacia 
(McCune–Albright syndrome). The endocrine disorders 
are the consequence of constitutive (non-ligand-dependent) 
activation of the adenylate cyclase second messenger sys-
tem. They arise from somatic mutations in the gene for the 
α subunit of the stimulating guanine binding protein (Gsα), 
which forms a critical part of the adenylate cyclase activat-
ing system, linking the receptor to the second messenger.
CONCLUSION
Bone is a metabolically active tissue. In mature bone, 
there is a continuous cycle of bone resorption and re-
placement. Osteoblasts are responsible for the synthesis 
	
31  Metabolic bone disease	
635
of bone matrix and osteoclasts for bone resorption. The 
important role of osteocytes is increasingly recognized. 
Normal bone formation, metabolism and repair depend 
on the coordinated activity of these cells and the integrity 
of the homoeostatic mechanisms for calcium and phos-
phate, which primarily involve parathyroid hormone, 
FGF23 and vitamin D.
Metabolic bone disease can be due to intrinsic abnor-
malities of the cellular elements of bone or to abnormali-
ties of the homoeostatic mechanisms for calcium and 
phosphate.
The commonest metabolic bone diseases are osteo­
porosis – a generalized reduction in bone density due 
to an imbalance between the rates of bone forma-
tion and resorption, which can have several causes, of 
which oestrogen deficiency in postmenopausal women 
is particularly important; osteomalacia, a defect of 
mineralization related either to a lack of calcium or 
phosphate or to defective osteoblast function; CKD-
MBD, a complex bone disease occurring in patients 
with chronic kidney disease, and Paget disease, a con-
dition of unknown aetiology characterized by greatly 
increased osteoclastic activity and disordered new 
bone formation.
Biochemical measurements are of considerable im-
portance in the diagnosis of metabolic bone diseases 
and in the assessment of the response of patients to 
treatment.
Further reading
Kanis JA. Pathophysiology and treatment of Paget’s disease of bone. 
2nd ed. London: M Dunitz; 1998. 
Definitive account of Paget disease.
Rosen CJ, editor. Primer on the metabolic bone diseases and disorders 
of mineral metabolism. 8th ed. Ames, IO: Wiley/American Society of 
Bone and Mineral Research (ASBMR); 2013. 
A succinct and authoritative account of the current state of knowledge in 
the fields of bone biology, calcium metabolism and metabolic bone disease, 
written by the leaders in the respective fields.
Seibel MJ, Robins SP, Bilezekian JP, editors. Dynamics of bone and 
cartilage metabolism. 2nd ed. London: Academic Press; 2006. 
Good background information on bone biochemistry.
Smith R, Wordsworth P. Clinical and biochemical disorders of the 
skeleton. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2005. 
An excellent reference for disorders of the skeleton associated with known 
biochemical abnormalities and genetic disorders.
APPENDIX 31.1: INDICATIONS FOR 
­DIAGNOSTIC TRANSILIAC BONE BIOPSY
•	 Excessive skeletal fragility in unusual circumstances 
(e.g. in a young adults).
•	 When a mineralizing defect is a diagnostic possibility.
•	 Characterization of bone lesion in CKD-MBD.
•	 Diagnosis and assessment of response to treatment 
in vitamin D-resistant osteomalacia and related 
disorders.
•	 When a rare metabolic bone disease is suspected.
To get maximum information from a biopsy, fluo-
rochrome labelling of bone is advised. Tetracycline 
(250 mg q.d.s.) or demeclocycline (150 mg q.d.s.) should 
be administered by mouth for two days, 18 and 17 days 
before the biopsy, and again five and four days before 
the biopsy. Tetracyclines are taken up into the mineral-
ization front and ‘double labelling’ permits calculation 
of bone formation and mineralization rates. The biopsy 
should be collected into phosphate-buffered formalin or 
70% alcohol and not decalcified. An experienced bone 
histomorphometrist is needed to interpret the biopsy.
APPENDIX 31.2: PROTOCOL FOR 
­DESFERRIOXAMINE TEST IN DIALYSIS 
PATIENTS
Desferrioxamine (DFO) 5 mg/kg body weight is adminis-
tered i.v. (in 100 mL 5% dextrose during the last 60 min of 
a dialysis session in haemodialysis patients). The plasma 
aluminium concentration is determined before this ses-
sion and before the subsequent session (i.e. approximately 
44 h after DFO administration).
An increment in plasma aluminium >7.5 μmol/L sug-
gests aluminium accumulation in bone. When coupled 
with a low concentration of PTH (<15 pmol/L with an 
intact PTH assay), it is indicative of a high total alumin-
ium burden, and has a sensitivity of 87% and specificity of 
95% for the diagnosis of aluminium-related bone disease.
If the plasma PTH is >65 pmol/L, patients are not 
prone to the effects of aluminium at the bone mineraliza-
tion front.
636
C H A P T E R  3 2
Biochemistry of articular disorders
Jeremy G. Jones
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  636
THE ARTICULAR SYSTEM  636
DISORDERS OF THE ARTICULAR SYSTEM  637
Osteoarthritis (OA)  637
Inflammatory arthritis  637
The connective tissue diseases  638
Aches and pains  638
Crystal arthritis  639
ARTICULAR INVOLVEMENT IN ENDOCRINE AND 
METABOLIC DISEASES  643
Diabetes mellitus  643
Other endocrine disorder  643
Haemochromatosis  643
Alkaptonuria  643
LABORATORY TESTING IN ARTICULAR DISEASE  643
Anaemia in rheumatoid arthritis  643
The acute phase response  644
Examination of synovial fluid  644
Rheumatoid factor  644
Other autoantibody tests  644
CONCLUSION  645
INTRODUCTION
While biochemical abnormalities themselves are respon-
sible for few articular disorders, clinical biochemistry 
plays an important part in the diagnosis, treatment and 
monitoring of many of these conditions.
This chapter starts with a description of the articular 
system and its diseases, which will put the role of bio-
chemistry in these conditions into perspective.
Crystal synovitis, as seen in gout and pseudogout, is the 
only common articular condition caused by an underly-
ing biochemical abnormality. This is described in some 
detail along with examination of synovial fluid, the one 
biochemical investigation that is primarily the province of 
the rheumatologist.
Some diseases with a primary biochemical abnormal-
ity like diabetes, alkaptonuria, endocrine conditions and 
haemochromatosis have articular manifestations and also 
warrant discussion.
Immunological abnormalities are at the root of an im-
portant group of rheumatic diseases, the connective tis-
sue diseases. Autoantibody formation is a major disease 
manifestation and, in some hospitals, tests to identify and 
measure autoantibodies are performed in the biochemis-
try laboratory. These tests are described briefly.
THE ARTICULAR SYSTEM
The joint is the pivotal structure of the articular system. 
Joints can be considered as discontinuities in the skele-
ton that permit controlled mobility. They have different 
structures depending on their functional requirements. 
When no movement is needed, the joint is bound to-
gether by tough fibrous tissue (e.g. the skull ‘sutures’). 
In cartilaginous joints, the bone ends are joined by com-
pressible fibrocartilage and reinforced by a surrounding 
tough fibrous tissue (as in the symphysis pubis and the ma-
nubriosternal joint) and permit only a limited amount of 
movement. This type of joint tends to be located centrally. 
If a moderate or wide range of movement is required, a 
space must exist between the bone ends, forming a discon-
tinuous ‘synovial’ joint. Most of the peripheral joints fall 
into this category.
The most important joints from a clinician’s point of 
view are the peripheral ones, which enable our arms and 
legs to move through such a wide range, our hands to be 
endowed with such dexterity and strength and our feet 
to carry us so uncomplainingly when we stand, walk, run 
and jump.
While synovial joints have the same basic structure 
and physiology, individual joints have evolved differ-
ently, depending on their situation and what is expected 
of them. For example, the knee, ankle and finger joints, 
which move mainly in one plane, are ‘hinge’ joints, while 
the hip and shoulder, which move in all directions, are 
ball and socket joints. Of course, to carry out even the 
simplest of tasks, like opening a door or walking up a step, 
we have to coordinate the movement of several joints, 
not to mention contracting and relaxing the muscles on 
­either side of the joints.
The archetypical synovial joint is an enclosed space with 
a negative pressure (Fig. 32.1). The bone ends that move 
against each other (the articular surfaces) are covered with 
articular cartilage. This is made up of proteoglycans and 
collagen, combined in such a way as to allow it to absorb 
	
32  Biochemistry of articular disorders	
637
huge forces of pressure like a shock absorber, while pro-
viding a shiny surface for smooth, low-­friction movement. 
A healthy joint is lubricated by a small amount of synovial 
fluid (0–4 mL). This is an ultrafiltrate of plasma with ad-
ditional components secreted by the synovium. The most 
important of these is hyaluronate, a linear repeating di-
saccharide with a molecular weight of some 107 Da. This 
provides the fluid with its viscoelastic properties without 
which the cartilage would fail and smooth movement 
would be impossible. Cartilage and synovial fluid together 
maintain coefficients of friction of <0.02.
The bone ends are enclosed by the tough joint ­capsule 
which is lined by the synovial membrane, a structure only 
a cell or two thick (Fig. 32.1). Synovial cells phagocytose 
intra-­articular debris, secrete many components of ­synovial 
fluid and possess immunological functions.
While we talk of ‘articular disorders’, it is not really 
possible to consider the joint in isolation. Each joint 
depends on other structures like ligaments, tendons, 
muscles and bone for its function and stability. Bone and 
muscle disease are dealt with in separate chapters.
DISORDERS OF THE ARTICULAR SYSTEM
There are over 100 rheumatic disorders with differ-
ent underlying causes, different treatments and differ-
ent outcomes. These conditions can be broadly divided 
into non-inflammatory diseases, of which osteoarthritis 
is the most important, and inflammatory conditions such 
as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), ankylosing spondylitis and 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE or lupus).
Osteoarthritis (OA)
The most common form of articular disease is osteoar-
thritis, in which the articular cartilage becomes fissured 
and gradually wears away. The joint tries to heal itself 
by forming bony out-growths on the sides of the joints 
(osteophytes). Trauma to a joint predisposes to OA, as 
do some rare biochemical disorders like alkaptonuria. 
However, in most cases, apart from an inherited tendency 
and increasing frequency with age, the cause cannot be 
identified. For many years, OA was thought to be due to 
degeneration or ‘wear and tear’. Recently, we have ap-
preciated that a degree of inflammation is often present if 
sought and that calcium pyrophosphate and basic calcium 
phosphate crystals are frequently found in osteoarthritic 
joints (see below).
At present, we have no treatment to influence this 
process. The knee and hip are often affected and, if the 
pain and limitation to mobility are severe enough, the 
orthopaedic surgeon will remove the joint and replace 
it with an artificial one, usually with very gratifying 
results.
Inflammatory arthritis
The other major class of articular disease is inflam-
matory arthritis. This consists of a group of systemic 
­immunological diseases that focus their attention on 
the synovium of the joint. Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is 
the archetypical form of inflammatory arthritis. In RA, 
there is an imbalance between the proinflammatory and 
anti-inflammatory cytokines that favours the induction 
of autoimmunity (an immune reaction against one’s own 
tissues), chronic inflammation and joint damage. The 
synovium becomes inflamed, resulting in pain, tender-
ness, heat and stiffness in the joint as well as a systemic 
reaction consisting of malaise and fatigue. An acute phase 
reaction ensues, which can be detected and monitored by 
measurement of plasma C-reactive protein (CRP) con-
centration or the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). 
In what may well be a separate process, in time the sy-
novial cells increase in size and number, the synovium 
becomes thickened and develops the changes of chronic 
inflammation with infiltration by macrophages and lym-
phocytes. There are also alterations in the small blood 
vessels. In addition, the amount of synovial fluid in the 
joint increases in quantity, which adds to the swelling and 
dysfunction of the affected joint. A number of different 
cytokines associated with the rheumatoid process can 
be found in the synovial tissue and fluid; these include 
tumour necrosis factor alpha (TNFα), interleukins one 
(IL-1) and six (IL-6). There are also abnormalities of 
the T and B cell lymphocytes. If left to its own devices, 
the thickened synovium will spread over the cartilage and 
erode it and the neighbouring bone. This results in joint 
damage, deformity and disability.
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, e.g. diclofe-
nac, ibuprofen and naproxen are used less frequently than 
they once were. Although they often provide symptom-
atic relief, they increase the risk of cardiovascular events, 
can cause chronic kidney disease and have no influence 
on the long-term outcome of the disease.
Bone
Key
Articular
cartilage
Joint
capsule
Synovial
membrane
Periosteum
Bone
FIGURE 32.1  ■  A typical synovial joint.
638	
Clinical biochemistry
Of more concern in the long term, is the chronic in-
flammation that results in joint damage and disability. 
Until about 20 years ago, there was little that we could 
do to slow or even stop the inexorable progress of this 
destructive process, meaning that many people with 
RA became very disabled with joint deformity and pain. 
However, there have been dramatic improvements in our 
drug treatment of this most unpleasant condition. We 
have learnt that we need to diagnose the condition as early 
as possible. This enables treatment with one or more dis-
ease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs (DMARDs) (e.g. 
methotrexate, leflunomide, sulfasalazine), to be started 
as soon as possible. As a rule, these drugs rapidly bring 
the arthritis under control, but different drugs suit dif-
ferent people so sometimes a degree of trial and error is 
required. DMARDs are taken for long periods and can 
cause side-effects such as liver damage or bone marrow 
suppression, and regular blood tests (full blood count, 
ESR, CRP and liver function tests) are used to monitor 
their safety as well as the activity of the disease.
More recently, the treatment of RA has been trans-
formed by the introduction of so-called ‘biologics’ 
(monoclonal antibodies designed to counteract the ef-
fects of cytokines or alter the function of T or B cell 
lymphocytes). They are expensive and need to be taken 
long term, so at present they are used in the cases where 
DMARDs have been unsuccessful. However, in time, 
they may become the first-line in treatment of RA. 
Biologics in common use include agents against TNFα 
(e.g. etanercept) and anti IL-6 (tocilizumab), as well as 
B cell depleters (rituximab) and T cell blockers (abata-
cept). This is a field of active research with the potential 
to transform the treatment not only of RA but of many 
other immunological diseases.
Other examples of chronic inflammatory arthritis in-
clude ankylosing spondylitis, which mainly affects the 
small joints of the spine, the arthritis associated with pso-
riasis and the ‘reactive’ arthritis one sees in response to 
certain intestinal or genitourinary infections.
The connective tissue diseases
The connective tissue diseases (CTDs) are a fascinating 
group of conditions in which, for reasons we do not un-
derstand, the normal fine balance of the immune system 
gets disturbed, causing the body to react against itself. In 
health, the immune system consists of series of counter-
balancing mechanisms that marshal defences against alien 
material like bacteria, viruses or foreign tissue, while not 
reacting in this way against itself. The identification of 
foreign tissue (the antigen) is the first step in the process 
and is followed by a series of defensive reactions includ-
ing manufacturing antibodies. In CTDs, the person’s 
ability to recognize their own tissue goes awry and they 
form antibodies against their own tissue (autoantibodies). 
In some cases, these are responsible for the clinical mani-
festations of the disease; in others they are a peripheral 
effect of the underlying disease process. Theories of the 
pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases are discussed in 
Chapter 30.
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) mainly affects 
younger women and can involve one or more of the 
bodily systems. It is characterized by the formation of 
autoantibodies against the cell’s nucleus, or part of the 
nucleus, which are believed to be responsible for many of 
the manifestations of the disease.
Joint pain is common, although it is unusual to see 
joint damage such as occurs in RA. SLE can result in a va-
riety of manifestations in other systems, for example vari-
ous rashes, haemolytic anaemia and glomerulonephritis 
leading to renal impairment, as well as cerebral, lung and 
heart problems. Some of these can be life threatening.
Autoantibodies against cell nuclei (antinuclear factor, 
ANF) are present in the plasma in almost every patient 
with SLE. However, they are also frequently present 
in other CTDs and in a proportion of healthy people. 
Antibodies to specific components of the nucleus are 
more specific. For example, antibodies against double-
stranded DNA are strongly suggestive of SLE.
Management depends on the systems affected. The 
joint and skin manifestations can often be controlled with 
hydrochloroquine and/or low doses of prednisolone. 
More severe cases require the use of high doses of corti-
costeroids with immunosuppression using cyclophospha-
mide, azathioprine or mycophenolate mofetil.
Other CTDs are associated with autoantibody form­
ation, although in these cases the disease is not believed 
to be caused by specific antibody-antigen complexes as 
in SLE. Examples of these conditions include Sjögren 
syndrome, polymyositis, scleroderma and primary biliary 
cirrhosis.
For details and associated immunological abnormali-
ties, see Table 32.1. Table 32.1 is, of necessity, an over-
simplified guide to some of the more important signs and 
symptoms seen in the CTDs, with their associated an-
tibodies. There is often a crossover of antibodies in the 
various diseases and the antibodies are by no means seen 
in every case.
Aches and pains
If we move from the laboratory to the clinic or surgery, 
‘articular disorders’ take on another perspective. About 
one-fifth of the patients in a GP’s surgery will complain 
of musculoskeletal symptoms, such as aches, pain, stiff-
ness or disability. Only a proportion of these patients 
will have a demonstrable disease or significant anatomi-
cal abnormality. Some will have abnormalities associated 
with the way they move their musculoskeletal system 
(‘mechanical’ pain), while in other cases, no abnormality 
can be identified. This does not mean the symptoms are 
imagined, but in the absence of an abnormality, attempts 
to diagnose and ‘cure’ a disease will, of course, be futile. 
Doctors are trained to diagnose diseases and then treat 
them. Too many doctors are uncomfortable when they 
are not able to make a diagnosis. This may provoke them 
to order unnecessary investigations in these often anxious 
patients, thus exposing both parties to the dangers of false 
positives, laboratory or clerical error and misinterpreta-
tion of the results.
As a rheumatologist, each week the author sees one or 
two patients referred as a consequence of an inappropri-
ately performed blood test. These patients usually have 
mechanical or unexplained musculoskeletal symptoms 
	
32  Biochemistry of articular disorders	
639
and their doctors have performed a batch of tests with 
vague rheumatological connotations, presumably to re-
assure themselves or to be seen to be doing something 
for the patient. The problem is that these tests are of-
ten positive in healthy people, especially at low levels. 
For example, low titres of ANF are widespread, and it 
is common for a number of anxious young women to be 
referred with aches and pains, ‘weakly positive ANF’ and 
a sheaf of internet misinformation about how fatal SLE 
is. Informed of their ‘positive’ test, they have often had 
to wait several months for their referral appointment, 
in fear and trepidation, and come prepared to hear the 
worst. False positive rheumatoid factor tests, high plasma 
urate concentrations and slightly raised ESRs produce a 
steady stream of worried well people with fears they have 
rheumatoid arthritis, gout or inflammatory disease, re-
spectively. Inappropriate tests are not only of concern to 
the biochemist and accountant. They cause a mass of un-
necessary work for the clinician, but the real victims are 
the unfortunate patients who have to endure long periods 
of unnecessary strife, stress and uncertainty.
Crystal arthritis
Just as crystals form in  vitro when the concentration 
of a solute is sufficiently high to allow nucleation and 
growth, so do they form in vivo. Crystals are sometimes 
found in joint fluid. These include monosodium urate 
(MSU), calcium pyrophosphate (CPP), basic calcium 
phosphates, cholesterol and oxalate crystals. The body’s 
response to crystals varies. In some cases, the presence 
of crystals in a joint provokes a severe inflammatory re-
action, but researchers have found crystals in joint fluid 
from asymptomatic patients. Different crystals tend to 
favour different sites. Monosodium urate is preferentially 
deposited in cartilage and synovium, CPP in articular 
fibrocartilage and basic calcium phosphates in tendons 
and hyaline cartilage. The formation of crystals is influ-
enced by physical factors such as temperature and hydro-
gen ion concentration (pH), but it is a complex process 
and what follows is a practical simplification.
Hyperuricaemia and gout
Gout is the best known form of crystal arthritis and is 
caused by MSU crystal deposition in articular tissues. 
The term hyperuricaemia is used to describe excessive 
uric acid or urate in the blood as defined by solubility 
in plasma at 37 °C; that is, >0.42 mmol/L in males and 
>0.36 mmol/L in females. While there is a relationship 
between MSU crystal deposition and hyperuricaemia, it 
is by no means absolute. Hyperuricaemia without attacks 
of gouty arthritis is common, and sometimes, particularly 
during an acute attack, plasma uric acid concentrations 
are normal.
Uric acid is the end-product of purine metabolism 
(Fig. 32.2). Purines are components of nucleic acids and 
of nucleotides that are involved in energy transformation 
and phosphorylation reactions and act as intracellular 
messengers. They are derived from diet, the breakdown of 
nucleotides and from de novo synthesis. Purines are me-
tabolized to urate via hypoxanthine and xanthine, the fi-
nal step being catalysed by xanthine oxidase. The kidneys 
excrete two-thirds of the urate, the remainder being re-
moved via the bowel, where it is broken down into carbon 
dioxide and ammonia by bacterial action. The amount of 
urate pooled in the body depends on the relationship be-
tween the input from diet, the breakdown of nucleotides 
and de novo synthesis versus the output via kidney and 
bowel. Hyperuricaemia results from excess production 
of urate or reduced excretion, or sometimes both mecha-
nisms. The average uric acid pool size is 7.2 mmol in men 
TABLE 32.1  The connective tissue diseases, their common clinical features and frequently 
associated autoantibodies
Disease
Clinical features
Autoantibodies
SLE
Rashes, joint pains, glomerulonephritis, haemolytic  
anaemia, leukopenia, neuropsychiatric lupus,  
pericarditis, pleurisy, vasculitis, fatigue
Anti-nuclear factor
Anti-double-stranded DNA
Anti-Sm
Anti-Ro
Anti-La
Scleroderma
Thickened skin, Raynaud phenomenon, pulmonary  
hypertension, calcinosis, pulmonary fibrosis
Anti-nuclear factor
Anti-centromere
Sjögren syndrome
Dry eyes, dry mouth, joint pains, fatigue, Raynaud  
phenomenon
Anti-nuclear factor
Anti-Ro
Anti-La
Rheumatoid factor
Polymyositis
Muscle weakness and wasting, joint pains, pulmonary  
fibrosis, fatigue
Anti-nuclear factor
Anti-Jo-1
Anti-synthetase
Dermatomyositis
Proximal muscle weakness and wasting, rashes,  
joint pains, pulmonary fibrosis
Anti-nuclear factor
Anti-Mi2
Wegener granulomatosis
Vasculitis, sinusitis, pulmonary infiltration,  
glomerulonephritis, rashes
cANCA
Microscopic polyangiitis
Glomerulonephritis, joint/muscle pains, rashes, lung  
infiltration
pANCA
Primary biliary cirrhosis
Jaundice, itching, joint pains, Raynaud phenomenon
Antimitochondrial
cANCA, cytoplasmic anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; pANCA, perinuclear anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody; SLE, systemic lupus 
erythematosus.
640	
Clinical biochemistry
and 3.6 mmol in women. Two-thirds is turned over each 
day. The uric acid pool of people with gout is increased to 
12–24 mmol; those with deposits of urate (tophi) may have 
a pool as large as 180 mmol.
Gout tends to run in families and is frequent in cer-
tain races, such as the New Zealand Maori. This points 
to an inherited abnormality in urate metabolism, but 
while there are well-defined enzyme defects resulting 
in hyperuricaemia, for example hypoxanthine-guanine 
phosphoribosyl transferase deficiency, the cause of the 
Lesch–Nyhan syndrome (see p. 640), these are rare. In 
most cases, we can only divide people with gout into 
those who undersecrete uric acid from the kidney (85%) 
and those who synthesize an increased amount.
Gout commonly affects middle-aged males; it is most 
unusual in premenopausal women. Hyperuricaemia, 
family history, obesity, hypertension, age, alcohol con-
sumption and renal insufficiency are risk factors for gout. 
Several drugs, particularly diuretics, low-dose ­aspirin 
and ciclosporin, and lead poisoning, may provoke gout 
by causing hyperuricaemia. Conditions with high pu-
rine turnover, such as leukaemia and lymphoma and 
their treatment with cytotoxic drugs, can cause gout and 
­sometimes acute urate nephropathy by increasing the 
urate load.
Asymptomatic hyperuricaemia. Asymptomatic hy-
peruricaemia is the first stage of gout. This is seen on 
at least one occasion in as many as 10% of adults, the 
majority of whom never experience an attack of gout. 
In the past, we have ignored asymptomatic hyperuri-
caemia, but it is looking increasingly likely that it is a 
risk factor for acute coronary syndromes and it is also 
linked with obesity, type 2 diabetes, hypertension and 
hyperlipidaemia.
Acute gout. Acute gout usually strikes the first meta-
tarsophalangeal joint (the bunion joint in the big toe) at 
night. Crystal formation is more likely at colder temper-
atures and this joint is cooler than more proximal ones of 
a similar size. The joint rapidly becomes severely pain-
ful, swollen, red and exquisitely tender to touch. The 
weight of the bedclothes is unbearable. There is often 
a systemic reaction with fever, an acute phase ­reaction 
and a leukocytosis. While acute gout most commonly 
attacks the great toe (70% of cases), the instep, the ankle 
or knee can be affected. Examination of synovial fluid 
drawn from an affected joint will show many MSU crys-
tals. Left to itself, acute gout usually subsides over ten 
days or so.
While some patients never have another attack, there are 
usually further sporadic attacks. These may become more 
frequent and may involve several areas at a time (polyar-
ticular gout) as the urate load increases and the disease 
progresses. In time, upper limb joints such as the fingers, 
wrists and elbows become affected.
Xanthine
Inosine
Inosine
monophosphate
De novo
synthesis
Uric acid
Xanthine oxidase
Xanthine oxidase
HGPRT
APRT
Guanosine
Guanosine
monophosphate
Nucleic
acids
Adenine
Dihydroxy
adenine
Adenosine
Purine
bases
Purine
nucleosides
Purine
nucleotides
Adenosine
monophosphate
Nucleic
acids
Hypoxanthine
Salvage pathways
Degradation pathways
Guanine
FIGURE 32.2  ■  A simplified diagram of the pathways of purine nucleotide metabolism and uric acid synthesis in humans. APRT, ­adenine 
phosphoribosyl transferase; HGPRT, hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase. (From Marshall W J, Bangert S K, Lapsley M 
2008 Clinical Chemistry. 7th ed. Edinburgh: Elsevier, with permission.)
	
32  Biochemistry of articular disorders	
641
Chronic tophaceous gout. In the later stage of un-
treated disease, the patient may have continuous inflam-
mation of many joints with associated pain, tenderness 
and immobility. In addition, crystals of urate are de-
posited in masses of chalky material called tophi, which 
sometimes ulcerate and discharge through the skin. 
These are often seen over joints and bony prominences 
such as the points of the elbows. They can occur in the 
joint and inside bone causing permanent damage, pain, 
deformity and disability. Urate crystals are often the fo-
cus for renal stone formation. At this stage, gout is a mis-
erable business.
Diagnosis. When gout presents in the classic manner, 
the diagnosis is obvious. However, infection in a joint 
also makes it hot, red and painful and sometimes it can 
be difficult to differentiate between crystal arthritis and 
infection. Because both conditions cause fever, leukocy-
tosis and an acute phase reaction, the only reliable way to 
make the diagnosis is to aspirate fluid from the joint and 
examine it for crystals (using polarizing light microscopy, 
see Fig. 32.3) and for bacteria (Gram stain and culture). 
Rarely, the two conditions coexist, so both tests should be 
performed.
For the reasons mentioned above, plasma urate con-
centrations are not helpful in diagnosis, although very 
high values are convincing and sometimes influence deci-
sions about drug treatment.
Treatment. There are three strands to the treatment of 
gout. Immediate action is required to counteract the se-
vere inflammation that is producing such pain and dis-
ability. In straightforward cases, anti-inflammatory drugs, 
such as diclofenac or naproxen, can rapidly achieve this. 
Colchicine, which stabilizes lysosomal membranes, can 
be used when anti-inflammatory drugs are inadvisable, for 
example in patients with kidney or stomach conditions. 
These drugs settle the inflammation but have no effect 
on crystal formation or the underlying problem of the 
increased urate load. The second strand to treatment is to 
try to persuade the patient to modify his lifestyle. More 
exercise, less alcohol, improved diet and weight loss are 
the goals. They are more easily achieved in some than in 
others.
The third strand of treatment is to reduce the urate 
load. This will have built up over years and so will take 
time to reduce. Reduction is usually achieved by the use 
of allopurinol, a potent purine xanthine oxidase inhibi-
tor, which blocks the conversion of xanthine to urate. 
Xanthine is soluble and is excreted renally. The decision 
to start allopurinol should be influenced by the frequency 
of the attacks of acute gout, the presence of tophi and/or 
chronic polyarticular gout and very high urate concentra-
tions. Allopurinol gradually leaches away the high urate 
load and, in time, urate concentrations become normal 
and tophi are absorbed. There is a danger of allopurinol 
provoking an acute flare of gout when it is first used, so 
it should not be started until the acute attack has been 
controlled. Once treatment with allopurinol has been es-
tablished, urate concentrations should be checked. The 
target is a value of <0.3 mmol/L and the dose of allopuri-
nol should be titrated accordingly.
The treatment of uncomplicated gout is simple and 
rewarding if patients can be persuaded to take their 
tablets regularly. Male patients often seem to find it 
difficult to continue their medication when they feel 
well and this is by far the commonest cause of failure 
of treatment. However, treating complicated gout can 
be challenging. These patients often have chronic kid-
ney disease, cardiac disease, peptic ulcers and are taking 
warfarin, all of which are relative contraindications to 
the use of anti-inflammatory drugs. They often require 
diuretics (which may provoke gout) to control heart 
failure and gout is frequently a problem in transplant 
patients because of the use of the hyperuricaemia-­
inducing anti-rejection drug, ciclosporin. In these cases, 
injecting corticosteroid into the affected joint controls 
the acute inflammation. If several joints are affected, 
systemic adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) or 
corticosteroids are necessary.
A
B
FIGURE 32.3  ■  Sodium urate (needle shaped, A) and calcium pyrophosphate (rhomboid, B) crystals viewed microscopically. Under 
polarized light, the former are negatively, the latter positively, birefringent.
642	
Clinical biochemistry
Lowering urate concentrations with allopurinol has 
been the mainstay of the treatment of gout for the past 
40 years. It is inexpensive and in most cases is very ef-
fective. However, drug reactions do occur and there has 
been a need for other urate lowering agents. Recently, fe-
buxostat, a non-purine selective xanthine oxidase inhibi-
tor, has been introduced and is showing great promise. 
It does not inhibit enzymes involved in purine and py-
rimidine metabolism, as does allopurinol and may in time 
become the drug of first choice.
All mammals apart from humans and Dalmatian dogs 
possess the enzyme urate oxidase (uricase) which oxi-
dizes urate to allantoin. This is 5–10 times more soluble 
than uric acid and so is more effectively excreted by the 
kidney. However, urate oxidase was lost in early human 
evolution. The reasons for this are not clear but it has 
been proposed that its loss was an advantage because 
uric acid is a powerful antioxidant and scavenger of free 
radicals that might protect against oxidative damage and 
so prolong life and decrease the risks of cancer. As a re-
sult, humans are prone to gout. The selective inbreeding 
of Dalmatian dogs has produced a striking white ani-
mal with black spots but also one without urate oxidase. 
Hence, the Dalmatian’s tendency to the development of 
gout and the formation of urate renal stones, which can 
be treated with allopurinol.
Until recently, this interesting information was of pe-
ripheral interest. However, researchers have investigated 
the use of urate oxidase to treat hyperuricaemia in humans. 
There are two preparations. Rasburicase, a recombinant 
form from the fungus Aspergillus flavus, is used to prevent 
acute urate nephropathy, which can occur when large tu-
mour loads are treated with chemotherapy (tumour lysis 
syndrome, see p. 114). However, its very short circulating 
life and the fact patients sometimes develop antibodies to 
the drug limits its use. These disadvantages led to the de-
velopment of PEG-uricase, a recombinant porcine urate 
oxidase, to which multiple strands of polyethylene glycol 
(PEG) of average molecular weight 10 000 Da have been 
attached. This greatly prolongs its circulating life and it 
is non-immunogenic. However, it has to be given intra-
venously at two-weekly intervals and can cause flares of 
gout and infusion reactions. At present, its use is reserved 
for patients with gout that is difficult to control who can-
not take standard treatment. It may be noted that accurate 
measurement of urate in patients treated with this drug is 
difficult, as it continues to act in vitro.
Calcium pyrophosphate deposition (CPPD)
This is the other common form of crystal arthritis. It is not 
as frequent as gout and is less well understood. Calcium 
pyrophosphate crystals are preferentially deposited in ar-
ticular cartilage where calcification can be seen on X-rays 
(chondrocalcinosis). Affected joints can become acutely in-
flamed in a way that resembles gout (hence CPPD’s other 
name of pseudogout). The knee and the wrist are most 
frequently affected. An acute phase reaction is ­common 
and, again, finding CPP crystals in the joint fluid makes 
the diagnosis. In some cases, there is chronic involvement 
of several joints, which can cause diagnostic confusion 
with other inflammatory articular diseases.
Calcium pyrophosphate deposition becomes more 
common with age. Symptomless chondrocalcinosis is 
often seen on X-rays of the elderly. Attacks are some-
times triggered by trauma unrelated to the joint (of 
which surgery is an excellent example), and rheuma-
tologists are often asked to see elderly postoperative 
patients in the surgical wards with a hot, swollen, ‘in-
fected’ wrist or knee. Almost invariably, pseudogout is 
responsible.
Familial CPPD is well recognized, and kindred from 
many different countries have been described. These pa-
tients present in their twenties and usually have severe 
destructive joint disease. In some families, a genetic ab-
normality on the short arm of chromosome 5p has been 
identified.
Calcium pyrophosphate deposition is associated with 
several metabolic diseases described in other chapters. 
Definite associations have been established with haemo-
chromatosis, hyperparathyroidism, hypomagnesaemia, 
hypophosphatasia, alkaptonuria and Wilson disease. In 
these cases, the onset is often at a younger age (under 
55 years) and the disease is more severe than is seen in 
uncomplicated cases. A link with thyroid disease is now 
disputed.
As yet, we have little understanding of the underlying 
biochemical processes at play in this group of conditions. 
Our ‘first aid’ style of treatment, with anti-inflammatory 
drugs and corticosteroid injection of affected joints, re-
flects this.
Basic calcium phosphate deposition disease
Basic calcium phosphate (BCP) crystals include hydroxy-
apatite, octacalcium phosphate and tricalcium phos-
phate. They are often difficult to identify, which is why 
we still have so much to learn about these conditions. 
Basic calcium phosphate crystals are sometimes depos-
ited in the tendons or in soft tissues outside the joints, 
where they can give rise to intense pain. This tends to 
occur in younger females and affects the shoulder, wrist 
and even the great toe, when gout may be incorrectly di-
agnosed. Injection of corticosteroid into the lesion often 
results in dramatic improvement. Mercifully, the pain 
usually settles down over a week or two and the calcifi-
cation seen on X-ray is often resorbed within six weeks. 
Basic calcium phosphate crystal deposition has also been 
implicated in an unusual condition that causes large ef-
fusions and joint resorption in the shoulders of elderly 
women (Milwaukee shoulder).
There is increasing interest in these crystals because 
they appear to be closely involved in the process of os-
teoarthritis (OA). Basic calcium phosphate crystals can be 
found in the synovial fluid of as many as 60% of joints 
severely affected by OA. It is uncertain whether this is 
related to the cause of OA or is a downstream effect of 
the OA process. However, in tissue culture, BCP crys-
tals stimulate mitogenesis and the production of metallo-
proteinases, which cleave cartilage matrix. This suggests 
BCP crystals may be involved in the cartilage breakdown 
seen in OA, and researchers are starting to look at the ef-
fects of agents such as phosphocitrate, which inhibit the 
formation of BCP crystals.
	
32  Biochemistry of articular disorders	
643
Other crystals found in synovial fluid
Other crystals can be found in synovial fluid. These in-
clude cholesterol and oxalic acid crystals. These latter 
occur in primary oxalosis and in patients with established 
renal failure on dialysis, in whom the crystals can provoke 
a chronic polyarthritis in the small joints of the hand.
ARTICULAR INVOLVEMENT IN ENDOCRINE 
AND METABOLIC DISEASES
Diabetes mellitus
Over 30% of diabetic patients have potentially disabling 
hand or shoulder disorders. Capsulitis of the shoulder 
(frozen shoulder) is particularly common in diabetes. It 
causes severe, disabling shoulder pain, which settles af-
ter a few months but leaves the patient with very limited 
mobility at the shoulder joint. The range of movement 
usually improves over the months. Sometimes a cortico-
steroid injection will help the pain, but limited movement 
remains a problem.
Many patients with diabetes develop changes in the 
connective tissues of the hands. Dupuytren contrac-
ture, a condition in which there is thickening of the 
palmar fascia and increasing contracture of fingers, is 
common in diabetes. In what seems to be a different 
process, called diabetic cheiroarthropathy or diabetic 
hand syndrome, the skin and underlying tissues become 
thickened, resulting in a limited range of movement of 
the hand and finger joints. Often the finger tendons 
are affected. These changes are sometimes mistaken 
for rheumatoid arthritis but there is no joint damage 
or acute phase reaction. Biopsy shows excessive fibrosis 
and increased deposition of dermal collagen. It has been 
suggested that increased tissue glycation may result in 
diminished collagen breakdown. Perhaps a similar sort 
of process is taking place in the frozen shoulders of dia-
betic patients.
Peripheral nerve damage is a frequent complication 
of diabetes. In some cases, the nerve supply to the joints 
is affected so that the usual sensations of joint position 
and joint movement are lost. Repeated trauma can take 
place within such a joint without the patient being 
aware and this can rapidly result in painless destruction 
and bony resorption of large areas of bone around the 
­affected joint. This is called a Charcot joint. It occurs 
almost exclusively in the foot and is a major problem. 
However, although evidence of damage to small nerve 
fibres is usually present in this condition, other ­factors 
are undoubtedly involved. Charcot arthritis occurs 
more frequently in type 1 diabetes. The reason for this 
is not clear.
Other endocrine disorders
Several endocrine disorders can cause muscle and joint 
pains and need to be considered in the assessment of 
the patient with aches and pains. Only rarely will they 
be found to be responsible, but early diagnosis and treat-
ment will often relieve the patient’s symptoms and can 
prevent further suffering and tissue damage. As ever with 
uncommon conditions presenting in unusual ways, the 
important thing is to think of the diagnosis.
Both hypo- and hyperthyroidism can result in joint pains 
and a variety of muscular symptoms. Hyperparathyroidism 
is a cause of bone pain and aching joints as well as chon-
drocalcinosis and pseudogout, while joint pains, degener-
ative arthritis, joint laxity and muscle weakness can result 
from effects of acromegaly on bone, joints and soft tissue. 
Hypercortisolism sometimes presents in the rheumatol-
ogy clinic with back pain (from osteoporotic fractures) 
and muscle weakness.
Haemochromatosis
As described in Chapter  14, liver disease and diabetes 
in a male with slate grey skin is the classic presentation 
of haemochromatosis. However, the alert rheumatolo-
gist will discover the occasional patient with this condi-
tion presenting in the clinic with articular disease. This 
can happen in two ways. We have already discussed how 
haemochromatosis is associated with chondrocalcinosis 
and pseudogout. In addition, haemochromatosis itself is 
responsible for a characteristic form of arthritis involving 
the metacarpophalangeal joints of the index and middle 
fingers. X-rays show loss of joint space and characteristic 
hook osteophyte formation in these joints. There is no in-
flammatory reaction, but iron studies show the character-
istic picture of haemochromatosis. The synovium contains 
much iron. Venesection unfortunately makes little differ-
ence to the joint symptoms, but does prevent further harm 
to the pancreas and liver. It is also important to screen the 
patient’s relatives so that those who have inherited the dis-
ease can be identified and treated before damage occurs.
Alkaptonuria
This rare, autosomal recessive disorder is caused by a de-
ficiency of the enzyme homogentisic acid oxidase. This 
results in a build-up of homogentisic acid, an intermediary 
product in the metabolism of phenylalanine and tyrosine. 
The excess homogentisic acid is oxidized and polymerized 
and forms a blackish pigment, alkapton, which is depos-
ited in cartilage and can be easily seen in the cartilage of 
the ears. More importantly, it is also deposited in articular 
cartilage, which becomes more susceptible to mechanical 
stress and degeneration. Arthritis of the hips, knees and 
shoulders develops early. Alkapton is also deposited in the 
intervertebral discs in the spine, which become calcified. 
This produces a characteristic X-ray appearance and pre-
disposes to mechanical back problems. The diagnosis is 
made by identifying homogentisic acid in the urine.
LABORATORY TESTING IN ARTICULAR 
DISEASE
Anaemia in rheumatoid arthritis
Anaemia is common in RA. When the disease is ac-
tive, there is frequently a normochromic, normocytic 
anaemia. This is called ‘the anaemia of chronic disease’ 
644	
Clinical biochemistry
(see Chapter 27) and it will resolve if the activity of the 
arthritis can be controlled. Iron is present in the bone 
marrow but cannot be utilized in erythropoiesis.
Some RA patients require an anti-inflammatory drug 
to keep their pain and stiffness at bay. These drugs have 
a tendency to cause erosions and ulcers in the stomach, 
duodenum or small bowel, resulting in blood loss, iron 
deficiency and a hypochromic microcytic anaemia.
Separating iron-deficiency anaemia and the anaemia 
of chronic disease in these patients is often tricky and is 
made more difficult by the behaviour of ferritin in in-
flammatory diseases. Ferritin is one of the several pro-
teins that are acute phase reactants, and for this reason, 
its plasma concentration is usually raised when RA is 
active. Measurement of plasma ferritin concentration 
is ­considered to be the best test of iron deficiency (see 
Chapter 27), but in RA, the result should be interpreted 
with caution. Usually a concentration of <12 μg/L is 
taken as diagnostic of iron deficiency, but in RA, rheu-
matologists take a concentration of <30 μg/L to indicate 
iron deficiency. However, iron deficiency can exist with 
higher concentrations of ferritin. The presence of micro-
cytosis favours the diagnosis of iron deficiency, but some-
times examination of bone marrow for iron stores is the 
only reliable way to differentiate between iron-deficiency 
anaemia and the anaemia of chronic disease.
The acute phase response
The acute phase response is discussed in detail in 
Chapter 30. Traditionally, rheumatologists have used the 
ESR to diagnose and then monitor an acute phase re-
sponse. This is, of course, an indirect measure of a series 
of acute phase proteins and immunoglobulins and is par-
ticularly influenced by plasma fibrinogen concentrations. 
Measurement of CRP concentration is gradually supersed-
ing the ESR and is believed to correlate better with disease 
activity in RA. In SLE, CRP concentration is often normal; 
indeed, a raised value in this condition is said to suggest in-
fection rather than increased disease activity. In truth, most 
rheumatologists like to use both CRP and ESR.
These simple investigations are of great help to a rheu-
matologist. One of our main tasks when confronted with 
a new patient is to differentiate between the inflamma-
tory and non-inflammatory types of arthritis. This is not 
always easy and the CRP and/or ESR often provide the 
answer. The activity of rheumatoid arthritis waxes and 
wanes over time and this is reflected in the acute phase 
response, as is the success or otherwise of drug treatment.
Examination of synovial fluid
An acutely swollen hot joint can be a result of infection, 
crystals or the irritative effects of blood on the synovium. 
The only reliable way to determine which is responsible 
is to aspirate the joint fluid. Blood will be apparent to the 
naked eye. Gram-staining will show bacteria and polariz-
ing light microscopy will demonstrate crystals (Fig. 32.3) 
and whether they are negatively (gout) or positively 
(CPP) birefringent. The chances of identifying crystals 
are increased if the specimen is centrifuged and the de-
posit examined at the earliest opportunity. Sometimes it 
is only possible to obtain a tiny amount of fluid. If ex-
pressed on to a microscope slide at the bedside and cov-
ered with a cover slip to avoid evaporation, this can yield 
vital information when examined in the laboratory.
Rheumatoid factor
Rheumatoid factors (RFs) are antibodies directed against 
the Fc portion of human IgG and are present in 75–80% 
of patients with RA. At present, it is believed that RF is 
produced as a downstream product of the rheumatoid 
process rather than being central to the disease process. 
Rheumatoid factors also occur in other connective tis-
sue diseases, chronic infections such as tuberculosis and 
hepatitis C and conditions associated with hyperglobu-
linaemia, such as hyperglobulinaemic purpura, sarcoid-
osis and cryoglobulinaemia. They are found in low titres 
in 5% of the population, occurring more frequently with 
advancing age.
A positive RF is strong confirmatory evidence of RA. 
In a patient with polyarthritis it has a sensitivity of 70% 
and a specificity of 80%. However, in an unselected pop-
ulation its predictive value is low (20%). Very high titres 
of RF are associated with severe disease and are a marker 
of poor prognosis.
Most laboratory methods identify IgM antibodies, al-
though IgA and IgG antibodies of uncertain clinical sig-
nificance do exist. For many years, rheumatoid factor was 
detected by techniques using flocculation or agglutination 
of IgG-coated particles or cells. The Rose Waaler test, 
the standard method for many years, used sheep red blood 
cells coated with rabbit IgG, which agglutinate in the pres-
ence of RF, while the flocculation of latex beads coated 
with human IgG forms the basis of the RA latex test. The 
sheep cell tests are more specific. However, heterophile 
antibodies reacting directly against sheep cells sometimes 
give rise to false positives. Because of this, sera are usually 
tested on uncoated and coated sheep red cells in parallel. 
Laser nephelometry, enzyme linked immunosorbent as-
say (ELISA), immunofluorescence and radioimmunoassay 
can also be used to measure rheumatoid factors.
Other autoantibodies are seen in RA. In recent years, 
it has become standard practice to measure antibodies 
to cyclic citrullinated protein (anti-CCP) as well as RF. 
These are measured by peptide-based ELISA. The test 
has a sensitivity of 74% and a specificity of 94%. It may 
eventually supersede the time-honoured RF test but most 
rheumatologists use both tests at present.
Other autoantibody tests
Autoantibodies are produced in the connective tissue dis-
eases (see above) and some cases of vasculitis. These are 
sometimes diagnostic, but most autoantibodies occur in 
several of these conditions and in healthy people. These 
tests are valuable in confirming a suspected diagnosis and 
negative tests are useful in helping to rule out diagnoses. 
However, because they occur in a proportion of normal 
people, they should not be used for screening purposes or 
in cases without clinical features suspicious of connective 
tissue disease (see p. 639). For some years, autoantibod-
ies have been identified by indirect immunofluorescence 
	
32  Biochemistry of articular disorders	
645
using Hep-2 cells. In this age of automation, there is a 
move to streamline the process of identifying anti-nuclear 
antibodies. In some laboratories, automated multiplex 
immunoassay is used to screen for a mixture of common 
nuclear antigens. Positive specimens are then examined 
by direct immunofluorescence, which remains the gold 
standard. At this stage, the presence of anti-nuclear factor 
(ANF) is a non-specific indicator that a connective tissue 
disease may be present (see Table 32.1). The next step is 
to determine to which part of the nucleus the antibody 
reacts, by using highly specific tests, including enzyme 
linked immunoabsorbent assay (ELISA) and indirect im-
munofluorescence. Anti-double stranded DNA, anti-Sm, 
anti-Ro, anti-La, anti-centromere, anti-Jo1, anti-Mi2 
and anti-mitochondrial antibodies can be identified in 
this way, each of which, as shown in Table 32.1, is associ-
ated with different connective tissue diseases.
CONCLUSION
In spite of the fact that biochemical abnormalities them-
selves are responsible for few articular diseases, we have 
seen how clinical biochemistry plays an important part 
in the diagnosis, treatment and monitoring of rheuma-
tological conditions. Many of the chapters in this book 
refer to medical specialties that primarily focus on bio-
chemical disorders, or conditions with major biochemi-
cal consequences. However, there are some, such as 
rheumatology, for which this is not the case. It is instruc-
tive to examine the different ways in which biochemical 
tests are useful in such a setting, using articular disorders 
as an example:
1.	 Confirming a diagnosis:
•	 finding urate crystals in synovial fluid makes the 
diagnosis of gout
•	 finding raised iron and ferritin concentrations 
in haemochromatosis arthritis and demonstrat-
ing the presence of increased iron on liver biopsy 
confirms the diagnosis
•	 finding homogentisic acid in the urine confirms 
the diagnosis of alkaptonuria.
2.	 Categorizing class of arthritis:
•	 in a patient with arthritis or possible CTD, dem-
onstrating an acute phase response by raised 
CRP and/or ESR supports the diagnosis of an 
inflammatory disease, while a normal CRP/ESR 
favours a diagnosis of osteoarthritis, a mechani-
cal disorder or ‘unexplained symptoms’
•	 the presence of ANF suggests one of the connec-
tive tissue diseases.
3.	 Supporting a diagnosis:
•	 when a diagnosis is suspected, a positive sensitive 
test is strong support for that diagnosis, for ex-
ample a positive rheumatoid factor and/or CCP 
in suspected RA or a raised urate in gout.
4.	 Excluding a diagnosis:
•	 normal iron studies virtually exclude the diagno-
sis of haemochromatosis.
5.	 Monitoring the activity of a disease:
•	 the activity of inflammatory arthritis waxes and 
wanes spontaneously. This can be monitored by 
regular CRP/ESR measurements.
6.	 Monitoring the effect of treatment:
•	 similarly, the CRP/ESR can be used to monitor 
the effectiveness of drug treatment in controlling 
the activity of inflammatory arthritis.
7.	 Monitoring for drug toxicity:
•	 regular blood testing is used to monitor for drug 
toxicity. For example, two-monthly liver func-
tion tests are performed routinely on the many 
patients with RA, who are taking the potentially 
hepatotoxic drug methotrexate.
8.	 Monitoring for the complications of a disease:
•	 glomerulonephritis and renal failure are fairly 
frequent complications of SLE. Hence regular 
tests of renal function and urine tests are part of 
the routine follow-up of these patients.
9.	 Specialty-specific idiosyncrasies:
•	 each specialty or disease has its own idiosyncra-
sies, for example the conflicting effect of iron de-
ficiency and the acute phase response on ferritin 
concentrations in patients with RA and anaemia.
These examples show how powerful biochemical in-
vestigations can be, when performed for a defined rea-
son. However, we have also demonstrated that, when 
used inappropriately, they have the power to inflict harm 
and distress on the unfortunate victim. We must recall 
Hippocrates' dictum ‘primum non nocere’ (first do not 
harm) at all times.
Further reading
Dalbeth N, Haskard DO. Pathophysiology of crystal-induced arthritis. 
In: Wortmann RL, Schumacher Jr HR, Becker MA et  al. editors. 
Crystal-induced arthropathies: gout, pseudogout, and apatite-
associated syndromes. New York: Taylor & Francis; 2006. 
Gives in-depth details of the pathophysiology of crystal-induced arthritis.
Maddison PJ, Huey P. Serological profile. In: Isenberg DA, Maddison 
PJ, Woo P et al. editors. Oxford textbook of rheumatology. 3rd ed. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2004. 
Although written some time ago, this well crafted chapter still provides an 
excellent and pertinent review of autoantibody testing.
Shipley M. Hyperuricaemia and gout. J R Coll Physicians Edinb 
2011;41:229–33. 
An up-to-date review of topic.
The following three articles are pertinent to the debate about the utility of 
traditional immunofluorescence microscopy compared with the newer automated 
methods. While automation is quicker and less labour-intensive, in the present 
state of our knowledge, immunofluorescence remains the gold standard.
Bonilla E, Francis L, Allam F et al. Immunofluorescence microscopy 
is superior to fluorescent beads for detection of antinuclear antibody 
reactivity in systemic lupus erythematosus patients. Clin Immunol 
2007;124:18–21.
Kumar A, Bhatia A, Walker Minz R. Antinuclear antibodies and their 
detection methods in diagnosis of connective tissue diseases: a journey 
revisited. Diagn Pathol 2009;4:1. 
This article provides an overview on advancement in antinuclear antibody 
detection methods, their future prospects, advantages, disadvantages and 
guidelines for use of these tests.
Wallace DJ. New methods for antinuclear antibody testing: does it cut 
costs and corners without jeopardizing clinical reliability? J Immunol 
Methods 2006;311:189–97.
646
C H A P T E R  3 3
Muscle disease
Laurence A. Bindoff
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  646
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY OF 
MUSCLE  646
DISEASES OF MUSCLE AND THEIR 
INVESTIGATION  650
BIOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATION OF MUSCLE 
DISEASE  651
‘Routine’ biochemical studies  651
Plasma creatine kinase activity  651
Other enzymes measurable in plasma  653
Myoglobinuria  653
INVESTIGATION OF MUSCLE DISEASE  653
Non-metabolic, genetically determined 
­myopathies  653
Metabolic, genetically determined 
­myopathies  654
CONCLUSION  659
APPENDIX  659
INTRODUCTION
Diseases affecting striated muscle are important causes 
of morbidity and mortality. They are common in clinical 
practice, and patients may be seen by a variety of clini-
cal specialists, including neurologists, rheumatologists, 
orthopaedic surgeons and paediatricians. Investigating 
suspected muscle disease requires a combination of clini-
cal and laboratory skills, including biochemical, genetic 
and pathological investigations, each assuming a different 
importance depending on the nature of the disorder. In 
some, biochemical studies play a minor role whereas in 
others, particularly the metabolic myopathies, biochemi-
cal investigations are crucial.
FUNCTIONAL ANATOMY AND PHYSIOLOGY  
OF MUSCLE
Skeletal muscle accounts for approximately 40% of total 
body weight and between 30% and 40% of total body 
oxygen consumption, even at rest. It is, therefore, an 
extremely important tissue in metabolic terms. Muscle 
is composed of multinucleated fibres that contain the 
contractile apparatus upon which movement depends. 
Although similar in structure, muscle fibres vary and 
three main types have been defined using metabolic and 
functional criteria (Fig. 33.1 and Table 33.1). Most skel-
etal muscles contain all three fibre types, although the 
proportions vary considerably depending on the function 
of the particular muscle.
The main function of muscle is to generate force in 
a controlled manner. This force, in the form of contrac-
tion (shortening), is produced in muscle fibres by the 
interaction of actin and myosin (Fig. 33.2), a process that 
is highly energy dependent. The energy required for 
muscle contraction comes from the hydrolysis of ATP, 
and maintenance of ATP concentration is critical. Any 
interference with ATP generation will inevitably impair 
the ability of muscle to produce force. ATP concentra-
tion is maintained by one of two mechanisms: ATP can 
be regenerated either from the energy storage molecule 
phosphocreatine or from ADP, or produced directly dur-
ing glycolysis and mitochondrial oxidation. Regeneration 
is rapid, while the second process takes longer.
Phosphocreatine is present in large quantities in mus-
cle (the other major site is brain) and acts as a reservoir of 
FIGURE 33.1  ■  Cross-section of normal muscle showing the his-
tochemical reaction for ATPase activity. The three fibre types can 
be easily identified: type I (dark), type IIa and type IIb. (Photograph 
courtesy of Dr M A Johnson.)
	
33  Muscle disease	
647
high-energy phosphate groups that it can donate to ADP 
in the following transphosphorylation reaction, catalysed 
by the enzyme creatine kinase:
The concentration of ATP does not fall significantly 
until nearly all of the phosphocreatine has been converted 
to creatine. A second transphosphorylation reaction, cat-
alysed by adenylate kinase, seems to have a minor role in 
ATP production. The AMP formed is broken down fur-
ther by AMP deaminase.
ATP can also be generated directly by glycolysis and 
the oxidative catabolism of carbohydrate and lipid fuels. 
These processes are slow compared with transphosphory-
lation, but nevertheless are essential for ATP generation. 
The breakdown of carbohydrate by glycolysis (Fig. 33.3) 
has a vital role in skeletal muscle since it permits ATP 
production under anaerobic conditions. When oxidative 
metabolism of pyruvate is impaired, for example during 
ischaemia, which includes high intensity activity, or in the 
presence of a defect of the respiratory chain, increasing 
amounts of lactate may be produced.
While small amounts of ATP can be generated by 
glycolysis in the cytosol, significantly greater amounts 
are produced by the oxidative breakdown of metabolic 
fuels (pyruvate, ketone bodies, fatty acids) that occurs 
within mitochondria. Long chain fatty acids, either 
from intracellular lipid stores or imported from the 
bloodstream, are first activated to their acyl-CoA esters 
before being transported into the mitochondrial matrix 
by the concerted action of carnitine palmitoyltransfer-
ase I, carnitine/acylcarnitine translocase and carnitine 
palmitoyltransferase II (Fig.  33.4). Short and medium 
chain fatty acids enter the mitochondria as the free 
acids and are activated to their acyl-CoA esters in the 
mitochondrial matrix. Inside the mitochondria, fatty 
acyl-CoA esters undergo β-oxidation, a series of four 
reactions that results in the production of acetyl-CoA 
and a chain-shortened fatty acid (Fig. 33.5); there are 
two or three enzymes with overlapping substrate speci-
ficities for each of these steps. Reducing equivalents 
phosphocreatine
ADP
creatine
ATP
creatine kinase
+
+



2ADP
ATP
AMP
adenylate kinase



+
AMP
IMP
NH
AMP deaminase



+
3
TABLE 33.1  Muscle fibre types
Fibre type
Electrical properties
Metabolic properties
Histochemical properties
Type I
Slow twitch
Oxidative
Heavily stained ATPase after preincubation at acid pH (e.g. 
pH 4.6)
Type IIA
Fast twitch
Oxidative/glycolytic
Lightly stained ATPase after preincubation at pH 4.6
Type IIB
Fast twitch
Glycolytic
Lightly stained ATPase only after preincubation at pH 4.3
The three main fibre types are differentiated on muscle biopsy by the calcium-activated myosin ATPase. Type I fibres are dependent upon 
oxidative metabolism, contain the most mitochondria and are particularly important for endurance exercise. Type II fibres contain a higher 
proportion of glycolytic enzymes and are important in rapid movement. Regenerating fibres have an intermediate staining pattern and are 
referred to as type IIC fibres.
FIGURE 33.2  ■ The structure of skeletal muscle. (A) Diagrammatic representation of the structural components within a single muscle 
fibre. Thin filaments (actin) are anchored to the Z line. Thick filaments are composed of multiple myosin molecules, each of which has 
a hinged end that can interact with the thin filament. The T tubule is a continuation of the sarcolemmal membrane, which interacts 
with the sarcoplasmic reticulum at specific sites (triad). The signal for contraction is transmitted along the sarcolemma to the T tubule, 
which in turn causes release of calcium from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR). Calcium release stimulates contraction. (B) Electron 
micrograph of normal muscle. This shows the bundles of myofilaments with Z lines (z), thin (I band) and thick (A band) filaments. Triad 
(Tr) and mitochondria (m) are identified. (Photograph courtesy of Dr M J Cullen. Magnification × 30 000.)
Sarcomere
H band
I band
T
A
SR
Triad
Myosin
filament
Actin
filament
Z line
Mitochondria
A band
B
648	
Clinical biochemistry
Phosphoglucomutase
Glucose 6-phosphate
Fructose 6-phosphate
Dihydroxyacetone
phosphate
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate
Fructose 1,6-diphosphate
1,3-Diphosphoglycerate
3-Phosphoglycerate
2-Phosphoglycerate
Phosphoenolpyruvate
Pyruvate
Acetyl CoA
NADH
Lactate
Lactate
dehydrogenase
NAD+ +H+
Pyruvate
dehydrogenase
complex
Glycogen
Glucose
Lysosome
Pi
ADP
ADP
NAD+ +Pi
NADH + H+
ATP
ATP
ATP
H2O
ATP
ADP
ADP
H2O
Glucose 1-phosphate
Branching enzyme
PG pyrophosphorylase
Phosphoglucose
isomerase
Phosphofructo-
kinase
Triose phosphate
isomerase
Phosphoglycerate
kinase
Enolase
Pyruvate
kinase
Phosphoglycero-
mutase
Glyceraldehyde
3-phosphate   
dehydrogenase             
Aldolase
Phosphorylase
Hexokinase
Acid
a-glucosidase
Amylo-1,6-
glucosidase
Glycogen
synthase
FIGURE 33.3  ■  Glycogen breakdown and glycolysis. Under anaerobic conditions, when further oxidation of acetyl-CoA is impaired, 
pyruvate is metabolized to lactate. This will also occur in defects of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) and of the respiratory 
chain, and is due to the failure to reoxidize intramitochondrial NADH, which in turn inhibits PDC. NADH formed during glycolysis (and 
other substrate oxidation) is reoxidized by complex I of the mitochondrial respiratory chain (see Fig. 33.7).
	
33  Muscle disease	
649
generated by the process of β-oxidation are transferred 
to the respiratory chain. The acyl-CoA dehydrogenases 
transfer reducing equivalents to electron transfer flavo-
protein (ETF) and thereafter to ETF dehydrogenase, 
which directly reduces ubiquinone of the respiratory 
chain (see Fig. 33.7). The 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydro-
genases reduce NAD
+ to give NADH, which transfers 
its reducing equivalents to complex I of the respiratory 
chain. Acetyl-CoA generated either from carbohydrate 
or fatty acid oxidation is metabolized further by the tri-
carboxylic acid cycle (Fig. 33.6). The oxidation of fatty 
acids and glucose, as well as the subsequent metabo-
lism of acetyl-CoA, generates more reduced cofactors 
(NADH and FADH2) that are re-oxidized by the respi-
ratory chain, and the energy released by this process is 
conserved as ATP (Fig. 33.7).
The balance of muscle metabolism depends on the 
state of activity, diet and the influence of various hor-
mones (particularly insulin, thyroxine, glucocorticoids). 
At rest, muscle predominantly oxidizes fatty ­acids to 
generate the energy for ATP synthesis. During exercise, 
the proportion of energy derived from carbohydrate or 
lipid depends on the degree and duration of this exercise 
and on the degree of physical fitness. High-intensity ex-
ercise at close to maximum oxygen uptake relies almost 
exclusively on carbohydrate metabolism, and glycogen 
depletion coincides with exhaustion. During moderate-
intensity exercise for prolonged periods, there is a 
switch from carbohydrate to lipid metabolism.
Long chain
fatty acid
Fatty acyl-CoA
Acyl-CoA
Acyl-CoA
CoASH
CoASH
Short chain and
medium chain
fatty acids
Fatty acids
Acylcarnitine
L-Carnitine
b-oxidation
b-oxidation
Acylcarnitine
L-Carnitine
Inner
mitochondrial
membrane
Acyl-CoA
synthase
Acyl-CoA
synthase
CPT I
CPT II
Cytosol
Mitochondrion
FIGURE 33.4  ■ Transport of fatty acids across the inner mitochon-
drial membrane. Short and medium chain fatty acids do not re-
quire a specialized transport mechanism to cross the membrane. 
Long chain fatty acids are first acylated in the cytosol. Carnitine 
palmitoyltransferase (CPT) I on the outer side of the inner mem-
brane converts the fatty acyl-CoA to an acylcarnitine ester and 
this is transported across the membrane linked to the export 
of carnitine. Inside the matrix, CPT II converts the acylcarnitine 
back to the fatty acyl-CoA, which is broken down by β-oxidation.
Respiratory chain
Short chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
Long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase
Long chain enoyl-CoA hydratase
Short chain enoyl-CoA hydratase
Short chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase
Long chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase
Long chain 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase
Short chain 3-oxoacyl-CoA thiolase
FIGURE 33.5  ■  Mitochondrial β-oxidation of saturated fatty acids. ETF, electron transfer flavoprotein; CoQ, coenzyme Q.
650	
Clinical biochemistry
DISEASES OF MUSCLE AND THEIR 
INVESTIGATION
There are a large number of different disorders of muscle, 
and while our classification includes the main categories 
(Box  33.1), more comprehensive lists are available (see 
Karpati et al. in Further reading, below). A detailed de-
scription of the clinical features associated with the dif-
ferent types of muscle disease is outside the scope of this 
chapter, but is discussed in several texts on muscle dis-
ease. The clinical features depend upon the age of the 
patient and the type of disease. For instance, a child with 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy will experience difficulty 
rising from sitting or lying and may have frequent falls. 
Such problems will prompt the parents to seek advice. In 
adults, the main forms of presentation are weakness, fa-
tigue and pain. Less commonly, muscle wasting, swelling 
or twitching of the muscle or a skin rash may be a first 
symptom. In the genetically determined disorders, the 
weakness is usually gradually progressive and often follows 
a characteristic pattern. In other myopathies, there may be 
associated stigmata, for instance joint disease or skin rash 
Fatty acids
Glycogen
Glucose 6-phosphate
Pyruvate
Pyruvate
NADH
Acyl-CoA
TCA
cycle
Pyruvate dehydrogenase
Glucose
Lactate
Fatty acyl-CoA
Fatty acyl-CoA
b-OXIDATION
Respiratory
chain
FADH2
NADH
NADH
FADH2
CO2
H2O
Cytosol
Mitochondrion
FIGURE 33.6  ■ The production and further metabolism of acetyl-CoA.
NAD+
NADH
Membrane potential generated
by extrusion of protons
Complex I
∼ 45 
subunits
(7 mtDNA)
Complex II
Includes succinate
dehydrogenase
4 subunits
Complex III
11 subunits
(1 mtDNA)
Complex V
14 subunits
(2 mtDNA)
Complex IV
13 subunits
(3 mtDNA)
ADP + Pi
ATP
H2O
e−
e−
e−
e−
e−
e−
β-oxidation
FAD+
UQ
c
Fe III
Fe II
ETF:QO
2H+ + ½O2
FADH2
FIGURE 33.7  ■  Components of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. NADH is reoxidized by complex I, while FADH2 donates electrons via 
complex II and ETF dehydrogenase (ETF:QO) donates electrons directly to uniquinone (UQ). Electron transport generates sufficient energy at 
three sites (complexes I, III and IV) to pump protons out of the matrix, producing an electrochemical gradient. This gradient is discharged by 
ATP synthase (complex V) and the energy released used to drive the phosphorylation of ADP to ATP. c, Cytochrome c; e
−, electron.
	
33  Muscle disease	
651
suggesting a connective tissue disorder; anxiety, sweating 
and weight loss suggesting hyperthyroidism, or features 
compatible with high alcohol intake. The muscle pain de-
scribed by patients with muscle disease may be important 
in suggesting whether there may be a metabolic cause. 
For instance, both defects of carbohydrate metabolism 
and fatty acid oxidation will cause muscle pain associated 
with exercise. The pain associated with defects of carbo-
hydrate metabolism occurs during high intensity exercise 
when glycolysis generates most of the energy required for 
muscle contraction, whereas defects of fatty acid oxidation 
cause muscle pain after prolonged exercise at a time when 
fatty acids are the predominant metabolic fuels.
The clinician must evaluate the clinical features and 
decide which investigations are appropriate. In many 
patients with suspected muscle disease, this will involve 
a combination of biochemical, molecular genetic, neu-
rophysiological and morphological investigations. While 
many biochemical and genetic studies are performed on 
blood samples, morphological study and biochemical 
analyses such as measurement of muscle enzyme activity, 
require tissue. Muscle biopsy is a relatively simple pro-
cedure and there are two main methods: an open biopsy, 
in which relatively large amounts (0.5–3 g) of muscle 
can be removed, and a needle biopsy, in which smaller 
amounts (50–200 mg) are obtained. For most biochemical 
and histochemical studies, small amounts are sufficient. 
Morphological changes alone may be sufficient to suggest 
a diagnosis, for example of Duchenne muscular dystrophy. 
The diagnosis of metabolic myopathies has been greatly 
improved by the development of cytochemical techniques 
that can show, for example, the abnormal storage of gly-
cogen or lipid, or demonstrate the presence or absence of 
specific enzyme activities in situ. A further development 
in this area is the use of specific antisera to enable the pre-
cise localization (and therefore the presence or absence) of 
proteins at the cellular level. This technique of immuno-
cytochemistry provides valuable additional information in 
the investigation of muscle disease.
BIOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATION  
OF MUSCLE DISEASE
‘Routine’ biochemical studies
These include the measurement of plasma sodium, potas-
sium, chloride, urea, bicarbonate, glucose, calcium and 
phosphate, together with simple tests of endocrine func-
tion. While not all these tests are necessary for each patient 
with muscle disease, disturbances of each parameter can re-
sult in muscle disease, as shown by the following examples. 
Severe hypokalaemia associated, for example, with diuretic 
use or liquorice ingestion, can result in muscle weakness. 
Renal failure may lead to muscle weakness for several rea-
sons, including electrolyte disturbance and altered calcium 
metabolism. It must also be remembered that acute muscle 
necrosis from any cause (e.g. malignant hyperpyrexia, drugs, 
injury or metabolic myopathy) may itself cause acute kidney 
injury owing to the tubulotoxic effect of myoglobin. Muscle 
symptoms are common in endocrine disturbances: hypo-
thyroidism, for example, may be associated with proximal 
weakness, often with discomfort in the affected muscles.
Plasma creatine kinase activity
The measurement of plasma enzyme activity is impor-
tant in the diagnosis of muscle disease, and while the 
activities of several enzymes may be elevated, creatine 
BOX 33.1	
Classification of muscle disease 
(excluding disorders of motor nerves 
and the neuromuscular junction) 
with examples
Non-metabolic, genetically determined myopathies
•	 Muscular dystrophies
•	 Duchenne, Becker
•	 Limb girdle types
•	 Facioscapulohumeral
•	 Others
•	 Congenital muscular dystrophy/myopathy includ-
ing central core disease (association with malignant 
hyperpyrexia)
•	 Disorders of muscle membrane/myotonic syndromes
•	 Myotonic dystrophy type I and II
•	 Myotonia congenita
•	 Periodic paralyses: hyperkalaemic and hypokalaemic
Trauma to muscle by external agents
•	 Physical
•	 Crush syndrome
•	 Ischaemic damage
•	 Toxic
•	 Drugs: steroids, chloroquine, fibrates, HMG-CoA 
reductase inhibitors (statins), emetine, theophylline 
(in overdose), zidovudine, snake venoms
Infection
•	 Viral myositis
•	 Bacterial myositis
Inflammatory
•	 Dermatomyositis/polymyositis
•	 Inclusion body myositis
•	 Sarcoidosis
Metabolic myopathies
•	 Muscle disease associated with endocrine disorder
•	 Hypo- and hyperthyroidism
•	 Hypo- and hyperadrenalism
•	 Hyperparathyroidism and osteomalacia
•	 Pituitary disorders, e.g. acromegaly
•	 Genetically determined
•	 Disorders of carbohydrate metabolism: myophos-
phorylase deficiency, acid α-glucosidase deficiency
•	 Disorders of fatty acid oxidation: acyl-CoA dehy-
drogenase deficiency, carnitine palmitoyltransferase 
deficiency
•	 Abnormalities of the respiratory chain: defects of 
complexes I, III and IV
•	 Other metabolic myopathies
•	 Alcohol myopathies
•	 Myopathy with chronic kidney disease
•	 Nutritional
Myopathy associated with malignant disease
652	
Clinical biochemistry
kinase (CK) is the most sensitive indicator of muscle 
damage. Skeletal muscle has the highest CK content of 
any tissue, more than three times as much as heart or 
brain, and consequently nearly all CK activity in normal 
plasma is derived from skeletal muscle. In addition, CK 
activity is more frequently abnormal than other enzymes 
in neuromuscular disease and the range of abnormal val-
ues is greater.
Human tissues contain three forms of creatine ki-
nase, comprising dimers of the muscle and brain-type 
subunits, M and B. The combinations are CK-MM, 
CK-MB and CK-BB. Skeletal muscle contains mostly 
CK-MM with only a small amount of CK-MB, rang-
ing from 0.2% to 15% of total enzyme activity (mean 
value of 5–6%). The proportion of CK-MB is higher in 
type I muscle fibres. Regenerating muscle fibres revert 
to an embryonic enzyme pattern and have about 40–50% 
CK-MB. Brain contains only CK-BB while heart muscle 
contains about 40% CK-MB, the rest being CK-MM. In 
normal adult plasma, CK activity is almost entirely due 
to the CK-MM isoform. Muscle damage will increase to-
tal CK activity and a proportion will be of the CK-MB 
type, but this is usually <6%. High plasma CK activity 
associated with a CK-MB fraction >6% may be associ-
ated with myocardial damage; however, there are several 
other situations in which the plasma CK-MB activity 
may be high:
•	 following acute muscle injury or surgical operations 
in healthy people, especially in those who regularly 
take vigorous exercise, the plasma CK-MB activity 
may rise above 6%. This has led to misleading re-
sults in marathon runners, acute myoglobinuria and 
a variety of surgical procedures
•	 in patients with chronic neuromuscular diseases, 
there tends to be a higher CK-MB activity owing to 
the increased percentage of regenerating fibres
•	 in children younger than early teenage, the percent-
age of CK-MB in plasma is higher than in adults, 
in the range of 14–26%. This could complicate the 
investigation of heart disease in this age group.
The activity of CK in plasma will vary even in healthy 
subjects and, as noted above, may be significantly el-
evated following exercise. While CK activity may be 
raised immediately after exercise, it reaches its peak 
­after 1–2 days. Generally, the more severe the exercise, 
the higher the total activity and the more delayed the 
peak. Thus, a 24-fold increase in CK activity has been 
reported after a 53 mile walk and transient CK values of 
10 000–20 000 U/L may be seen after intense training in 
young men, in whom subsequent investigation fails to de-
tect any abnormality. The effect on CK activity is more 
pronounced in untrained subjects compared with trained, 
but generally does not result in greater than a four-fold 
increase, unless the exercise performed is severe, and re-
turns to normal with resting.
Conditions other than exercise may cause significant 
increases in plasma creatine kinase activity (Box 33.2). 
The importance of obtaining a good clinical history 
and measuring CK activity under basal conditions is, 
therefore, of paramount importance if unnecessary in-
vasive investigations are to be avoided. Creatine kinase 
activity in plasma is raised whenever there is necrosis 
or regeneration of muscle and will, therefore, be ele-
vated in most myopathies. Very high values are found in 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy and in conditions where 
severe muscle necrosis occurs, such as acute polymyo-
sitis and rhabdomyolysis associated with malignant hy-
perpyrexia or the metabolic myopathies. In myopathies 
where muscle destruction is not a major feature, for in-
stance some endocrine myopathies, plasma CK activity 
may be normal or only mildly elevated. It must be re-
membered that plasma CK activity may also be elevated 
in severe neurogenic conditions that include active de-
nervation, and thus it is not diagnostic of muscle condi-
tions alone. Plasma CK activity may be used to follow 
the progress of myopathic disorders and their response 
to treatment. For example, the effective ­treatment of in-
flammatory muscle disease with steroids and/or other 
immunosuppressive treatments may be monitored by 
the fall in CK activity as well as by the improvement in 
muscle function.
Occasionally, a significantly elevated CK is found un-
expectedly. Many of these patients will be found to have 
muscle disease when formally examined, but there are 
also individuals with elevated CK who show no signs of 
neuromuscular disease, so-called ‘idiopathic hyperCK-
aemia’. Some of these prove to have ‘macro CK’ – an 
entity consisting of CK bound to an immunoglobulin 
(usually IgG) – which is cleared more slowly from the 
plasma than the unbound enzyme. Endocrine dysfunc-
tion, such as hypothyroidism, can elevate CK without 
obvious muscular dysfunction and it is important to 
BOX 33.2	
Causes of increased creatine kinase 
activity other than muscle disease
Muscle origin
•	 Exercise
•	 Trauma
•	 Large muscle mass
•	 African Caribbean and Indian Asian ethnicity
•	 Alcohol
Central nervous system disease
•	 Cerebral infarction or haemorrhage
•	 Bacterial meningitis
•	 Head injury
Cardiac disease
•	 Acute myocardial infarction
•	 Electrical cardioversion
•	 Mediastinal radiotherapy
Diseases of other organs
•	 Pneumonia, lung infarction
•	 Colonic infarction
•	 Metastatic carcinoma
Miscellaneous disorders
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Sepsis
•	 Shock
•	 Acute psychosis
Modified from Layzer 1985.
	
33  Muscle disease	
653
remember that individuals with malignant hyperthermia 
can have elevated CK with no other features of neuro-
muscular disease.
Statin induced elevation of creatine kinase
Drug-induced elevation of CK occurs and, indeed, has 
become more common since the introduction of the 
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors (statins). This class of 
drug frequently causes myalgia, often with no rise in 
plasma CK concentration, but only rarely causes muscle 
disease, although necrotising myopathy and rhabdomy-
olysis have been reported. Several risk factors that predis-
pose to muscle disease in those taking statins are known, 
including genetic variants in drug transport molecules and 
hepatic drug metabolism. Factors that are associated with 
higher plasma concentrations of statins such as increasing 
age, female sex, liver or kidney disease, untreated hypo-
thyroidism and drugs that inhibit the cytochrome P450 
system, increase the risk of myalgia and rhabdomyolysis. 
Interfering drugs that are of particular concern include 
cyclosporin, fibrates, calcium channel blockers, protease 
inhibitors and warfarin; grapefruit juice also has a similar 
effect. Pravastatin is not metabolised by the cytochrome 
P450 system so may be a safer choice than other statins if 
combination treatment with these drugs is required. Low 
plasma concentrations of 25-hydroxycholecalciferol are 
associated with myalgia and may exacerbate statin associ-
ated muscle pain. There is some evidence that patients 
given vitamin D replacement before starting a statin are 
at lower risk of developing symptoms.
There is a strong association between statin induced 
myalgia and a common variant of the gene SLCO1B1, 
which codes for a transporter that mediates the hepatic 
uptake of statins apart from fluvastatin. In one study, >60% 
of cases could be attributable to the variant, which im-
pairs statin uptake. Cyclosporin is thought to inhibit the 
transporter and can therefore increase plasma concentra-
tions of most statins, even of those that are not metabo-
lised by the cytochrome P450 system.
The underlying mechanism of statin toxicity is still de-
bated, but theories include alterations in myocyte mem-
brane cholesterol content, depletion of isoprenoids that 
control myofibre apoptosis and depletion of coenzyme 
Q10 (ubiquinone). Hydrophilic statins such as pravastatin 
and rosuvastatin may be less myotoxic than other more 
lipophilic statins such as atorvastatin, simvastatin and lo-
vastatin, possibly because of decreased penetration into 
muscle cells.
In most patients with statin-induced myalgia, the CK 
does not rise dramatically, if at all, and a minor rise may 
simply require monitoring and not cessation of treat-
ment. Strategies for improving the tolerability of statin 
treatment include changing to a hydrophilic statin, re-
ducing the frequency of doses to once or twice weekly, or 
supplementation with vitamin D and/or coenzyme Q10. 
However, much of the evidence of benefit of dosage vari-
ations and supplements has been anecdotal and there are 
few data on the cardiovascular effects of such strategies.
Persisting elevation of CK following withdrawal of 
statin treatment should be investigated, as there is more 
likely to be an underlying muscle disorder. The use of 
statins in patients with known muscle disease should be 
avoided if possible, although in individuals where there 
is a strong case for treatment, monitoring CK activity to 
detect progressive change is an alternative.
Other enzymes measurable in plasma
The activities of aldolase, lactate dehydrogenase and py-
ruvate kinase are also raised in destructive myopathies, 
but measurement of these enzymes provides no addi-
tional information to that given by CK measurement. 
Similarly, carbonic anhydrase III and a muscle-specific 
enolase, two enzymes that are specific to skeletal muscle, 
are also elevated in muscle disease, but the patterns of ab-
normality are similar to that of CK. Alanine aminotrans-
ferase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST) are 
also raised in the presence of muscle destruction and rise 
in parallel with CK. Measurement of plasma γ-glutamyl 
transferase activity may help to determine the tissue ori-
gin of high aminotransferases, as it is normal in muscle 
disease but usually raised with liver disease.
Myoglobinuria
In the presence of muscle damage, the muscle pigment 
myoglobin leaks into blood and urine. While myoglobin 
is a sensitive indicator of muscle destruction, it is neither 
significantly more sensitive nor more specific than CK. 
Myoglobin gives a positive reaction on urine dipstick 
testing for blood, which can be misinterpreted as being 
due to haematuria. In conditions in which there is severe 
muscle necrosis, rhabdomyolysis may occur. Causes in-
clude mechanical trauma, myotoxic agents (animal poi-
sons, numerous drugs and alcohol), extremes of ambient 
temperature, infections and inherited muscle diseases 
such as malignant hyperpyrexia, some types of muscular 
dystrophy and defects of mitochondrial energy, carbohy-
drate and lipid metabolism. Myoglobin may be deposited 
in nephrons and cause acute kidney injury. The risk of 
injury appears to be associated with acute elevations of 
myoglobin.
INVESTIGATION OF MUSCLE DISEASE
Non-metabolic, genetically determined 
myopathies
The investigation of muscular dystrophies and other 
non-metabolic myopathies is largely dependent on mor-
phological and/or genetic analyses. For example, the 
X-linked allelic disorders Duchenne and Becker muscular 
dystrophies may be diagnosed by identifying the defect 
at the genetic level; a deletion of the dystrophin gene is 
found in around 65% of Duchenne boys. The same is 
true for facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy, where 
a deletion of telomeric DNA on the long arm of chro-
mosome 4 is seen in >95% of cases. In the limb girdle 
group of muscular dystrophies, the same phenotype is 
produced by defects in very different proteins (and their 
corresponding genes) such that muscle biopsy and immu-
nocytochemical studies are usually required.
654	
Clinical biochemistry
In membrane disorders, such as the myotonic dys-
trophies and congenital myotonias, genetic analysis is 
paramount. In contrast, the periodic paralyses, which are 
also caused by ion channel dysfunction, are associated 
with electrolyte changes that are important to define. In 
hypokalaemic periodic paralysis, the patient may experi-
ence episodes of weakness that last from hours to days 
and which can be provoked by carbohydrate ingestion. 
Serum potassium measured at the onset of weakness is 
low, but may normalize quickly despite persisting symp-
toms. In hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis, the potassium 
concentration is elevated and there is also a form in which 
potassium appears not to change. In certain populations, 
particularly in Asia, the combination of hypokalaemic pa-
ralysis and hyperthyroidism is found. Treatment of the 
underlying thyroid dysfunction cures the potassium dis-
turbance and the muscle disease.
Malignant hyperpyrexia is a rare syndrome, in which 
there is a rapid rise of body temperature (up to 1 °C ­every 
5 min), lactic acidosis, muscle rigidity, hyperkalaemia, 
very high plasma CK activity and myoglobinuria. The 
­reaction may be triggered by several inhalational anaes-
thetics (e.g. halothane) and succinylcholine. The disor-
der has been linked to various different genetic defects 
including mutations in the ryanodine receptor gene. 
(Defects in this gene also give rise to the muscle disease, 
central core disease.) Plasma CK activity can also be in-
creased in ­patients at risk. Diagnosis is dependent on 
in vitro testing of muscle strips for an abnormal contrac-
ture response to halothane, caffeine or a combination of 
both agents.
Metabolic, genetically determined 
myopathies
Whereas the biochemical investigations so far described 
are either general indicators of muscle damage or di-
rected at systemic conditions in which muscle involve-
ment occurs, the following section deals with specific 
investigations of genetically determined metabolic 
muscle disease. It is in this area that biochemical studies 
are of paramount importance. The three main areas to 
be described are disorders of carbohydrate metabolism, 
defects of the respiratory chain and defects of fatty acid 
oxidation. The discussion of each will be divided into sec-
tions dealing with the investigations performed in blood 
and/or urine, muscle tissue analyses (e.g. histocytochemi-
cal studies, when appropriate) and specific biochemical 
investigations.
Disorders of carbohydrate metabolism
Disorders of carbohydrate metabolism can be divided 
into two main groups:
•	 failure to metabolize glucose, either owing to im-
paired mobilization or breakdown of glycogen (e.g. 
myophosphorylase deficiency) or impaired glycoly-
sis (e.g. phosphofructokinase deficiency)
•	 disorders resulting from lysosomal storage of gly­
cogen (α-acid maltase deficiency) or from the de­
position of abnormal polysaccharide (branching 
enzyme deficiency). For a detailed discussion of the 
clinical and biochemical features, the reader is re-
ferred to the review by Chen (2001) (see Further 
reading, below).
Dynamic/functional tests. In diseases related to fail-
ure to metabolize glucose, the symptoms are related to 
the lack of energy (ATP) under conditions where mus-
cle relies on glycolysis to meet this demand. The main 
clinical manifestations are cramp-like muscle pain and, 
­occasionally, the appearance of contractures. The inabil-
ity to derive energy from glycolysis is easily demonstrated 
by making the patient perform muscular work and mea-
suring the rise of blood lactate. This is usually done un-
der ischaemic conditions, but is equally effective without 
­ischaemia (see Appendix 33.1).
Histocytochemistry. Histocytochemical methods are 
used to study both the amount of glycogen and several 
of the enzymes of glycogen mobilization and glycolysis. 
Glycogen is usually demonstrated by some variant of the 
periodic acid Schiff (PAS) technique. Myophosphorylase, 
phosphofructokinase, myoadenylate deaminase and lactate 
dehydrogenase activities are all detectable cytochemically, 
and absence of enzyme activity is diagnostic in clinical 
terms. The finding of glycogen storage with grossly ele-
vated membrane-bound acid phosphatase activity is virtu-
ally diagnostic of acid α-glucosidase deficiency.
Biochemical investigations. The enzymes of glycoge-
nolysis and glycolysis are all highly active, and homoge-
nates prepared from needle-biopsy specimens are usually 
adequate for analysis. The measurement of these enzymes 
has been reviewed elsewhere (see Further reading, below) 
and only a brief summary is given here.
Acid α-glucosidase (acid maltase) is measured by mon-
itoring glucose release from maltose or glycogen at acid pH 
or by using 4-methylumbelliferyl ­α-glucoside as substrate 
and measuring the fluorescence of 4-­methylumbelliferone 
released. The process has been simplified by the availabil-
ity of a sensitive immune capture technique and activity 
can now be measured in dried blood spots saved on filter 
paper. The simplest technique for the assay of amylo-1,­ 
6-glucosidase activity is based on the fact that the hydro-
lytic activity of this enzyme is partly reversible; activity may 
be followed by measuring the incorporation of [U-
14C] 
glucose into glycogen in the presence of a muscle homoge-
nate. Branching enzyme α-1:α-1,4-glucan:1,4-glucan-6-
glucosyltransferase activity depends upon the stimulation 
of the rate of glycogen synthesis from glucose 1-phosphate 
catalysed by phosphorylase a (non-physiologically): activ-
ity is followed by the release of inorganic phosphate. The 
reaction catalysed by phosphorylase a is reversible, al-
though, in vivo, the concentration of glucose 1-phosphate 
is at least two orders of magnitude too low to allow gly-
cogen synthesis. The enzyme can therefore be measured 
in either direction. Phosphorylase kinase is measured 
by the rate of ATP-dependent conversion of phosphory-
lase a to phosphorylase b. Phosphofructokinase activity 
is measured in muscle homogenates by coupled enzyme 
assay in which the fructose 1,6-bisphosphate formed is 
converted to dihydroxyacetone phosphate, and this is 
converted to glycerol 3-phosphate with the oxidation of 
	
33  Muscle disease	
655
NADH. Phosphoglycerate kinase and phosphoglycer-
ate mutase are measured in muscle homogenates by cou-
pled enzyme assays. Lactate dehydrogenase is measured 
by a standard spectrophotometric assay.
Defects of the respiratory chain
These disorders were first identified in muscle, but are 
now known to produce a wide range of clinical disorders 
often involving the central nervous system (see Further 
reading, below). The respiratory chain is composed of five 
complexes (Fig. 33.7) and defects have been identified in 
each of them as well as in many of the proteins required 
to assemble and maintain this pathway and the mitochon-
drial genome that encodes some of the components.
Dynamic/functional tests in blood. Elevated plasma 
lactate, often associated with high concentrations of py-
ruvate and alanine, is a common, but not universal feature 
of respiratory chain dysfunction. In some patients, resting 
lactate is normal, but increases to very high concentra-
tions during aerobic exercise. Aerobic exercise tests can, 
however, be difficult to perform in children and patients 
with significant physical disability. Examination of the 
CSF lactate is of value in patients who have predominantly 
CNS symptoms since the lactate concentration may be 
inappropriately high in this compartment, but normal or 
near normal in blood. In patients with the Kearns–Sayre 
syndrome, elevated total protein concentrations are found 
in CSF, and this is one of the diagnostic criteria of the 
disorder. Recently, a fibroblast growth factor, FGF21, was 
found to be elevated in plasma in mitochondrial disease 
and appears to be a better biomarker for mitochondrial 
muscle disease than metabolites such as lactate.
Histocytochemistry. The activity of several mitochon-
drial enzymes can be demonstrated cytochemically. 
Cytochrome c oxidase (COX) and succinate dehydro-
genase (SDH) are the most specific for the respiratory 
chain, but NADH oxidation and ATPase activity may 
also give non-specific clues to the presence of a disorder. 
The morphological hallmark of respiratory chain dis-
ease is the ragged red fibre originally described using the 
Gomori trichrome stain. The finding of COX positive 
and deficient muscle fibres (a mosaic) is highly sugges-
tive of a defect in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA), and this 
can easily be shown using COX and SDH stains in com-
bination (Fig. 33.8). In this case, histochemical analysis 
is sufficient and the next step will be genetic analysis of 
mtDNA. Detailed biochemical analysis is still necessary, 
however, particularly for the investigation of complexes I 
and III. Newer techniques that combine gel electropho-
resis, ‘in gel’ activity measurement and immunoblotting 
are also available and will certainly play a greater role in 
the diagnostic process in the future.
Biochemical investigations
 Measurement of mitochondrial oxidations. The 
­complete oxidation of metabolic fuels with concomitant 
synthesis of ATP can be studied in various ways, includ-
ing overall flux from substrate to water, flux through vari-
ous segments and the activities of individual components 
FIGURE 33.8  ■  Histochemical demonstration of: (A) cytochrome 
c oxidase (complex IV) and (B) succinate dehydrogenase (com-
plex II) activity. The reactions specifically identify respiratory 
chain complexes and the combination (C) permits the easy de-
tection of muscle fibres lacking cytochrome c oxidase activity 
(light grey fibres). (Photographs courtesy of Dr B Krossnes.)
A
B
C
656	
Clinical biochemistry
of the respiratory chain. These will be discussed below. 
In many instances, it is necessary to isolate mitochondria 
from tissue (usually muscle). This is a relatively straight-
forward, but critical, step, since the outcome of all fur-
ther work will depend on the quality of the mitochondrial 
fraction prepared.
Flux through the whole respiratory chain can be 
studied either by measuring oxygen consumption or the 
production of ATP. Polarography measures the rate of 
change in oxygen concentration in solution, and since 
oxygen is the final electron acceptor of the respiratory 
chain, this provides direct measurement of activity. The 
working volume of the electrode determines how much 
mitochondrial protein is required and since human mus-
cle biopsies are small, the smaller the volume the better. 
Several parameters may be assessed using polarography. 
First, the quality or state of the mitochondria may be in-
ferred from the respiratory control ratio (RCR). This is 
the ratio of oxygen consumption in the presence of ADP 
to that when all ADP has been converted to ATP. The 
RCR in fact reflects the structural integrity of the mito-
chondria, since any damage to the inner membrane will 
dissipate the electrochemical gradient and thus the ability 
to synthesize ATP. The RCR in human skeletal muscle 
mitochondrial fractions is usually between 2 and 4. Flux 
through the respiratory chain is often expressed in terms 
of oxygen consumed per milligram of protein in the pres-
ence of ADP. It is also possible to measure ATP formed 
during respiration, either directly or by linking to a lumi-
nescent marker.
Flux through segments of the respiratory chain can be 
measured spectrophotometrically using artificial electron 
acceptors whose light absorption changes on reduction/
oxidation. A commonly used acceptor is potassium fer-
ricyanide. NADH produced by the oxidation of pyruvate, 
oxoglutarate or glutamate, yields electrons that enter the 
respiratory chain via complex I. Ferricyanide accepts elec-
trons from cytochrome c with the result that it is possible 
to assess flux through the segment containing complex I, 
ubiquinone and complex III (see Fig. 33.7). Alternatively, 
using succinate as a substrate, electrons enter via succi-
nate dehydrogenase that is part of the respiratory chain 
complex II. The ferricyanide-linked assay will then mea-
sure flux from complex II to cytochrome c.
Measurement of activity of individual respiratory 
chain complexes. The activity of these complexes is 
best measured in mitochondrial fractions. Where small 
amounts of tissue are available, partial purification is used.
Complex I activity is measured by determining 
­rotenone-sensitive NADH-ubiquinone oxidoreductase 
activity. Low molecular weight, water-soluble ubiqui-
none or a ubiquinone analogue can be used as an electron 
acceptor. This assay requires that the mitochondria are 
made ­permeable to enable the NADH to reach its bind-
ing site on the inner aspect of the inner mitochondrial 
membrane. NADH oxidation is measured by the decrease 
in absorbance at 340 nm before and after the addition of 
­rotenone. The use of rotenone, a specific complex I in-
hibitor, is essential since there are other enzymes capable 
of oxidizing NADH.
Complex II activity is measured by following the re-
duction of ubiquinone by succinate either directly or by 
linking the reaction to an artificial electron acceptor such 
as dichlorophenol-indophenol. The succinate dehydro-
genase component of complex II can be further studied 
by using phenazine ethosulphate rather than ubiquinone 
as the intermediate electron acceptor.
Complex III activity is measured by following the reduc-
tion of cytochrome c by ubiquinol. Ubiquinol is synthesized 
from ubiquinone by reduction with dithionite followed by 
organic extraction. Further studies of part of complex III 
can be made by measuring the transhydrogenase reaction, 
which gives information on the b cytochromes.
Complex IV activity is measured by following the oxi-
dation of reduced cytochrome c. Reduced cytochrome c 
is prepared by addition of ascorbate, which is removed 
by gel filtration. Polarographic measurement of complex 
IV activity is also widely used. In this reaction, ascorbate 
and tetramethyl-p-phenylenediamine dihydrochloride 
(TMPD) are used as artificial electron donors to cyto-
chrome c.
Complex V is rarely measured in patients with sus-
pected mitochondrial disease, but several methods to 
measure oligomycin-sensitive ATPase activity have been 
used for mitochondria from other species.
Molecular biology techniques. Mitochondria are unique 
in that they contain their own DNA (mtDNA). This small 
genome encodes 13 polypeptides (seven that go into com-
plex I, one in complex III, three into complex IV and two 
into complex V) and 24 RNA species that participate in 
intramitochondrial protein synthesis. Disorders caused 
by mtDNA mutations are highly variable, but there are 
some classic syndromes that are easily recognizable. For 
example, Kearns–Sayre syndrome and chronic progres-
sive external ophthalmoplegia that can be caused by gene 
rearrangements (most often deletions); Leber hereditary 
optic neuropathy is due to a point mutation in complex 
I ­protein-coding genes, and myoclonus, epilepsy with 
ragged red fibres (MERRF) and myopathy, encephalopa-
thy, lactic acidosis and stroke (MELAS) are due to point 
mutations in different mitochondrial genes. Since the 
mitochondrial genome is inherited exclusively from the 
mother, disorders in which maternal inheritance occurs 
gave the first clue to the possibility of mtDNA mutations.
Since the first mtDNA mutations were described 
in 1988, more than 150 different mutations have been 
found including both rearrangements (deletions or du-
plications) and point mutations. In the last few years, 
mutations in nuclear encoded genes affecting mitochon-
dria have also been identified and this group is expand-
ing. As stated earlier, the finding of a mosaic of COX 
positive and deficient fibres is highly suggestive of a de-
fect involving mtDNA. This can, however, either be a 
primary mtDNA mutation, as, for example, in the syn-
drome of MELAS, or a secondary mtDNA defect caused 
by a nuclear genetic defect in a protein that has a role in 
mtDNA maintenance.
Defects of fatty acid oxidation
Muscle symptoms associated with a defect of fatty acid 
oxidation can occur alone or as part of a systemic abnor-
mality. Symptoms may arise acutely or more chronically 
	
33  Muscle disease	
657
and affected individuals are at risk of developing cardio-
myopathy, hepatic dysfunction, sudden infant death and 
hypoglycaemic coma.
Dynamic/functional tests
Intermediary metabolites and metabolic fuels in 
blood.  If a systemic defect is present, the inter-­relationship 
­between metabolic fuels is abnormal. In healthy subjects 
during stress or fasting, lipolysis is stimulated and free 
fatty acids are released into the circulation. Following 
uptake by tissues, fatty acids are converted to their 
acyl-CoA esters and oxidized by β-oxidation to ­generate 
acetyl-CoA. Acetyl-CoA may be further oxidized 
by the citrate cycle or converted to ketone bodies in 
the liver. Circulating ketone bodies are an important 
source of energy during stress or fasting and are read-
ily oxidized by extrahepatic tissues, in particular muscle 
and brain. When fatty acid oxidation is impaired, the 
blood concentrations of free fatty acids increase, but 
there is no concomitant increase in the concentration of 
­ketone bodies. Energy must, therefore, be derived from 
­carbohydrate metabolism as long as glycogen stores last. 
Once these are depleted, hypoglycaemia can develop 
and may lead to permanent tissue damage or death. It 
is clear, therefore, that fasting is potentially dangerous 
for patients with fatty acid oxidation defects and should 
be avoided.
Measurement of plasma, tissue and urine ­carnitine 
concentrations. Patients with defects of fatty acid oxi-
dation frequently have abnormalities of carnitine me-
tabolism. Partial β-oxidation will continue to generate 
chain-shortened acyl-CoA ester intermediates that 
combine with carnitine in a reaction catalysed by car-
nitine acyltransferases. These carnitine esters are trans-
ported out of the mitochondrial matrix, resulting in a 
higher percentage of carnitine in the acylated form in 
blood and urine from patients compared with healthy 
subjects. In addition, in the presence of a defect in 
β-oxidation, there will be abnormal excretion of spe-
cific acylcarnitines, e.g. octanoylcarnitine in medium 
chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MCAD). 
Secondary carnitine deficiency can occur in these indi-
viduals, although the mechanism remains uncertain, as 
total urinary excretion of acylcarnitines is not increased. 
Carnitine concentrations, free and acylated, are usually 
measured using tandem mass spectrometry. Since car-
nitine metabolism is perturbed by most defects of fatty 
acid oxidation, these measurements rarely help in mak-
ing a specific diagnosis.
Mass spectroscopic measurement of specific acylcar-
nitines is a screening technique that is now widely used. 
This can be performed on dried blood spots (e.g. on a 
Guthrie card) and allows the detection of specific inter-
mediates that are identified using tandem mass spectrom-
etry. The metabolism of fatty acids proceeds by a chain 
shortening series of reactions that produce acetyl-CoA. 
In the presence of a block in this process, chain-shortened 
fatty acids will accumulate and these are esterified with 
carnitine, forming acylcarnitines that can be detected in 
blood. Figure 33.9 shows typical profiles for three differ-
ent defects that can be identified using this technique in 
dried blood samples. Owing to the frequency of MCAD 
in certain populations and its association with sudden in-
fant death, this technique is increasingly being used for 
screening of neonates.
Measurement of dicarboxylic acids and ­acylglycines 
in urine. When mitochondrial β-oxidation is impaired, 
dicarboxylic acids, e.g. adipic, suberic and sebacic, 
are generated by the partial oxidation of fatty acids 
in the endoplasmic reticulum (ω-oxidation) and by 
­β-oxidation in peroxisomes. These dicarboxylic acids 
are excreted in the urine, and the pattern of the organic 
aciduria, detected by gas chromatography, may be help-
ful in the diagnosis of a defect of fatty acid oxidation. 
Acylglycines are formed in the liver by the combination 
of acyl-CoA esters and glycine, a reaction catalysed by 
glycine-N-acylase. Glycine conjugates are excreted in 
the urine and can be detected by gas chromatography. 
An isotope dilution analysis of urinary acylglycines has 
been introduced, which seems to be a very sensitive test 
for defects of medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
deficiency.
Specific biochemical investigation
Measurement 
of 
flux 
through 
β-oxidation. 
Measurement of flux is an important investigation in 
­defects of fatty acid oxidation. There are, however, many 
problems in accurately determining the flux in muscle 
preparations for diagnostic purposes. One of the most 
frequently used methods measures 
14CO2 formed by 
the oxidation of 
14C-labelled fatty acids. This method 
is inaccurate since 
14CO2 is only released by the fur-
ther oxidation of acetyl-CoA by the citrate cycle, which 
is incomplete and not necessarily proportional to the 
flux through β-oxidation. Measurement of 
14C-labelled 
acid-soluble products is a much better indicator of flux, 
but this method is not suitable for 
14C-labelled medium 
and short chain fatty acids. An alternative approach 
is to determine 
3H2O formed during the oxidation of 
3H-labelled fatty acids. Unfortunately, this technique is 
also limited because of the relatively few 
3H-labelled 
fatty acids available. Acylcarnitine profiles can be stud-
ied in fibroblasts using the same technique as for dried 
blood spots.
Measurement of carnitine transport and enzyme 
­activity. Primary carnitine deficiency, due to a defect of 
carnitine transport, can be investigated by measuring the 
uptake of labelled carnitine into fibroblasts. Carnitine 
palmitoyltransferase activity is measured radiochemi-
cally. A number of different spectrophotometric and 
fluorometric techniques have been used to measure acyl-
CoA dehydrogenase activities and the methods of choice 
are a dye reduction assay and the fluorometric ETF-
reduction assay. Electron transfer flavoprotein activity 
can be measured by a dye reduction assay or by a cata-
lytic assay using a physiological electron donor, reduced 
medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase and the physio-
logical electron acceptor ETF dehydrogenase. Electron 
transfer flavoprotein dehydrogenase activity can be 
measured by two different methods. One measures the 
NADH-ETF reductase activity anaerobically following 
the reduction of the ETFox flavin to the semiquinone. 
The other measures the co-proportionation of oxidized- 
and two-electron reduced to one-electron ­reduced ETF 
658	
Clinical biochemistry
semiquinone by following the disappearance of the 
ETFox flavin fluorescence. Enoyl-CoA hydratase activ-
ity is measured by following the hydration of the double 
bond of 2-enoyl-CoA esters. 3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA dehy-
drogenase activity is measured in the reverse direction 
following the oxidation of NADH or in the forward 
direction by linking the reaction with 3-­oxoacyl-CoA 
thiolase. 3-­Oxoacyl-CoA thiolase activity is measured 
by following the decrease in absorbance resulting from 
the disappearance of a ­Mg
2+-enolate complex using a 
long chain 3-­oxoacyl-CoA ester and acetoacetyl-CoA as 
substrates.
100
0
100
0
100
0
100
0
%
200
225
250
275
300
325
350
375
400
425
450
475
500
525
550
Control
Medium chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency
Very long chain acyl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency
Long chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydrogenase deficiency
m/z
218.2
219.2
260.2
263.2
277.3
353.4
428.4
456.3
465.5
466.5
482.3
484.4
465.5
263.2
260.1
218.1
249.1
277.3
316.4
344.4
353.4
372.4
456.4
466.5
482.5
218.1
221.4
263.2
249.0
277.4
342.2
353.5
374.2 400.4
424.4
426.5 456.5
465.5
428.4
452.2
482.5
484.5
485.5
263.2
260.3
221.1
249.0
277.3
353.5
372.4
400.3 428.4
444.3
456.4
465.5
482.5
484.4
498.4
218.2
%
%
%
FIGURE 33.9  ■  Analysis of acylcarnitine intermediates using mass spectrometry. Acylcarnitine profile in dried blood spot from a healthy 
subject (upper panel) and patients with defects of fatty acid oxidation. The numbers above the peaks are m/z values that correspond to 
the molecular ions of butylated acylcarnitine species: free carnitine (m/z 218), free carnitine internal standard (m/z 221), C2-carnitine 
(m/z 260), C2-carnitine internal standard (m/z 263), C3-carnitine (m/z 274), C3-carnitine internal standard (m/z 277), C8-carnitine (m/z 
344), C8-carnitine internal standard (m/z 353), C12-carnitine (m/z 400), C14:1-carnitine (m/z 426), C14-carnitine (m/z 428), C16-carnitine 
(m/z 456), C16-carnitine internal standard (m/z 465), C18:1-carnitine (m/z 482), C18-carnitine (m/z 484), 3-OH-C18:1-carnitine (m/z 498), 
3-OH-C18-carnitine (m/z 500). Major diagnostic analytes are shown by arrows. For example, in medium chain acyl-CoA deficiency, 
medium chain (C8)-carnitine esters accumulate (m/z 344). In very long chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency, C14 and longer 
chain fatty acids accumulate, while in long chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (bottom panel), long chain hydroxy 
forms of the carnitine esters accumulate.
	
33  Muscle disease	
659
CONCLUSION
The investigation of muscle disease requires a combina-
tion of clinical investigation, morphological, biochemical 
and molecular genetic studies. Clinicians must recognize 
the characteristic patterns of weakness and important as-
sociated clinical features and then decide which investi-
gations are appropriate. Biochemical studies will play an 
important part in the investigation, particularly in those 
patients with suspected metabolic myopathies. Many of 
the routine biochemical studies will be available at all 
hospitals, but the specialized tests to investigate meta-
bolic myopathies are best performed in the few centres 
with a research interest in muscle disease.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I am grateful to my colleagues Mike Cullen, Margaret 
Johnson, Mori Pourfarzam and Bård Krossnes for giving 
me their illustrations and their experience and to Petter 
Sanaker for reading through the manuscript.
Further reading
Berardo A, DiMauro S, Hirano M. A diagnostic algorithm for metabolic 
myopathies. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep 2010;10:118–26. 
This review describes the clinical features encountered in metabolic 
myopathies, particularly mitochondrial disease.
Chen Y-T. Glycogen storage diseases. In: Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, 
Sly WS et  al. editors. 8th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill; 2001 
Chapter 71. 
This describes the clinical features and the biochemical investigations of 
defects of carbohydrate metabolism.
Edwards RHT, Young A, Wiles CM. Needle biopsy of skeletal muscle 
in the diagnosis and clinical study of muscle function and repair. N 
Engl J Med 1980;302:267–71.
Jackson MJ, Schaefer J, Johnson MA et  al. Presentation and clinical 
investigation of mitochondrial (respiratory chain) disease: a study of 
51 patients. Brain 1995;118:339–57.
Johnson MA. Skeletal muscle. In: Filipe MI, Lake BD, editors. 
Histochemistry in pathology. Edinburgh: Churchill Livingstone; 
1990. p. 129–57. 
The morphological and histochemical evaluation of muscle disease is 
described in this chapter.
Karpati G, Hilton-Jones D, Bushby K, Griggs RC, editors. Disorders of 
voluntary muscle. 8th ed. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press; 
2009. 
This is a comprehensive review of muscle disease and is an excellent 
reference volume.
Layzer RB. Neuromuscular manifestations of systemic disease. 
Philadelphia: F A Davis; 1985. 
This book describes the common involvement of muscle in systemic disease.
McFarland R, Taylor RW, Turnbull DM. A neurological perspective on 
mitochondrial disease. Lancet Neurol 2010;9:829–40. 
A review of the neurological manifestations of mitochondrial (respiratory 
chain) disease.
Nanji AA. Serum creatine kinase isoenzymes: a review. Muscle Nerve 
1983;6:83–90. 
This review describes the different forms of creatine kinase and the 
relevance of this investigation in various muscle diseases.
Sherratt HSA, Watmough NJ, Johnson MA, Turnbull DM. Methods 
used for the study of normal and abnormal skeletal muscle 
mitochondria. Methods Biochem Anal 1988;33:243–335. 
The review describes the investigation of skeletal muscle mitochondrial 
disease.
Warren JD, Blumbergs PC, Thompson PD. Rhabdomyolysis: a review. 
Muscle Nerve 2002;25:332–47. 
A comprehensive review.
APPENDIX 33.1: THE FOREARM EXERCISE TEST
This consists of measuring lactate production following 
1 min of exercise, which can be performed under isch-
aemic conditions or without. The use of ischaemia in pa-
tients with glycogen breakdown defects such as McArdle 
disease can be associated with rhabdomyolysis and should 
be avoided. The test is otherwise the same. If used, isch-
aemia is induced in the forearm by the use of a sphyg-
momanometer cuff placed around the upper arm and 
inflated to just above systolic pressure (note: a reliable cuff 
is essential since gradual loss of pressure will allow the 
entry of fresh blood).
The subject is asked to squeeze a (spare) sphygmoma-
nometer bulb once every second for 1 min and then rest 
with the cuff still inflated for 1 min to allow lactate to leak 
out of the forearm muscles. The cuff is then released. 
Blood samples are taken prior to inflating the cuff and 
immediately following release, and at intervals (e.g. 2, 5, 7 
and 12 min) after exercise. The pre-exercise blood sample 
must be withdrawn without stasis so a small, indwelling 
cannula (e.g. 21-G butterfly) is placed in an antecubi-
tal vein. Should stasis be required to place this, 10 min 
should be left before taking the pre-exercise sample. 
Samples taken into anticoagulants (e.g. fluoride oxalate) 
must be analysed within 30 min. Alternatively, samples 
can be mixed with ice-cold perchloric acid.
The normal response is for lactate to rise in the first sam-
ple after ischaemic exercise to between three and five times 
pre-exercise concentrations and then gradually ­decline. 
Healthy subjects perform this test easily, but patients with 
disorders of glycolysis often have to stop the exercise owing 
to pain and/or cramp. In disorders of glycogen mobilization 
or glycolysis, little or no rise in venous lactate will be seen. 
Since myoadenylate deaminase deficiency gives a similar 
clinical picture to myophosphorylase deficiency, ammonia 
concentration should be measured simultaneously with 
lactate. In myoadenylate deficiency, lactate rises normally, 
but there is no (normal) rise in ammonia. This provides, 
moreover, an internal control for the investigation in most 
instances, since failure of lactate to rise can also be due to 
poor effort during ischaemic exercise.
660
C H A P T E R  3 4
Investigation of cerebrospinal fluid
Geoffrey Keir  •  Carrie Chadwick
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  660
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID PHYSIOLOGY  661
Formation  661
Composition  661
Analysis of cisternal or ventricular  
fluid  661
INVESTIGATIONS RELEVANT TO PHYSIOLOGY 
AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY  661
Sampling and pressure  661
Appearance  661
Cells  661
Glucose  662
Lactate  662
Proteins  662
Brain-specific proteins  665
Cerebrospinal fluid oto- and 
rhinorrhoea  666
Haem pigments and ferritin  666
Enzymes in CSF  667
Markers of inflammation  667
Non-biochemical investigations  668
BIOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATIONS IN CNS  
DISORDERS  669
Acute infections  669
Chronic infections  669
Haemorrhage and  
obstruction  670
Inherited metabolic diseases  670
Malignancy  670
Dementia  670
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis in demyelinating 
diseases  671
CONCLUSION  671
INTRODUCTION
Spinal paracentesis (lumbar puncture) was introduced 
at the end of the 19th century for the therapeutic relief 
of raised intracranial pressure secondary to tuberculous 
meningitis. Within a few years, however, it was being 
used to sample lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) to aid 
clinical diagnosis. Analyses that were undertaken in these 
early days included microscopy for cells and chemical 
tests to measure reducing substances, protein and chlo-
ride. Even today, counting cells and measuring total pro-
tein and glucose remain the mainstay analyses routinely 
carried out on CSF specimens. Yet, modern analytical 
techniques make possible the quantitative and qualitative 
detection of a vast range of biochemical substances. It is 
the purpose of this chapter to assess critically the role of 
laboratory studies of CSF in the investigation of central 
nervous system (CNS) disorders. The results of these 
analyses must be considered both in the clinical context 
and in conjunction with the findings of other investiga-
tions, including neuroimaging and neurophysiological 
measurements.
A few points should be kept in mind when handling 
CSF. Despite the fact that well-documented procedures 
exist that will minimize discomfort, including that of 
post-lumbar puncture headache, the anticipation of a 
lumbar puncture (LP) is something that causes distress 
to many patients. This is not helped by the fact that, oc-
casionally, even when carried out by an experienced prac-
titioner, performing a satisfactory LP can prove difficult 
and uncomfortable and is not without the risk of epidural 
or subdural bleeding or infection. In many instances, only 
one spinal tap can be carried out. One reason is that the 
introduction of a needle into the lumbar sac to sample 
the CSF can lead to blood contamination of the remain-
ing CSF. This can invalidate the taking of further samples 
for several days, the exact time being dependent upon the 
analyte being studied and the degree of blood contami-
nation. There are also ethical reasons against repeating 
an invasive procedure for trivial reasons. Furthermore, in 
the very young, the volumes of CSF that can safely be 
taken are small. Collectively, this places a heavy burden of 
responsibility on laboratories to make sure that the maxi-
mum relevant information is achieved from the available 
fluid, and that none is wasted or prematurely discarded. 
Also, the analysis of CSF is multidisciplinary, and it be-
hoves laboratories to ensure that there is the necessary 
cooperation among pathology specialties. It is strongly 
recommended that laboratories produce guidelines for 
doctors indicating sample requirements, and establish 
procedures to ensure that all CSF samples surplus to 
immediate analytical requirements are correctly stored. 
Like all body fluids, CSF is a potentially hazardous mate-
rial and must be handled appropriately.
	
34  Investigation of cerebrospinal fluid	
661
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID PHYSIOLOGY
Formation
In the normal adult, the total volume of CSF is about 
150 mL. Cerebrospinal fluid is formed at a rate of approx-
imately 500 mL/day, so the fluid is typically exchanged 
about four times daily (every 6 h). Infants and children 
have smaller CSF volumes that range from 30–60 mL in a 
neonate to 100 mL in a pre-teen.
While the choroid plexuses that line the ventricles are 
the major site of CSF production, as much as 30% of CSF is 
formed by fluid shifts across various vascular beds within the 
CNS, such as the cerebral capillaries and dorsal root ganglia. 
Unlike choroidal CSF, interstitial fluid forms throughout 
the brain and spine, and then diffuses into the CSF.
Cerebrospinal fluid formed in the lateral ventricles passes 
through the third and fourth ventricles into the cisterna 
magna, from where it circulates out into the cerebral and 
spinal subarachnoid spaces. The subarachnoid space lies 
between the two leptomeninges, the outer (arachnoid) ma-
ter and inner (pia) mater, which cover the whole brain and 
spinal canal down to the level of the second sacral vertebra. 
The flow of CSF from the cisterna magna is mainly upward 
and outward over the cerebral hemispheres to the main site 
of reabsorption through the arachnoid villi, which drain into 
the major dural sinuses. Flow down the cul-de-sac of the 
spinal cord is relatively sluggish. Thus, while the average 
turnover time of CSF is ~6 h, radiolabelled plasma albumin 
can continue to equilibrate with lumbar CSF for 1–2 days.
Composition
Solutes enter the CSF by a variety of processes, including 
active transport via specific transporter mechanisms pres-
ent in choroidal epithelial cells, facilitated diffusion and 
passive diffusion.
Cerebrospinal fluid constituents may be derived from 
plasma, from the metabolic activities of cells normally 
present in the CNS or from cells and organisms present 
in the CSF as a result of pathological processes.
Analysis of cisternal or ventricular fluid
While the most common fluid obtained for analysis is 
lumbar CSF, there are occasions when CSF is taken from 
other regions, for example from one of the lateral ven-
tricles (usually via a ventriculo-peritoneal or ventriculo-
extracorporeal shunt), the 4th ventricle (by cisternal 
puncture) and even from around the cortex. It is ex-
tremely important that the anatomical site of the fluid is 
recorded, as the reference ranges for many constituents 
vary according to the anatomical source of the CSF.
INVESTIGATIONS RELEVANT TO 
­PHYSIOLOGY AND PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Sampling and pressure
Details of CSF sampling techniques are well described in 
standard textbooks of practical medical procedures. The 
initial hydrostatic pressure is between 80 and 180 mmH2O 
when the patient is in the lateral recumbent position. 
Ideally, four sequential fractions of CSF should be col-
lected into sterile polypropylene containers. In an adult, 
a total of 10–12 mL of fluid should be withdrawn, but as 
little as 3 mL or less in the case of a neonate. The contain-
ers must be numbered in the order of collection. Typically, 
fraction 1, taken into a fluoride tube, is used for glucose 
(this fraction may also be suitable for protein measure-
ment by some methods), fractions 2 and 3 are used for 
cell counts and microbiological examinations, i.e. Gram 
stain and culture, and fraction 4 is used for the assay of 
specific proteins and oligoclonal bands and, if required, 
spectrophotometry (in which case the tube must be pro-
tected from light from the moment of collection). Blood 
for glucose and, in the case of spectrophotometry, for total 
protein and bilirubin should be taken at the same time.
Appearance
Cerebrospinal fluid is normally crystal clear and colour-
less. The fluid appears turbid when there are more than 
200 × 10
6 white cells/L (200/mm
3) or 400 × 10
6 red cells/L 
(400/mm
3). The presence of bacteria or contamination 
by epidural fat may also cause turbidity of the specimen. 
Clot formation may occur when protein concentrations 
are markedly elevated; where the source of the protein is 
blood then at least 1 000 000 × 10
6 red cells/L (10
6/mm
3) 
are required for clotting to occur. Cerebrospinal fluid may 
be coloured yellow by bilirubin or, rarely, by carotenoids, 
red (or more usually pink/orange) by oxyhaemoglobin or 
brown by methaemoglobin. Yellow discolouration of CSF 
is called xanthochromia, a term that has often been used 
to encompass the colours imparted by both bilirubin and 
oxyhaemoglobin. Because the presence of oxyhaemoglo-
bin and bilirubin is most appropriately detected by spec-
trophotometry, where this technique is used, the term 
xanthochromia should be avoided to minimize confusion.
Cells
The total leukocyte count in normal adult CSF is rarely 
>5 × 10
6/L mononuclear cells (lymphocytes and mono-
cytes). The presence of even one polymorphonuclear 
­leukocyte (neutrophil, polymorph) in the CSF should be 
a cause for concern in an adult. In neonates, however, the 
normal cell count is <30 × 10
6/L (predominantly poly-
morphs), with <10 × 10
6/L lymphocytes. Changes that 
­occur in the presence of CNS infections form an important 
part of the initial diagnosis and will be considered later.
Erythrocytes are not normally present in CSF. They 
appear either following trauma to blood vessels during 
LP or after an intracranial bleed. A traumatic LP occurs 
when the needle damages a blood vessel while passing 
through the vascular epidural space, thereby introduc-
ing blood directly into the lumbar sac, and is estimated 
to occur in 15–20% of all LPs. Traumatic contamination 
complicates interpretation in two ways.
•	 The first is in the investigation of suspected intrac-
ranial haemorrhage, especially subarachnoid haem-
orrhage. After haemorrhage, CSF will show equal 
staining of all samples, while a traumatic tap will 
662	
Clinical biochemistry
­typically result in CSF that is stained initially, but 
clears in subsequent fractions; in the past this has 
been confirmed by performing red blood cell counts 
on the individual collection bottles. While the in-
dividual who performed the LP may often have an 
opinion on whether or not the puncture was trau-
matic, both clinical impression and sequential red 
blood cell counting have been demonstrated to be 
unreliable. The use of such evidence for substanti-
ating an intracranial bleed should be avoided, and if 
spectrophotometry for detection of oxyhaemoglobin 
and bilirubin is unavailable or equivocal, the presence 
or absence of red cells is used to direct further inves-
tigations.
•	 The second is in the interpretation of the CSF white 
cell count (WCC). Usually an increase in the num-
ber of white cells is an indication of infection, but 
following a traumatic tap, white cells are more likely 
to be from the contaminating blood. When a CSF 
leukocytosis is suspected in spite of a traumatic tap, 
the predicted white cell count can be compared with 
that observed, as follows:
A ratio of observed (O) to predicted (P) WCC >1 im-
plies CSF leukocytosis. There is a significant overlap of 
causes for O:P values between 0.75 and 1.0. However, an 
O:P ratio of <0.1 is highly predictive in terms of exclud-
ing infection.
Glucose
The brain has no significant glycogen store and is there-
fore wholly dependent upon the blood supply of glu-
cose to satisfy its requirements. Although the brain is 
only about 5% of the total body mass, it uses 20% of the 
­glucose available from the blood. Cerebrospinal fluid glu-
cose concentrations can only meaningfully be interpreted 
in relation to the plasma concentration, measured on a 
sample ideally taken within 15 min of LP. Cerebrospinal 
fluid glucose is derived solely from plasma glucose and 
is normally 60–80% of the concentration in the latter, 
­although, for the first six months of life, the CSF glucose 
concentration may equal that of plasma. The CSF:plasma 
glucose ratio falls below 0.6 in a number of conditions, 
and this finding can be used as a diagnostic aid. The most 
notable reductions are observed in bacterial, tuberculous 
and some fungal meningitides, and in hypoxia, whereas 
ratios are usually normal in viral meningitis. The exact 
cause of the lowered CSF:plasma glucose ratio is still 
unresolved and will be discussed below. Whatever the 
cause, a lowered ratio usually indicates a diffuse general-
ized meningeal disease. A false negative result may be ob-
tained if the patient has been given prior treatment with 
antibiotics.
Glucose is transferred into the CSF by a specific mem-
brane carrier transport system. In the adult, the usual 
ratio is maintained up to plasma glucose concentrations 
of 20 mmol/L. For plasma glucose concentrations higher 
than this, the CSF glucose concentration does not rise fur-
ther, probably due to saturation of the transport system. 
In severe hyperglycaemia, therefore, the CSF glucose may 
seem disproportionately low relative to that in the blood. 
It is important that this is not misinterpreted as evidence 
for infection. Furthermore, the CSF typically takes 2–4 h 
to equilibrate fully with a change in blood glucose. In a 
diabetic patient who has recently taken either insulin or an 
oral hypoglycaemic agent, it is therefore possible to have 
the paradoxical finding of a CSF glucose concentration 
that is higher than that in a paired blood sample.
Lactate
Cerebrospinal fluid lactate concentration is normally 
<2.5 mmol/L; concentrations are controlled indepen-
dently of those in arterial blood, indicating that it is a 
product of metabolism within the CNS. An increased 
CSF lactate concentration is observed in cerebral hy-
poxia (for example, following a cerebral infarction) and, 
most notably, in bacterial meningitis, when it is often 
associated with a decreased CSF glucose concentra-
tion. Elevated CSF concentrations of lactate have been 
demonstrated in patients with inherited disorders of the 
mitochondrial electron transport chain involving the py-
ruvate dehydrogenase complex, which give rise to the 
mitochondrial myopathies. In those with predominantly 
neurological symptoms, lactate concentrations may be 
increased only in the CSF.
Proteins
Two-dimensional protein electrophoresis of CSF reveals 
200–300 spots, of which about half correspond to 34 unam-
biguously identified proteins. Nearly all proteins give rise 
to multiple spots owing to heterogeneity arising from vari-
ous combinations of glycosylation, phosphorylation and 
splice variants. Proteins in CSF can be grouped as follows:
•	 those arising from plasma proteins that have crossed 
the blood–CSF barriers
•	 those synthesized in the brain and secreted into the 
CSF
•	 those usually present inside CNS cells that have 
leaked into the CSF following cell damage. Proteins 
within this group are generally present in only trace 
amounts.
Table 34.1 lists the ten proteins with the highest con-
centrations in CSF and plasma.
Some 80% of the total CSF protein concentration is 
derived from plasma proteins that have diffused passively 
across the various blood–CSF barriers. The remainder 
comprises proteins that are synthesized within the CNS 
(Fig. 34.1). Some plasma proteins, such as transferrin, un-
dergo receptor-mediated transfer. The cells of the cho-
roid plexus also synthesize transferrin and prealbumin, 
so the CSF concentration is a function of several factors. 
In health, two factors influence the CSF concentrations 
of the individual plasma-­derived CSF proteins. One is 
the degree of permeability of the combined blood–CSF 
barriers to the protein, which is inversely proportional 
to the Stokes radius of the protein. The other is the 
plasma concentration of the protein: in general, the CSF 
predicted WCC
CSF redcellcount
blood WCC
blood
redcellcount
=
×


/


	
34  Investigation of cerebrospinal fluid	
663
concentration is directly proportional to that in plasma, 
and inversely proportional to molecular size.
All the frequently measured plasma proteins are present 
in CSF, demonstrating the lack of an upper limit for molec-
ular size exclusion by the blood–CSF barriers. In health, all 
CSF albumin and immunoglobulin come from the plasma. 
Albumin accounts for 50–60% of total lumbar CSF pro-
tein and is present at a concentration of about 1/250 of that 
of the plasma. Permeability of the barrier alters with age; 
total CSF protein and albumin concentrations reflect this 
(Table 34.2). The albumin concentration (and thus that of 
total protein) also increases from ventricle to lumbar re-
gions, reflecting both a change in the permeabilities of the 
blood–CSF barriers along the CNS axis and the longer 
time for equilibration of lumbar CSF with plasma.
Cerebrospinal fluid total protein concentrations may 
increase in two circumstances:
•	 when there is an increased permeability of the 
blood–CSF barriers, most commonly owing to 
infection (e.g. meningitis) or autoimmune inflam-
matory conditions (e.g. Guillain–Barré syndrome, 
which is particularly characterized by an acellular 
CSF and a protein concentration >1 g/L)
•	 when there is reduced flow of spinal CSF, such as 
occurs with a partial or complete blockage of CSF 
flow down the spine (e.g. owing to a prolapsed in-
tervertebral disc, an abscess or a spinal tumour). In 
this circumstance there is increased equilibration of 
CSF with plasma, often accompanied by an inflam-
matory increase in permeability. In Froin syndrome, 
there is complete spinal block of CSF flow, usually 
TABLE 34.1  Comparison of the ten proteins with highest concentrations in CSF and plasma
CSF
Mean  
concentration (mg/L)
Plasma
Mean  
concentration (g/L)
Albumin
250
Albumin
45
β-Trace (prostaglandin 
D-synthase)
25
IgG
10
IgG
20
Fibrinogen
3
Transthyretin
17
Transferrin
3
Transferrin
14
α2-Macroglobulin
2.5
α1Antitrypsin
8
Apolipoprotein A
2
Apolipoprotein A
6
IgA
2
γ-Trace (cystatin-C)
6
Haptoglobin
1.5
Orosomucoid
3.5
α1-Antitrypsin
1.5
Haemopexin
3
Complement factor C3
1.5
Total CSF
proteins
γ-Trace
(11%)
Transthyretin
(27%)
CSF
enriched
(16%)
IgG (6%)
Albumin
(63%)
All others
(15%)
β-Trace
(47%)
Transferrin (4%)
A1AT (2%)
ApoA (2%)
Oroso (1%)
Hpx (1%)
Gc (1%)
Hp (1%)
All others (4%)
Proteins enriched
within CSF
FIGURE 34.1  ■  Protein composition of CSF showing those ­proteins 
that are plasma derived and those whose synthesis occurs within 
the CNS.
TABLE 34.2  Age-related values for lumbar CSF 
total protein, albumin and IgG
Age
CSF total  
protein  
(mg/L)
CSF  
albumin  
(mg/L)
 
CSF IgG  
(mg/L)
Pre-term
27–32 weeks
1390 (770)
Reliable 
data not 
available
Reliable 
data not 
available
32–36
1200 (490)
36–40
930 (290)
Term
0–1 weeks
770 (160)
1–4
660 (160)
1–3 months
450 (130)
3–6
290 (40)
6–12
270 (70)
1–16 years
220 (50)
105 (29)
  
17–30
367 (63)
170 (46)
 17 (4)
31–40
363 (61)
179 (50)
 21 (7)
41–50
433 (79)
204 (57)
 24 (8)
51–60
479 (94)
242 (56)
 27 (9)
61–77
526 (132)
238 (73)
 
26 (9)
Values are means and (standard deviations).
664	
Clinical biochemistry
due to a spinal tumour; cerebrospinal fluid distal to 
the block stagnates, and this eventually allows com-
plete equilibration of the CSF with plasma leading 
to protein concentrations that are similar in both 
fluids.
A comprehensive review of the role of CSF protein 
analysis in the investigation of CNS disorders is included 
in the Further reading list.
Assessment of blood–brain barrier permeability 
and reduced fluid flow
Measurements of total protein, albumin and α2-
macroglobulin concentrations, and electrophoresis have 
all been advocated as investigations appropriate to the as-
sessment of barrier permeability. Total protein has been 
the most widely used and must be interpreted against 
age-related reference intervals. Some authors have advo-
cated a correction when blood is present due to a trau-
matic tap, recommending the subtraction of 10 mg/L 
for every 1000 × 10
6 erythrocytes/L. The cell count and 
protein determination must be performed on the same 
sample of CSF and there should not be any degree of cell 
lysis, which would otherwise render the correction void. 
The correction assumes a normal plasma total protein 
and haematocrit and, while it should be used with cau-
tion, provides an approximate measure of the degree to 
which the CSF protein concentration may be increased 
following addition of blood from whatever source.
Albumin is a better indicator of barrier dysfunction, 
for three reasons:
•	 it is not synthesized by the normal brain, unlike 
some of the proteins that contribute to CSF total 
protein
•	 it is a homogeneous protein, unlike total protein, 
which is a composite of variable proportions of mul-
tiple proteins
•	 its concentration has a lesser degree of age depend-
ency than that of total protein.
Despite CSF protein concentrations reflecting 
plasma concentrations, there is generally no discrimina-
tory advantage to be obtained by relating CSF values to 
those of plasma. The choice between total protein and 
albumin will depend both on which assay is available at 
an appropriate analytical standard and cost. Quality as-
surance programmes indicate similar overall analytical 
imprecision for total protein and albumin. Experience 
of using albumin as an alternative to total protein is, as 
yet, limited.
Intrathecal immunoglobulin synthesis
Intrathecal synthesis of immunoglobulins occurs where B 
lymphocytes are induced to migrate from the blood into 
the brain. Once these cells are sequestered in the brain, 
local cytokine production results in clonal expansion and 
differentiation into plasma cells, which then start secret-
ing immunoglobulins intrathecally. Intrathecal synthesis 
of immunoglobulins occurs in a wide variety of neuro-
logical diseases, but is most commonly associated with 
multiple sclerosis and other autoimmune conditions, 
and infections of the CNS. The immunoglobulin most 
widely studied is IgG, and this is associated mainly with 
subacute and chronic conditions.
Cerebrospinal fluid protein index. The general ap-
proach to detecting intrathecal synthesis relies upon the 
fact that it is possible to calculate the expected CSF con-
centration for any protein if the plasma concentration of 
that protein and the integrity of the blood–CSF barri-
ers are known. The integrity of the blood–CSF barrier 
is given by the CSF/plasma quotient for albumin. If the 
blood–CSF barriers are intact, the albumin quotient is 
typically <7 × 10
−3; as the barriers become progressively 
impaired, so the quotient rises, owing to passage of albu-
min from blood into CSF. Impairment of the barriers will 
also cause the protein in question to leak from plasma to 
CSF – but the CSF/plasma quotient for that protein re-
mains roughly in proportion to that of albumin, assuming 
there is no local synthesis. If local synthesis of protein oc-
curs, then the protein quotient will be increased relative 
to that of albumin. Thus the ratio of protein quotient to 
albumin quotient will be increased when local synthesis 
occurs.
The ratio of quotients is known as the protein index 
and is given by:
This method has been widely used in the past to evalu-
ate intrathecal IgG synthesis, but has now been super-
seded by examining CSF for IgG oligoclonal bands.
Oligoclonal bands
Locally synthesized IgG demonstrates qualitative differ-
ences from that which is normally present. Following 
serum electrophoresis, the normal gamma globulin 
region is revealed as a diffuse smear. As CSF gamma-
globulins are normally derived from the plasma, they 
show a similar pattern on electrophoresis. When local 
synthesis is present, however, electrophoresis of CSF 
shows multiple discrete bands that are superimposed on 
the diffuse IgG background. These bands are not seen 
in the serum. The bands are thought to represent the 
products of the limited number of clones of plasma cells 
that are present in the CNS. The pattern is referred to 
as oligoclonal IgG banding. Due to its higher resolu-
tion, isoelectric focusing (IEF) is the method of choice 
for detecting oligoclonal bands (Fig. 34.2). Oligoclonal 
bands of IgM and free κ and λ light chains may be de-
tected in a manner analogous to that of IgG.
Papers discussing the relative merits of these ap-
proaches (qualitative versus quantitative) are provided in 
the Further reading list. All the evidence indicates that 
detection of oligoclonal bands is significantly more sensi-
tive than measuring the IgG index in detecting intrathe-
cal synthesis. The reason is simple: owing to population 
variation and the compounded imprecision of the four 
immunoassays necessary to calculate the IgG index, the 
CSF IgG concentration needs to increase substantially 
before the index becomes abnormal. Oligoclonal bands, 
by contrast, can be detected when individual bands 
protein index
CSF protein
serum protein
serum albumin
CSF albumin
=
×
	
34  Investigation of cerebrospinal fluid	
665
constitute only 1–2% of the total IgG concentration in 
CSF. A serum sample must be analysed concurrently with 
the CSF so that oligoclonal immunoglobulins present 
in the CSF may be shown to be unique to the CSF, as 
opposed to those that have originated in the plasma and 
­diffused across the blood–CSF barriers (see Fig. 34.2).
Brain-specific proteins
Measurements of concentrations of proteins synthesized 
by cells within the CNS and released into the CSF dur-
ing inflammation or cell destruction are now firmly es-
tablished tools in the diagnosis of neurological disease. 
Often described as brain-specific proteins, they are more 
correctly referred to as brain-enriched proteins. They in-
clude proteins such as glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP), 
a product of astrocytes; S100, a product of glial cells; 14-
3-3, a neuronal cytoplasmic protein; tau and phosphory-
lated tau, products of the neuronal cytoskeleton; and the 
amyloid components Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42.
Glial fibrillary acid protein is a component of the as-
trocyte cytoskeleton. When astrocytes are damaged or 
undergo activation in response to a variety of cytokine 
messengers, GFAP may be released into the extracellu-
lar compartment from where it diffuses into the CSF. A 
raised CSF GFAP concentration generally indicates as-
trocyte damage and/or reactive astrocytosis.
All cells in the body differentially express the S100 
family of proteins, of which 14 are currently known. 
They are found in the cytoplasm and all undergo con-
formational changes in response to binding calcium. 
They also interact with key enzymes in a variety of 
metabolic pathways. In this way, calcium fluxes within 
the cell can modulate metabolic activity. In the brain, 
the S100ββ homodimer, produced by microglial cells, 
is the most important member. A high CSF concentra-
tion of S100ββ is associated with gliosis. In addition, the 
monomer S100β acts as a cytokine and is released by mi-
croglial cells in response to inflammatory mediators. It 
is of note that in high concentrations, S100β can induce 
apoptosis in cells. As the CSF concentration represents 
a global average of the production throughout the brain, 
there may be regional high concentrations causing cell 
death, which may not always be detected by examining 
lumbar CSF.
14-3-3 Proteins derive their name from a classification 
scheme based upon separation by a combination of chro-
matography and the coordinates of the original protein 
spot on two-dimensional gel electrophoresis. Once again 
there is a family of at least ten members, of which 14-
3-3γ is the most important isoform in the CNS. 14-3-3 
Proteins are cytosolic and they interact reversibly with a 
wide range of ligands. Their main physiological role is 
to connect the cytoplasmic region of cell-surface recep-
tors with their intracellular effector molecules (usually 
enzyme precursors). 14-3-3 Proteins are ubiquitous in 
cells, and can make up as much as 1% of the total in-
tracellular protein concentration. Thus 14-3-3 proteins 
are useful markers of cell disruption, and 14-3-3γ is par-
ticularly helpful in neurology as it is associated primarily 
with neurons. 14-3-3γ is a reliable marker of neuronal 
cell loss when such loss occurs rapidly and extensively, 
and high CSF values are found in paraneoplastic neu-
rological syndromes, viral encephalitis and neurodegen-
erative conditions (such as sporadic Creutzfeldt–Jakob 
disease, CJD). It is not useful in conditions in which 
neuronal cell loss occurs slowly but progressively (e.g. 
in Alzheimer disease), because the rate at which it is re-
leased is no faster than that by which it is cleared from 
the CSF.
Tau protein and phosphorylated tau are components 
of the neuronal cytoskeleton. The phosphorylation of tau 
is enzymatic and controls the extent to which the protein 
is incorporated into the cytoskeleton. Tau can be phos-
phorylated at multiple sites, and in certain conditions, hy-
perphosphorylated tau is found. It is not yet clear whether 
the hyperphosphorylation is the cause or a consequence 
of the underlying conditions. Increased concentrations 
of total tau and hyperphosphorylated tau are associated 
with the formation of the neurofibrillary tangles that are 
seen in several neurodegenerative conditions, especially 
Alzheimer disease.
Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 are two proteolytic fragments of 
protein Aβ (which stands for amyloid protein β). Aβ is a 
FIGURE 34.2  ■  Isoelectric focusing (IEF) of serum and CSF show-
ing the five basic patterns. (A) normal polyclonal pattern in both 
CSF and serum. (B) oligoclonal IgG in CSF, absent from serum, 
typical of local (intrathecal) IgG synthesis. (C) oligoclonal bands 
in both CSF and serum with an identical band distribution 
(spectrum). this is termed a ‘mirror’ pattern and is indicative of 
a systemic, but not intrathecal, limited clonal IgG synthesis. (D) 
here, there are oligoclonal bands in both CSF and serum, but 
there are additional bands in the CSF which are not present in 
the serum, indicative of both systemic and additional intrathe-
cal limited clonal IgG synthesis. (E) there are identical bands in 
both CSF and serum. The pattern shows a striking ladder ap-
pearance with an identical spacing between adjacent bands. 
This is highly characteristic of a monoclonal gammopathy.
Serum
A
CSF
B
Serum
CSF
C
Serum
CSF
D
Serum
CSF
E
Serum
CSF
666	
Clinical biochemistry
constitutive protein that is expressed by nearly all cells 
of the CNS. The normal metabolism of Aβ requires it 
to undergo highly specific proteolytic cleavage to form 
products that are highly soluble and readily removed. In 
some neurodegenerative conditions, however, the pro-
teolysis is aberrant, giving rise to larger fragments that 
are insoluble, and which accumulate in the form of an 
extracellular amyloid. Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 are two of the 
normal fragments containing 40 and 42 amino acids, re-
spectively. In some dementias, including Alzheimer dis-
ease, there is a decrease in the CSF concentration of both 
Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42, which reflects the fact that these 
components, rather than being in the soluble form (and 
hence measurable in the CSF), are present as insoluble 
fragments that are deposited within the CNS.
Cerebrospinal fluid oto- and rhinorrhoea
The leakage of CSF from the intracranial cavity can po-
tentially be serious and usually occurs following skull 
fractures, although it can be a complication of intra-
cranial surgery, infection or neoplasia, and can also oc-
cur spontaneously. Cerebrospinal fluid is characterized 
by the presence of a β2-transferrin band. This is often 
termed tautransferrin but, as there is a risk of confu-
sion with the other tau proteins (see above), the use of 
the name ­asialotransferrin is preferred. Asialotransferrin 
is a desialylated form of transferrin. In the blood, desi-
alylated transferrin is rapidly removed (half-life 20 min) 
by the asialoglycoprotein receptor that is present on 
the cells of the liver and reticuloendothelial system. 
The asialoglycoprotein receptor is not expressed in the 
CNS, so asialotransferrin accumulates in CSF. In normal 
CSF, asialotransferrin constitutes about 25% of the total 
transferrin. Asialotransferrin is not present to any great 
extent in plasma, nasal secretions, tears, saliva or other 
potentially confounding fluids. Asialotransferrin is ­easily 
­detected by immunofixation or immunoblotting follow-
ing electrophoresis (Fig. 34.3). Other proteins that have 
been used include transthyretin (prealbumin), ­β-trace 
(prostaglandin D-synthase) and γ-trace (cystatin-C) 
­proteins. These are not CSF specific, detectable amounts 
of all occurring in normal plasma, so interpretation of 
fluid concentrations is difficult. Measurements of both 
glucose and chloride concentrations have been shown 
to lack the discriminatory power of asialotransferrin and 
should be discontinued.
Haem pigments and ferritin
Oxyhaemoglobin and bilirubin appear in the CSF in 
a time-dependent manner following an intracranial 
bleed. Oxyhaemoglobin is released during in vivo cell 
lysis, appearing within a few hours. Following a split 
into haem and globin, haem is then metabolized to 
biliverdin by an inducible haem oxygenase followed by 
reduction to bilirubin by biliverdin reductase; both en-
zymes are present in cells of the CNS. While animal 
studies indicate that enzyme induction is maximal by 
12 h, this will not necessarily equate to the certainty 
that an increase in CSF bilirubin will be observable in 
all patients 12 h after a bleed, given the inevitable bio-
logical variation that occurs and possible interspecies 
differences. Evidence from one apparently definitive 
study, that CSF bilirubin concentrations were increased 
by 12 h in all of 111 patients after a proven intracranial 
bleed, has to be viewed with caution owing to the am-
biguous definition of xanthochromia used in this study. 
Oxyhaemoglobin is also released as a result of in vitro 
lysis of red cells. While initial studies indicated that the 
degree of lysis is proportional to both red cell count and 
time delay before separation of supernatant from cells 
by centrifugation, more recent studies have indicated 
that the in vitro formation of oxyhaemoglobin cannot 
be reliably predicted. The very low concentration of 
bilirubin normally present in CSF arises from the pas-
sage of albumin-bound bilirubin from plasma into CSF 
and, hence, will be increased if either or both of the 
plasma albumin-bound bilirubin and CSF albumin is 
increased. Under certain circumstances, allowance can 
be made for this when determining if an intracranial 
bleed has occurred.
Serum
CSF
NF
(neat)
NF
(diluted 1/10)
Serum
CSF
NF
(neat)
NF
(diluted 1/10)
A
B
FIGURE 34.3  ■ Transferrin glycoforms in the detection of CSF rhinorrhoea. (A) lane 1, control serum; lane 2, control CSF; lanes 3 and 4, a 
sample of nasal fluid (NF) which does not contain CSF. The asialotransferrin band is indicated by the arrow. (B) lane 1, control serum; lane 
2, control CSF; lanes 3 and 4, nasal fluid containing CSF. In each case, the nasal fluid samples were applied undiluted and diluted 1/10.
	
34  Investigation of cerebrospinal fluid	
667
Release of iron from haem also stimulates CNS syn-
thesis of ferritin, with subsequent passage of ferritin into 
the CSF.
Examination of CSF for haem and bilirubin
The currently recommended method for detecting 
haem and bilirubin in CSF is spectrophotometry, which 
should cover the range 350–600 nm. An accumulating 
body of evidence now indicates that visual inspection 
of CSF for xanthochromia is an unreliable method of 
confirming an intracranial bleed, because it is insensi-
tive, subjective, non-quantitative, does not distinguish 
between oxyhaemoglobin and bilirubin and provides no 
objective record of detection. Direct chemical methods 
of measuring bilirubin concentration in CSF need to be 
evaluated rigorously, as does the measurement of CSF 
ferritin concentration in the investigation of intracra-
nial bleeds.
Enzymes in CSF
Measuring enzyme activities in CSF used to be popular. 
For example, increased lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) ac-
tivity has been reported to be a more sensitive and ear-
lier marker than CSF glucose concentration in detecting 
bacterial meningitis. Unfortunately, however, there is 
significant overlap between cases diagnosed with bacte-
rial and aseptic/viral meningitis. In addition, false eleva-
tions of LDH activity occur in erythrocyte-contaminated 
CSF. Lactate dehydrogenase activity is also increased 
in the presence of various primary CNS tumours and 
when there is meningeal metastatic spread, when the 
increase involves predominantly the LDH4 and LDH5 
isoenzymes.
β-Glucuronidase, creatine kinase BB (CKBB), neuron-
specific enolase (NSE), glucose 6-phosphate isomerase 
(G6PI) and alanine aminotransferase (ALT) are other 
intracellular enzymes known to be released into CSF by 
various primary and metastatic tumours. Creatine kinase 
BB and NSE are also increased during cerebral ischaemia 
and various meningoencephalitides, thereby limiting 
their specificities. Ischaemic brain damage can either be 
reversible or permanent. Although patients suffering ma-
jor ischaemic events tend to have higher CSF activities of 
CKBB, LDH, NSE and ALT, the discrimination between 
recoverable and permanent damage usually requires serial 
sampling of CSF, and even then the predictive value is low.
Angiotensinogen-converting-enzyme (ACE) is a puta-
tive marker of neurological involvement in sarcoidosis. 
Care must be taken to correct for serum ACE activity, 
which may be increased in systemic sarcoidosis, and to 
correct for blood–CSF barrier leakage using either albu-
min or CSF total protein. The sensitivity of the test is low 
and the diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis, in the absence of 
positive CNS histology, remains a presumptive one based 
on the evidence of CNS inflammation, systemic sarcoid-
osis and exclusion of alternative diagnoses.
In recent times, measurement of enzyme activities in 
CSF has generally given way to quantitative immunoas-
says that measure the enzymes in terms of protein mass. 
The use of antibodies also means that isoform-specific 
immunoassays, which offer significant advantages in terms 
of determining the tissue of origin over the more crude 
measurement of overall enzyme activity, can be developed.
Markers of inflammation
Neopterin 
is 
the 
oxidized 
form 
of 
D-7,8-
dihydroneopterin, which is produced by macrophages 
when stimulated by γ-interferon released by activated 
T cells. Increased concentrations in body fluids are ob-
served following viral, bacterial and fungal infections, as 
well as other cell-mediated immunopathologies, such as 
coeliac disease. Cerebrospinal fluid neopterin concentra-
tions are normally very low, as pterins do not readily cross 
the blood–brain barrier. Increased neopterin concentra-
tions in the CSF thus reflect the presence of activated 
microglia, the CNS equivalents of macrophages.
There is interest in the measurement of CSF con-
centrations of neopterin (and dihydroneopterin, which 
may be the dominant form in CSF, but is more difficult 
to measure) as a non-specific marker of CNS cellular 
immune activity. Particular applications have included 
monitoring the response of multiple sclerosis patients 
to treatment, detecting possible CNS infections in im-
munocompromised subjects, such as those with acquired 
immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS), and establishing 
evidence of infections when the aetiological agents are 
difficult to isolate.
β2-Microglobulin (β2M) is an 11 800 Da protein that is 
non-covalently bound to the class 1 molecules of the ma-
jor histocompatibility complex (MHC). While expressed 
on the surface of virtually all nucleated cells, it is pres-
ent in highest concentrations on activated lymphocytes 
and macrophages. Cerebrospinal fluid concentrations 
of β2M increase with age and appear not to be corre-
lated with plasma concentrations in diseases affecting 
the CNS. Increased concentrations of CSF β2M occur in 
conditions associated with the presence of activated lym-
phocytes within the CNS or with increased proliferation 
and turnover. Measurement of CSF β2M concentration 
has been shown to be of value in the early detection of 
metastatic lymphomas and the spread of leukaemias to 
the CNS. While both neopterin and β2M are poten-
tially valuable markers of CNS inflammatory responses, 
their use as markers of specific pathologies is likely to be 
limited by the non-specific nature of the inflammatory 
response.
C-reactive protein (CRP) is a protein synthesized by 
hepatocytes. Synthesis is increased by several cytokines, 
but principally interleukin-6, which is released from 
macrophages that become activated during inflammatory 
events; this is most notable in bacterial infections, and 
occurs only to a much smaller degree in viral infections. 
The inflammatory cells themselves do not synthesize 
CRP. As with other plasma-derived proteins, the concen-
tration of CRP in the CSF roughly parallels that in the 
plasma, and is normally <50 μg/L. Increased serum con-
centrations are observed in patients with bacterial men-
ingitis. Measuring CSF CRP concentrations in bacterial 
meningitis is of limited value, however, as they are highly 
668	
Clinical biochemistry
variable and are often not as high as might be expected. 
This is most likely due to CRP binding by bacteria.
Non-biochemical investigations
The investigation of CNS disorders involves many disci-
plines (Box 34.1). While the naked eye examination of the 
CSF is a simple test to perform, it is vital to appreciate that 
it is subjective and unreliable, and that significant abnor-
malities may be present when the CSF appears to be clear 
and colourless. The diagnosis of bacterial meningitis is a 
medical emergency and prompt treatment may mean the 
difference between complete recovery and severe morbid-
ity or even death. Infections cause characteristic changes 
in the differential white cell count, and sometimes in a 
Gram stain of a spun deposit (Table 34.3). It is worth not-
ing, however, that white blood cells do not appear in the 
CSF of patients with bacterial meningitis until ~12 h after 
the bacteria. These investigations, together with simple 
biochemical tests (glucose, protein and, if possible, serum 
CRP and CSF lactate concentrations) should be available 
as ‘stat’ tests offering results within 1 h of sampling. Most 
bacterial infections can be confirmed by standard culture 
techniques within 24 h. Antigen tests for a number of 
infective agents are also in use. A particular problem is 
the positive and rapid identification of viral and fungal 
infections. With most microbiological infections, poly-
merase chain reaction (PCR) is the analytical technique 
of choice in the acute stage of infection. In the subacute 
and chronic stages, however, PCR tests may be negative. 
In these instances, recourse to detection of specific an-
tibody responses is necessary. Newer techniques include 
the detection of antigen-specific oligoclonal bands.
Modern imaging techniques, for example spiral com-
puterized tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imag-
ing (MRI) and positron emission tomography (PET), 
are important in the diagnosis of many CNS lesions, in 
conjunction with laboratory investigations of CSF. In 
some instances, for example intracranial tumours, im-
aging has largely replaced the need for CSF cytology. 
Nevertheless, CSF cytology still plays an important role 
in investigating raised white cell counts in inflamma-
tory conditions and also in detecting and monitoring 
BOX 34.1	
Non-biochemical investigations of 
CNS disorders
•	 Gross appearance of CSF
•	 Microscopic examination of CSF cell count and 
differential
•	 Identification of organisms
•	 Gram stain on spun deposit
•	 Culture
•	 Detection of antigens
•	 Demonstration of antibodies
•	 Amplification of genetic material
•	 Imaging
•	 Computerized tomography
•	 Magnetic resonance imaging
•	 Positron emission tomography
•	 Electrophysiological measurements
•	 Visual evoked potentials
•	 Auditory evoked potentials
•	 Nerve conduction studies
TABLE 34.3  Characteristic CSF changes in meningitis and the differential diagnosis
Condition
Appearance
Cells ×10
6/L  
(per mm
3)
Gram stain or  
antigen tests or  
culture for pyogenic 
bacteria
Protein  
(g/L)
Glucose  
(mmol/L)
Differential  
diagnosis
Normal
Clear
0–5 lymphocytes
a
Negative results
0.15–0.4
c
2.2–3.3
d
–
‘Purulent’ 
meningitis
Turbid
100–2000 
polymorphs
b
Positive results
0.5–3.0
0–2.2
Bacterial 
meningitis
e
Amoebic 
meningitis
Cerebral abscess
‘Aseptic’ 
meningitis
Clear or slightly 
turbid
15–500 
lymphocytes 
(polymorphs 
may 
predominate in 
the acute stage)
Negative results
0.5–1.0
Normal
Viral meningitis
e
Partially antibiotic-
treated bacterial 
meningitis
f
Leptospiral 
meningitis
Encephalitis
Brain abscess
TB/fungal 
meningitis
Tuberculous 
meningitis
Clear or slightly 
turbid; fibrin 
web may 
develop
30–500 
lymphocytes 
plus 
polymorphs
Negative results 
(scanty acid-fast 
bacilli may be 
seen in a Ziehl–
Neelsen-stained 
smear)
1.0–6.0
0–2.2
TB meningitis
e
Brain abscess
Cryptococcal 
meningitis
aIn a neonate, up to 30 × 10
6 cells/L, mainly polymorphs. 
bA few cases of pyogenic meningitis may have 5–100 × 10
6/L polymorphs. 
cIn ­neonates, 
protein concentration up to 1.5 g/L. 
dApproximately 60% of blood glucose concentration. 
eMost frequent cause. 
fGlucose concentration may 
be reduced.
From Shanson DC. Microbiology in Clinical Practice, 3rd edn. Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann, 1999, with permission.
	
34  Investigation of cerebrospinal fluid	
669
CNS invasion by leukaemias. Background information 
on neuroradiological methods and clinical neurophysi-
ological techniques may be obtained from the Further 
reading list.
BIOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATIONS IN CNS 
DISORDERS
Acute infections
Infections of the CNS that can present acutely include 
viral meningitis, bacterial meningitis, cerebral abscess, 
subdural empyema and viral encephalitis. Acute bacte-
rial meningitis is a life-threatening infection that needs 
urgent treatment, whereas viral meningitis is generally 
a less severe disease that is usually followed by complete 
recovery.
The cellular and microbiological examination of CSF 
plays a central role in the investigation of suspected in-
fection, and a full description can be found in the Further 
reading list. Nevertheless, there are occasions when this 
does not provide a definitive answer; biochemical tests 
are useful as adjuncts in the diagnosis of infection and 
need to be available on an urgent basis. Two tests widely 
employed have been measurement of CSF protein and 
glucose concentrations, and these have for many years 
been considered to be essential in the investigation of 
cases of suspected meningitis. Protein concentration is 
usually raised, more so in bacterial than in viral men-
ingitis, but there is considerable overlap; rarely, it may 
be normal. The presence of protein is simply a marker 
of barrier impairment. Glucose concentrations are usu-
ally depressed in bacterial meningitis but often remain 
normal in viral meningitis. However, CSF glucose con-
centration may be reduced in some non-bacterial causes 
of meningitis. Concentrations <1.0 mmol/L are usually 
found only in severe bacterial meningitis. A CSF:plasma 
glucose concentration ratio of <0.4 is typical of bacterial 
meningitis, although a normal value does not exclude the 
diagnosis.
Cerebrospinal fluid lactate concentrations are raised in 
bacterial meningitis, but are usually normal (<2.5 mmol/L) 
in viral meningitis. Concentrations >3.5 mmol/L have 
been considered indicative of bacterial meningitis, with 
values <3 mmol/L being more consistent with a viral ae-
tiology. Rapid measurement of CSF lactate has proved 
of particular value in cases of diagnostic difficulty, for 
example partially treated bacterial meningitis (when 
Gram stain and culture are negative and cell counts may 
be atypical), and early in some viral meningitides when 
there may be a predominance of polymorphs and variably 
depressed glucose concentrations. With a threshold of 
3.5 mmol/L, the sensitivity and specificity of CSF lactate 
are greater than those of either CSF glucose or protein 
concentration, in terms of discriminating between bacte-
rial and viral meningitis.
Measurement of serum CRP concentration may be of 
value in patients presenting with equivocal CSF findings, 
with concentrations >100 mg/L being consistent with 
a bacterial infection. Serum procalcitonin may provide 
even better discrimination between bacterial and viral 
infections. Measurement of serum CRP concentration 
also enables a rational decision to be made on the dura-
tion of antibiotic therapy in patients with brain abscesses 
or subdural empyemata.
The most reliable indicator of acute infection remains 
the CSF cell count and differential, with measurement 
of CSF lactate concentration being used for diagnosti-
cally difficult cases. Measurement of cerebrospinal fluid 
protein appears to add nothing to the diagnosis. Chloride 
estimation, once widely advocated for the diagnosis of tu-
berculous meningitis, has been shown to be of no value.
Chronic infections
Chronic infection of the CNS may be caused by viruses, 
bacteria, spirochaetes, parasites and fungi. In patients 
who are immunocompromised, most commonly due to 
cytotoxic drug therapy for cancer, fungal infections and 
reactivation of latent viral infections are particularly 
troublesome. In all of these situations, the interpretation 
of standard PCR techniques can be difficult, as the mere 
presence of viral or bacterial nucleic acid alone does not 
always represent a causal relationship. Quantitative PCR, 
which measures the amount of nucleic acid and so gives 
an indication of the numbers of organisms present, is su-
perior but still not definitive.
Serological tests for the presence of antibodies are 
based on the premise that the continued presence of 
the causative organisms will maintain production of 
specific antibodies. These tests can suffer from memory 
effects – the immune system generally maintains a vast 
memory bank of B cells that manufacture antibodies to 
individual target antigens. The immune system is fre-
quently upregulated in many inflammatory conditions 
and this can lead to increased production of antibod-
ies by some or many of these memory cells. If the up-
regulation occurs in response to a particular infectious 
agent, then the antibody production will be more spe-
cific towards that organism. Antibody production can 
be measured by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) or similar technology. However, this approach 
can make it difficult to distinguish antibodies that vary 
in affinity from those that vary in quantity, for example 
a small amount of high-affinity antibody can give the 
same signal in an ELISA as a larger amount of low-
affinity antibody. An alternative approach is to use im-
munoblotting after isoelectric focusing. This relies on 
coating a nitrocellulose or similar membrane with the 
target microorganism. This is then used to immuno­
blot the CSF and serum following isoelectric focusing. 
The membrane is subsequently tested for bound im-
munoglobulin. In this way, oligoclonal bands against 
the organism in question can be identified. The pattern 
can then be compared with that found in standard iso-
electric focusing (which reveals total IgG oligoclonal 
bands). If the spectrum of bands seen on the antigen-
specific blot resembles that on the total IgG blot, then 
the causative organism is identified. If, however, the 
­antigen-specific pattern bears no resemblance to the to-
tal IgG pattern, then it is unlikely that the organism un-
der study is causally related to the disease. Although the 
antigen-immunoblotting technique can be extremely 
670	
Clinical biochemistry
powerful, it is still under development and should be 
used as an adjunct to classic serological assays.
Haemorrhage and obstruction
Intracranial haemorrhage can occur due to spontaneous 
rupture of cerebral blood vessels, as a result of injury, 
­malignancy-associated necrosis or as a consequence of 
bacterial meningitis leading to a diffuse vascular haem-
orrhage. All may result in the passage of blood into the 
CSF, with consequent formation of oxyhaemoglobin and 
bilirubin. By far the most important cause of an intracra-
nial bleed is spontaneous rupture of a cerebral aneurysm 
into the subarachnoid space, termed a subarachnoid 
haemorrhage (SAH). In the majority of patients, diagno-
sis presents no problem. However, a number of studies 
have shown an initial misdiagnosis rate of up to 30%, 
often in patients presenting in a good clinical condition 
with no focal neurological signs, leading to a significantly 
poorer outcome than in those in whom the correct initial 
diagnosis has been made.
Following SAH, blood is usually visible on a computer-
ized tomography (CT) scan, and this is the test of choice in 
the initial examination. This will be positive in over 95% 
of patients within the first 24 h, but in only 50% one week 
after the bleed. It is in those patients in whom the CT scan 
is negative or not available that CSF should be examined 
for oxyhaemoglobin and bilirubin, preferably waiting for 
12 h after the onset of symptoms prior to puncture to allow 
for the formation of bilirubin. Wherever possible, CSF 
should be examined by spectrophotometry with analysis 
and interpretation provided ­according to the guidelines 
cited in the Further reading list.
Hydrocephalus is a common complication of trauma 
and obstruction and is best investigated by CT scan-
ning. Shunts inserted to drain CSF into the systemic 
circulation or peritoneal cavity may become obstructed 
with a subsequent increase in CSF protein concentra-
tion, which may provide an indication that obstruction 
has occurred.
Inherited metabolic diseases
Biochemical examination of CSF is of value in the diag-
nosis of certain inherited metabolic diseases.
Patients with primary defects of pyruvate metabolism, 
for example pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency or mi-
tochondrial disorders, present with a variety of clinical 
features. Some, when symptomatic, have a systemic met-
abolic acidosis with elevated blood lactate concentrations; 
some may have a near-normal hydrogen ion concentra-
tion, mild elevations only of blood lactate concentration 
but elevated CSF lactate concentration. Measurement of 
CSF lactate may thus be helpful when such defects are 
suspected, although normal concentrations do not ex-
clude them. Cerebrospinal fluid lactate determination 
may also be helpful in certain organic acidaemias.
Cerebrospinal fluid amino acid measurement is of es-
tablished value in confirming the diagnosis of glycine en-
cephalopathy (non-ketotic hyperglycinaemia) in neonates 
and infants. In this disorder, the CSF glycine concentra-
tion is high whereas the blood glycine concentration may 
be only mildly elevated or within the reference range for 
age. The most sensitive discriminator is the CSF:plasma 
glycine molar ratio, which is increased from the normal 
0.025–0.1.
In patients with defects in biopterin metabolism, 
measurement of CSF biopterin concentrations and the 
concentrations of the biogenic amine metabolites, ho-
movanillic and 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acids, may be of 
value in confirming the diagnosis.
Malignancy
In space-occupying lesions of the brain that may be germ 
cell tumours, the initial approach is to measure serum hu-
man chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) and α-fetoprotein 
(AFP) concentrations. Pointers to a possible germ cell 
tumour are a space-occupying lesion in the pineal or su-
prasellar regions in a male under 15 years of age. The na-
ture of the tumour is usually defined from tissue obtained 
during surgery. Where operation is contraindicated and 
serum hCG and AFP concentrations provide no informa-
tion as to tumour type, there may be a need to measure 
hCG and AFP concentrations in the CSF.
Rarely, there may be the requirement to examine CSF 
for monoclonal IgG, IgM, κ or λ when a CNS lymphoma 
is suspected.
Dementia
Dementia is defined as a global impairment or loss of in-
tellectual function. There are over 50 identified causes 
of dementia, including various neurodegenerative dis-
eases, such as Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease; 
cerebrovascular diseases; infectious diseases; demyelin-
ating disorders; metabolic disorders, such as Wilson dis-
ease and the leukodystrophies; malignancies; epilepsies; 
traumatic brain disease; systemic disorders, such as en-
docrine disease and vitamin deficiencies, and toxic dis-
orders, including alcohol dependency and drug toxicity. 
Mental illnesses, such as depression and schizophrenia, 
may also present with features of dementia. With the 
increasing life expectancy in developed nations, neu-
rodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer disease, are 
becoming major social burdens. As several types of de-
mentia are treatable, it is important that a diagnosis can 
be made reliably. Many of these diagnoses are relatively 
straightforward and require laboratory blood tests that 
are covered elsewhere in this book. Few involve CSF 
analysis.
Unfortunately, there are no specific CSF tests for any 
of the dementias. The differential diagnosis is gener-
ally made using a combination of clinical features, CSF 
findings and the exclusion of other diagnoses. Recent 
developments in neurogenetics are particularly helpful 
where there is a familial predisposition, but may not be 
useful in the majority of cases, which are sporadic in 
nature.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis in dementia is generally 
intended to exclude an infective or demyelinating disor-
der, as described elsewhere. In specific cases, CSF analysis 
is intended to detect evidence of neurodegeneration  – 
the death of neurons. Examples include the neuronal 
	
34  Investigation of cerebrospinal fluid	
671
cytoplasmic proteins 14-3-3, neuron-specific enolase 
(NSE) and neurofilament proteins. Unfortunately, while 
the intracellular amounts of these proteins are quite high, 
for example 14-3-3 protein constitutes ~1% of the total 
cytoplasmic protein of neurons, CSF concentration is 
generally only raised when there is extensive neuronal 
loss occurring over a short time period. They can be use-
ful markers in conditions such as sporadic Creutzfeldt–
Jakob disease (CJD), paraneoplastic neurological disease 
and chronic viral infections such as subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis (SSPE), but generally they are of little use 
in detecting slowly progressive neurodegeneration condi-
tions, such as Alzheimer disease or Parkinson disease. In 
(new) variant CJD, 14-3-3 is a less sensitive marker than 
in sporadic CJD. The best markers currently available for 
Alzheimer disease are a combination of Aβ1-40 and total 
tau (see above, Brain-specific proteins). Some dementias 
are associated with gliosis or astrocytosis, for example 
Pick disease, and this may lead to an increase in CSF con-
centrations of S100ββ protein and/or glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (GFAP).
Cerebrovascular disease is second only to Alzheimer 
disease as a cause of dementia. The usual pathology is 
subcortical infarcts secondary to embolism or disease of 
small blood vessels (microangiopathy). Unfortunately, 
there are no reliable CSF diagnostic tests, although a 
comprehensive examination of blood haemostatic factors 
including platelet count, specific clotting factors and an-
tiphospholipid antibodies may be helpful. A strong clini-
cal clue is that cerebrovascular dementia, in contrast to 
other types, tends to be of acute onset and usually pro-
gresses in a stepwise manner.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis in demyelinating 
diseases
There are many diseases that affect the myelin sheaths 
of neurons. One of the most significant is multiple 
sclerosis (MS), which affects ~125 per 100 000 young 
adults in the UK, with an annual incidence of ~5 per 
100 000. The condition affects twice as many women as 
men, and usually first presents between the ages of 20 
and 40. Autoimmunity is involved in the pathogenesis, 
but whether as a primary or secondary event is uncer-
tain. Multiple sclerosis is a progressive disorder, typically 
presenting with a relapsing remitting clinical picture 
(relapsing remitting MS, RRMS). Some patients have a 
relentless progressive form of the disease, so-called pri-
mary progressive MS (PPMS), while the overwhelming 
majority of patients who start with RRMS eventually de-
velop a progressive form of the condition, and these are 
classed as having secondary progressive MS (SPMS). This 
clinical stratification is important as a guide to choosing 
an appropriate therapeutic strategy.
The acute lesion of MS is the plaque, which is char-
acteristically a demarcated area of demyelination associ-
ated with swelling of axonal cylinders and infiltration by 
inflammatory cells. This is followed by gliosis and dis-
appearance of the inflammatory infiltrate leading to the 
formation of a chronic plaque, largely devoid of myelin. 
Some remyelination can occur during remissions, but this 
is generally incomplete. The cause of MS is unknown, 
but epidemiological evidence suggests an environmental 
influence, possibly coupled to a genetic predisposition. 
There is a higher concordance of MS in monozygotic 
twins compared with dizygotic twins.
Clinical diagnosis of MS can be extremely difficult, 
particularly in the early stages of the disease when only 
an isolated focal region of the brain may be affected (this 
is sometimes termed clinically isolated syndrome). As 
more of the CNS becomes affected and the symptoms 
reflect this, then clinical diagnosis becomes easier. The 
diagnosis depends upon demonstrated clinical evidence 
for demyelination affecting different areas of the brain 
at different times. This spatial and temporal separation 
of lesions is the hallmark of RRMS, and clearly distin-
guishes MS from similar disorders of myelin, such as 
acute disseminated encephalomyelitis, in which the clin-
ical presentation of symptoms is typically monophasic. 
Multiple sclerosis can also be distinguished on MRI by 
the characteristic individual lesions that are scattered 
throughout the CNS. Unfortunately, the brain accumu-
lates small areas of damage as part of normal ageing, and 
it can be difficult to differentiate the lesions of MS from 
those of age.
While current guidelines, published in 2001 and re-
viewed in 2005, admit a more prominent role for MRI 
in the diagnosis of MS than previously, biochemically, 
the hallmark of MS remains the presence of oligoclo-
nal IgG bands in the CSF that are absent from paired 
serum. These locally synthesized oligoclonal bands are 
found in at least 98% of patients with MS and are so 
indicative of MS that they are incorporated into the 
pathological definitions of the disease: a clinical diagno-
sis of MS, based in part on MRI findings has to be called 
into doubt if there are no oligoclonal bands in the CSF. 
Oligoclonal bands are not, however, specific for MS and 
can be found in many other inflammatory and autoim-
mune conditions affecting the brain. The presence of 
oligoclonal bands and a CSF protein of >1 g/L points to 
a diagnosis other than MS. The current gold standard 
method for detecting oligoclonal IgG is isoelectric fo-
cusing coupled to nitrocellulose immunoblotting. This 
approach is significantly more sensitive at detecting 
abnormalities of CSF IgG than any of the quantitative 
measurements (see p. 664).
Additional supportive evidence for MS may be pro-
vided by evoked potentials. These are electrical signals 
generated in response to sensory stimuli. Lesions af-
fecting the optic nerve, the most common isolated site, 
may be detected by visual evoked potentials, which 
demonstrate attenuation of amplitude and prolonged 
latency.
CONCLUSION
Measurement of CSF lactate and glucose concentrations 
plays a limited but important role in the differential di-
agnosis of suspected acute CNS infection, particularly 
when the immediate microbiological examination of the 
CSF sediment does not provide a diagnosis.
Determination of CSF protein concentration is of 
limited value in the detection and differential diagnosis 
672	
Clinical biochemistry
of acute infection. Indeed, it may be misleading, as some 
have used a normal result as an indication not to proceed 
with a search for organisms. Protein analysis is of value 
in suspected Guillain–Barré syndrome and MS, when a 
value >1 g/L in the presence of oligoclonal bands points 
to an alternative diagnosis.
In most other disorders of the CNS, routine estima-
tion of protein (and glucose) concentrations, although 
relatively cheap and apparently simple, does not appear 
justifiable unless it would truly influence patient manage-
ment. This rarely appears to be the case where modern 
imaging techniques are available. The remainder of the 
tests described have a role appropriate to particular diag-
nostic problems.
The detection of locally synthesized oligoclonal 
IgG bands remains crucial in the investigation of sus-
pected demyelinating disease, such as multiple sclerosis. 
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) with an appropriate de-
tection system is now the technique of choice in diagnos-
ing acute viral infections, but antibody assays still have 
a role in chronic infections. At the same time, with in-
creasing emphasis on ameliorating the harmful effects of 
inflammation, there may emerge a role for the measure-
ment of concentrations of cytokines and other compo-
nents of the inflammatory response. Continuing research 
into the various dementias has highlighted several useful 
biochemical markers that provide diagnostic information.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to acknowledge the contribution of Robert 
Beetham, who was a co-author of this chapter in previous 
editions of this book.
Further reading
Abbott NJ. Evidence for bulk flow of brain interstitial fluid: significance 
for physiology and pathology. Neurochem Int 2004;45:545–52. 
A brief overview on the important area of brain interstitial fluid.
Bauer J, Rauschka H, Lassmann H. Inflammation in the nervous system: 
the human perspective. Glia 2001;36:235–43. 
A review of current understanding of the interplay of inflammatory 
mechanisms involved in neurological disease.
Beetham R. The examination of cerebrospinal fluid in CT negative 
suspected subarachnoid haemorrhage. CPD Bulletin Clinical 
Biochemistry 2006;7:25–31. 
A critical account of the investigation of CSF in CT negative suspected 
subarachnoid haemorrhage.
Cunha BA. The diagnostic usefulness of cerebrospinal fluid lactic 
acid levels in central nervous system infections. Clin Infect Dis 
2004;39:1260–1. 
A text that emphasizes the usefulness of CSF lactate.
Graham RNJ, Perriss RW, Scarsbrook AF. Subspecialty Web review – 
neuroradiology. Clin Radiol 2005;60:838–9. 
A short review and synopsis of internet-based radiological educational 
resources that cater for medical students and trainee or non-specialist 
radiologists, focusing on neuroradiology.
Huy NT, Thao NT, Diep DT et  al. Cerebrospinal fluid lactate 
concentration to distinguish bacterial from aseptic meningitis: a 
systematic review and meta-analysis. Crit Care 2010;14:R240. 
A review summarizing the value of CSF lactate in CNS infections.
Jerrard DA, Hanna JR, Schindelheim GL. Cerebrospinal fluid. J Emerg 
Med 2001;21:171–8. 
A concise review of general laboratory analysis of CSF.
Keir G, Luxton RW, Thompson EJ. Isoelectric focusing of cerebrospinal 
fluid immunoglobulin G: an annotated update. Ann Clin Biochem 
1990;27:436–43. 
One of the best critiques available of the preferred method for performing 
this essential investigation in suspected multiple sclerosis and other diseases 
involving a humoral response within the CNS.
McDonald WI, Compston A, Edan G et al. Recommended diagnostic 
criteria for multiple sclerosis: guidelines from the International Panel 
on the diagnosis of multiple sclerosis. Ann Neurol 2001;50:121–7. 
The guidelines to follow for the clinical investigation of suspected MS. 
They have recently been revised by Polman et al. (see below)
Oberascher G. A modern concept of cerebrospinal fluid diagnosis in 
oto- and rhinorrhoea. Rhinology 1988;26:89–103. 
This is a small but important area. The paper provides both background 
and an up-to-date approach to the analysis of watery discharges that might 
be from CSF leakage.
Polman CH, Reingold SC, Banwell B et  al. Diagnostic criteria for 
multiple sclerosis: 2010 Revisions to the McDonald Criteria. Ann 
Neurol 2011;69:292–302. 
This clarifies the role of spinal cord lesions, and how lesions spread with time.
Simon L, Gauvin F, Amre DK et al. Serum procalcitonin and C-reactive 
protein levels as markers of bacterial infection: a systematic review 
and metaanalysis. Clin Infect Dis 2004;39:206–17. 
This article reviews the present evidence for use of procalcitonin in 
distinguishing between viral and bacterial infections.
Thompson EJ, Keir G. Laboratory investigation of cerebrospinal fluid 
proteins. Ann Clin Biochem 1990;27:425–35. 
An overview of the clinically important CSF proteins including 
brief physiology, pathophysiology and the application of measurement to 
disease.
UK 
National 
External 
Quality 
Assessment 
Scheme 
for 
Immunochemistry Working Group. Revised national guidelines for 
analysis of cerebrospinal fluid for bilirubin in suspected subarachnoid 
haemorrhage. Ann Clin Biochem 2008;45:238–44. 
Current details of how to perform and interpret spectrophotometric scans 
of CSF.
Wright BL, Lai JT, Sinclair AJ. Cerebrospinal fluid and lumbar 
puncture: a practical review. J Neurol 2012;259:1530–45. 
A pragmatic review on performing lumbar puncture, particularly useful 
for non-neurologists.
673
C H A P T E R  3 5
Biochemical aspects 
of psychiatric disorders
William J. Marshall  • Teifion Davies
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION: PSYCHIATRY AS A CLINICAL 
DISCIPLINE  673
Investigations in psychiatry 674
THE CLASSIFICATION OF PSYCHIATRIC 
DISORDERS  674
THE AETIOLOGY OF PSYCHIATRIC 
DISORDERS  675
BIOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATIONS IN PSYCHIATRIC 
­DISORDERS  675
PSYCHIATRIC MANIFESTATIONS OF ORGANIC 
DISEASE  676
Acute confusional state (delirium)  676
Anxiety  676
Dementia  677
Depression  678
Post-traumatic stress disorder  679
Schizophrenia  679
ENDOCRINE AND METABOLIC MANIFESTATIONS 
OF ­PSYCHIATRIC DISEASE  680
Abnormalities of the hypothalamo–pituitary–
adrenal axis  680
Abnormalities of the hypothalamo–pituitary–
thyroid axis  680
Abnormalities of the hypothalamo–pituitary–
gonadal axis  680
Abnormalities of growth hormone 
secretion  681
Abnormalities of prolactin secretion  681
Other metabolic abnormalities  681
METABOLIC COMPLICATIONS OF PSYCHOTROPIC 
DRUGS  681
Lithium  681
Drugs causing hyperprolactinaemia  681
Drugs causing hyponatraemia  681
Drugs causing hyperglycaemia and 
­hyperlipidaemia  682
Drugs interfering with hepatic function  682
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS  682
CONCLUSION  682
INTRODUCTION: PSYCHIATRY AS A  
CLINICAL DISCIPLINE
Psychiatry is the branch of medicine that deals with the 
disturbance, distress and disability arising from those 
disorders of the nervous system that affect mental func-
tioning. ‘Mental’ functions are those that we regard as 
distinguishing human beings as persons, and are usually 
divided into the major domains of cognition (thinking, 
remembering, planning); perception (awareness of self 
and environment); mood (feelings, emotions, ‘affect’) 
and behaviour (objective manifestations of subjective 
states). Although it is clear that each of these mental 
functions must be realized in the human brain (and that 
they may be affected by overt damage to the brain, as 
in head injury), they have been regarded traditionally 
as emergent phenomena that are only tenuously depen-
dent upon the biological structures and processes of the 
brain itself.
This ‘epiphenomenal’ view of mental functions has 
been reinforced by two separate sets of findings. First, 
the psychological and neurobiological study of normal 
mental functions is only beginning to link them to ana-
tomically discrete structures or pathways. Instead, they 
have been found to rely on distributed systems of activity 
in many brain areas that appear to interact in a seemingly 
limitless pattern of complexity. Second, the delineation of 
abnormal states has been constrained by a failure to iden-
tify specific causes, biological markers or even reliable 
pathognomonic features, with the result that psychiatry 
has been slow to follow most other medical disciplines 
away from the description of clinical syndromes (clusters 
of clinical symptoms and signs) towards a classification of 
disorders based on aetiology.
Psychiatric diagnosis remains, therefore, near one 
extreme of a continuum from ‘organic’ (having of-
ten localized pathology, discrete (possibly pathog-
nomonic) signs and objective laboratory findings) to 
674	
Clinical biochemistry
‘non-organic’ (unclear structural pathology, overlap-
ping signs and no confirmatory tests). Psychiatrists’ 
skills are largely clinical, and consist in eliciting a wide 
array of information directly from the patient by means 
of standardized interviewing and observation of behav-
iours and responses, supplemented by collateral infor-
mation from informants such as carers, family members 
and others. Psychiatric decision-making begins with 
a comparison of this clinical information with what is 
known of the normal repertoire of mental states (taking 
into account age, sex and developmental and cultural 
factors), and proceeds with a systematization of the 
abnormal features to produce a set of recognized, but 
potentially overlapping, clusters. These form hypoth-
eses to be tested by further enquiry, again usually direct 
questioning, so that the relative likelihood that the pa-
tient’s presentation is due to one syndrome rather than 
another is evaluated. The end result of this iterative 
process is rarely a single clear-cut diagnosis but rather 
a shortlist of differential diagnoses stratified according 
to the balance of probabilities on the evidence avail-
able. Immediate management will proceed on the basis 
of the most likely (or most serious in the short term) 
diagnosis, and will be reassessed iteratively as above and 
modified as new information, such as response to initial 
treatment, emerges.
Investigations in psychiatry
The emphasis on clinical information, that is, informa-
tion gained directly from the patient in the clinic or at 
the bedside, should not be taken to mean that there is 
no role for laboratory investigations in psychiatry. Also, 
a general physical examination should form part of every 
psychiatric assessment and this or particular features of 
the patient’s history may lead to consideration of appro-
priate objective tests. What is true of psychiatry, as of all 
branches of medicine, is that no investigation should be 
regarded as ‘routine’: all investigations carry a finite risk 
of morbidity, and it is important to remember that this 
can be psychological as well as physical. Therefore, all 
investigations must be justified and the reasons for their 
selection or omission should be recorded (see below). It 
is also of great importance that the rationale for investi-
gation, the intended procedures and potential unwanted 
effects be discussed with the patient and that his or her 
consent be sought before proceeding.
The reasons for selecting specific tests will be similar 
to other branches of medicine: screening (e.g. asymp-
tomatic patients from high-risk population groups); 
baseline (to exclude or establish the extent of physical 
disorder, or as a preparation for certain treatments); 
monitoring (to monitor progression of primary physical 
disease or of disease secondary to the mental disorder 
or to monitor therapeutic drugs), and therapeutic (as 
part of the treatment plan, or to monitor compliance 
with treatment). A rational plan of investigation should 
be based on one or more specific purposes, as listed 
above, and be stratified into: primary (simpler, quicker, 
cheaper, more likely to gain information); secondary 
(more complex, expensive or specific) and tertiary (most 
complex, expensive or reliant on specialist operation). 
This stratified approach clarifies the medicolegal status 
of investigations, at least in psychiatric practice: primary 
level tests should be considered for every patient, and if 
not performed, the reasons for omission should be re-
corded; secondary and tertiary level tests should be per-
formed only if indicated by the presentation, by other 
findings or on specialist advice, and the reasons for their 
performance recorded.
THE CLASSIFICATION OF PSYCHIATRIC 
DISORDERS
Psychiatric illnesses are usually referred to as ‘disorders’ 
rather than ‘diseases’, in part because of the overlap in 
clinical features between individual conditions and, in-
deed, with what may be regarded as an extreme of normal 
behaviour.
There are two principal systems for classifying psy-
chiatric disorders. One is provided by the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual (DSM) of the American Psychiatric 
Association. The current edition (DSM-5), published in 
2013, includes 18 groups of disorders, including personal-
ity disorders, together with a group of conditions that are 
deemed to require further research before they can be ac-
cepted for clinical use.
The 
World 
Health 
Organization’s 
(WHO) 
International Classification of Diseases (10th edition) 
(ICD-10) is more widely used outside the USA. The 
ICD-10 classification of mental and behavioural disor-
ders is shown in Table 35.1. The number of psychiatric 
disorders that are recognized is continuing to increase 
as new conditions are described and others are subdi-
vided and reclassified. The number of psychiatric diag-
noses listed in DSM-II in 1968 was 182, and this had 
slightly more than doubled to 365 in DSM-IV (1994). 
Although the number appears not to have been signifi-
cantly increased in DSM-5, several conditions have been 
sub-divided and others unified and there is an effective 
overall increase.
Psychiatric disorders have traditionally been divided 
into neuroses (in which the symptoms, principally anxi-
ety, vary only in severity from those of normal behav-
iour) and psychoses, with features such as delusions (an 
abnormal belief, e.g. of persecution) or hallucinations 
(perceptions lacking an objective stimulus) and typically 
with little insight. However, this is not to suggest that 
neuroses are less harmful in their effect. There are also 
conditions that have features that overlap these defini-
tions (e.g. anorexia nervosa). The classification of some 
mental disorders as neuroses therefore has little practi-
cal value.
Psychiatric disorders are common: the overall preva-
lence in the general population is estimated to exceed 
20%, comprising mainly depression, anxiety and ad-
justment disorders (e.g. grief reactions) and contribute 
to about 30% of consultations with family doctors; in 
hospitals, organic disorders (e.g. delirium, particularly 
in the elderly) are more common. The major psychoses 
(by any definition) (e.g. schizophrenia) are less common 
(<5% in total), but form a major part of the work of many 
psychiatrists.
	
35  Biochemical aspects of psychiatric disorders	
675
There are several subspecialties within psychiatry. 
These include child psychiatry, old age psychiatry, sub-
stance misuse and forensic psychiatry.
This chapter primarily concerns the clinical biochemi-
cal aspects of psychiatric disorders and those general 
medical disorders that have psychiatric manifestations.
THE AETIOLOGY OF PSYCHIATRIC 
DISORDERS
The causation of most psychiatric disorders is multifacto-
rial. Biological (e.g. genetic, organic), psychological and 
behavioural (e.g. abuse in childhood, emotional trauma), 
and social and environmental factors (e.g. social isolation) 
are all involved.
Alterations in neurotransmission are undoubtedly 
a key mechanism in schizophrenia and affective dis-
orders, although the cause of this remains uncertain. 
In schizophrenia, for example, there is considerable 
evidence to implicate dopaminergic pathways, with in-
creased activity in the subcortical and limbic regions 
of the brain and reduced activity in the prefrontal 
cortical regions. The drugs that are used in the treat-
ment of schizophrenia all have effects on dopaminer-
gic neurotransmission. Decreased monoamine activity 
has long been considered to be an important mecha-
nism in depression, a notion that is supported by the 
efficacy of monoamine oxidase inhibitors in its man-
agement. Many addictive drugs have effects on neuro-
transmission: for example, cocaine blocks the reuptake 
of dopamine in the brain and benzodiazepines bind to 
receptors for γ-aminobutyric acid, an important inhibi-
tory neurotransmitter.
Until recently, it has been difficult to study biochemi-
cal activity in the brain. Measurements of neurotrans-
mitters and their metabolites made in peripheral blood, 
blood in veins draining the brain and in cerebrospinal 
fluid provide only indirect information about brain ac-
tivity and none on localization. However, the techniques 
of positron emission tomography (PET) and single-
proton emission tomography (SPET) are beginning to 
shed light on the molecular basis of psychiatric disorders. 
Functional MRI measures cerebral blood flow, which is 
related to neuronal activity. And there can be little doubt 
that studies on the molecular genetics of receptors and 
enzymes involved in neurotransmission will contribute to 
a greater understanding of the biochemical disturbances 
that underlie psychiatric disorders.
BIOCHEMICAL INVESTIGATIONS IN  
PSYCHIATRIC DISORDERS
Although laboratory investigations do not have a specific 
role in the diagnosis of the majority of psychiatric disor-
ders, they are important for several reasons. First, because 
many physical diseases can give rise to symptoms that oc-
cur in psychiatric disorders (e.g. psychosis and delirium in 
systemic lupus erythematosus), it is frequently important 
to exclude an organic cause in a patient presenting with 
an apparent psychiatric disorder (albeit the results of such 
investigations are usually negative). Features suggesting 
an organic cause for an apparent psychiatric disorder in-
clude late age of onset, with no previous history or family 
history of psychiatric disorder, and no psychological or 
social precipitating factor. Second, organic illnesses may 
be complicated by psychiatric disorders. For example, 
panic disorder, generalized anxiety, social phobia and de-
pression, occur more frequently in patients with irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS) than in the general population, 
and antidepressant and anxiolytic medication has been 
shown to benefit significant numbers of patients with re-
fractory IBS. Another connection between organic illness 
and psychiatric disorders is that the latter may cause both 
metabolic and endocrine disturbances (e.g. amenorrhoea 
in anorexia nervosa).
Third, psychotropic medication can cause metabolic 
abnormalities, and particularly given the high prevalence 
of psychiatric disorders, and hence the use of psycho-
tropic drugs, clinical biochemists must be cognizant of 
these, so that, for example, the finding of a high serum 
prolactin concentration in a patient being treated with 
an antipsychotic drug should not lead automatically to 
a search for a pituitary tumour. Fourth, substance abuse 
may involve the clinical biochemist both analytically and 
in relation to the metabolic disturbances that may ensue. 
While it is beyond the scope of this book to discuss the 
TABLE 35.1  A classification of psychiatric disorders
Classification
Examples or notes
Organic disorders
Conditions with a structural (e.g. dementia) or functional (e.g. 
delirium in fever) basis
Mental and behavioural disorders due to psychoactive 
substance use
Includes alcohol and illicit or prescribed drug misuse
Schizophrenia and delusional disorders
Delusions are firmly held but abnormal beliefs; hallucinations are 
clear perceptions without an objective stimulus
Mood (affective) disorders
Depression, bipolar disorder (including mania) etc.
Neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders
Physical and/or psychological manifestations of anxiety are 
central. Includes conditions that suggest pathology in an organ 
or organs, but where none can be demonstrated
Behavioural syndromes
Having a psychological, physical or physiological cause
Disorders of personality and behaviour
Developmental disorders that do not have an obvious psychiatric 
or organic cause
Mental retardation
676	
Clinical biochemistry
role of the laboratory in the detection of substance abuse, 
the metabolic complications associated with some of the 
more frequently encountered substances are discussed in 
Chapter 40.
Table 35.2 summarizes the biochemical and other lab-
oratory investigations that may be of value in excluding 
an organic cause for an apparent ‘psychiatric presenta-
tion’; the ensuing sections of this chapter describe the 
major psychiatric manifestations of organic diseases and 
the metabolic changes that can occur in psychiatric disor-
ders and as a result of their treatment.
PSYCHIATRIC MANIFESTATIONS OF  
ORGANIC DISEASE
Acute confusional state (delirium)
Delirium is a complex syndrome of altered conscious-
ness, manifest by decreased awareness of the environment 
and inattention, together with cognitive impairment, 
with memory deficit, disorientation, decreased percep-
tion and language disturbance. There may, in addition, 
be emotional disturbances (e.g. anxiety, irritability) and 
psychomotor changes (e.g. agitation or retardation). 
Symptoms tend to fluctuate, confusion typically being 
greater at night or in unfamiliar surroundings (e.g. a 
hospital ward).
The causes include:
•	 metabolic and endocrine (see below)
•	 infection (systemic, particularly with high fever and 
meningeal/cerebral)
•	 vascular (e.g. cerebral haemorrhage and infarction)
•	 toxic (e.g. drugs, both intoxication and withdrawal, 
and toxins, e.g. carbon monoxide)
•	 neoplasia (primary cerebral tumours, cerebral me-
tastases and paraneoplastic syndromes)
•	 trauma 
(e.g. 
subdural 
haematoma, 
cerebral 
contusion)
•	 miscellaneous (e.g. post-ictal, postoperative).
The metabolic and endocrine causes are summarized 
in Table 35.3. When one of these is the cause of acute 
confusion, there will often be other clinical features of, 
or clues to, the condition, but if this is not the case, the 
laboratory investigations performed beyond a standard 
‘biochemical profile’ and full blood count (with differ-
ential) should reflect the relative frequency of the con-
ditions. It should be noted that in the elderly, almost 
any acute illness can present with acute confusion, and 
that the elderly may be at increased risk of developing 
confusion in response to any causative condition as a 
result of poor nutrition, visual or auditory impairment, 
or incipient dementia. The tendency for elderly people 
to be taking multiple therapeutic drugs coupled with 
age-related changes in the rates of metabolism and ex-
cretion of drugs is another important factor.
Sepsis and drug intoxication or withdrawal are par-
ticularly common causes of delirium. Sepsis may increase 
the risk of drug-induced delirium by increasing the per-
meability of the blood–brain barrier. For drugs that are 
protein-bound, a low plasma albumin concentration may 
also increase toxicity by increasing the proportion of the 
drug present in the unbound form.
Anxiety
Anxiety is a normal response to a threat, but in the 
anxiety disorders, the response is out of proportion to 
any real danger and causes suffering and behavioural 
disturbance.
The anxiety disorders comprise three conditions: 
­generalized anxiety disorder, in which symptoms are per-
sistent, and two conditions in which they are episodic – 
panic disorder, in which there is no apparent stimulus, 
TABLE 35.2  Laboratory investigations to exclude organic disease in patients with psychiatric symptoms
Investigation
Rationale
Full blood count
Anaemia can lead to cerebral hypoxia, causing confusion; macrocytosis may be due to 
vitamin B12 deficiency, a cause of dementia, and to a high alcohol intake; chronic anaemia 
may contribute to depression
Acute phase proteins
High erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) suggests systemic illness, e.g. infection, 
malignancy, that may cause delirium; C-reactive protein (CRP) elevation may indicate 
abrupt onset of inflammation
Creatinine, ‘electrolytes’, 
estimated glomerular 
filtration rate (eGFR), 
calcium, liver function tests
Electrolyte disorders and renal and hepatic failure can cause delirium; they may result from 
behavioural disturbance secondary to psychiatric disorder
Blood gases
Hypocapnia can mimic anxiety (but note that, more frequently, hyperventilation secondary 
to anxiety or a panic attack can cause hypocapnia); hypercapnia in respiratory failure can 
cause delirium
Glucose
Hypoglycaemia can mimic anxiety (and, when chronic, may lead to behavioural disturbance 
and trigger referral to a psychiatrist); hyperglycaemia can cause delirium
Thyroid function tests
See text
Syphilis serology
General paresis (a late manifestation of neurosyphilis), presenting with dementia, tremor 
and upper motor neuron signs, can develop 5–15 years after primary infection, if this is not 
treated
Blood cultures
To detect occult sepsis
Blood alcohol
A frequent cause of and exacerbating feature in psychiatric presentations
Other laboratory investigations that may be valuable (though are less frequently required) include measurement of heavy metals, 
­carboxyhaemoglobin (for carbon monoxide poisoning), antinuclear factor (for cerebral lupus erythematosus) etc.
	
35  Biochemical aspects of psychiatric disorders	
677
and phobic anxiety disorders, in which anxiety stems 
from fear of situations, for example going out alone or 
being in crowded spaces (agoraphobia), or objects, for ex-
ample spiders. All types can be associated with somatic 
symptoms, including chest pain, palpitation, dyspnoea 
(typically a feeling of not being able to take a full breath), 
paraesthesiae and sweating, but these are particularly as-
sociated with panic disorder. They may lead to the pa-
tient seeking urgent medical advice because they fear a 
serious illness, for example a heart attack. Patients with 
generalized anxiety disorder may seek medical advice be-
cause of bowel disturbance.
The somatic symptoms in the acute anxiety disorders 
are due to a combination of increased sympathetic ac-
tivity, release of catecholamines and hyperventilation. 
The latter causes falls in arterial PCO2 and hydrogen 
ion concentration (rise in pH) with normal bicarbon-
ate and normal PO2, reducing the plasma concentration 
of ionized calcium and increasing neuromuscular excit-
ability. Typically, symptoms can be provoked by over-
breathing and abated by rebreathing into a paper (not 
plastic, which risks asphyxiation) bag. It is not usually 
difficult to distinguish hyperventilation in anxiety from 
hyperventilation in response to acidosis (e.g. ketoaci-
dosis) or in pulmonary disease (e.g. asthma, pulmonary 
oedema) but, if necessary, arterial blood gases can be 
measured.
Hypocapnia can also cause anxiety. The symptoms 
produced (e.g. chest pain) may lead sufferers to believe 
that they have serious disease, inducing anxiety and set-
ting up a vicious circle.
The differential diagnosis of anxiety disorders in-
cludes drug dependence and withdrawal, hyperthy-
roidism, 
hypoglycaemia, 
hypoparathyroidism 
and 
phaeochromocytoma.
Thyroid function tests should always be performed in 
patients presenting with an apparent primary anxiety dis-
order. Anxiety, insomnia, emotional lability and difficulty 
concentrating are frequently present in patients with 
hyperthyroidism and the symptoms may occasionally be 
sufficiently severe to suggest hypomania. It may be dif-
ficult to distinguish between an anxiety state and mild hy-
perthyroidism: features suggesting the latter include eye 
signs, the presence of a goitre and proximal myopathy. 
Tremor is often present in both conditions, but the hands 
tend to be warm and moist in hyperthyroidism as a result 
of the hyperdynamic circulation, but cold and clammy 
in anxiety disorder. Resting pulse rate is usually normal in 
anxiety disorders but increased in hyperthyroidism. The 
anxiety symptoms of hyperthyroidism usually respond to 
treatment with β-blockers.
The diagnosis of hypoglycaemia is discussed in detail in 
Chapter 17, and of phaeochromocytoma in Chapter 38. 
Measurement of fasting blood glucose concentration 
during an attack is a simple matter; measuring plasma or 
urinary catecholamines or their metabolites is not, but 
phaeochromocytoma, although rare, should be consid-
ered when there are predominant sympathetic symptoms 
(e.g. palpitation, sweating) and no obvious precipitating 
factor can be identified.
Dementia
Dementia – a condition characterized by a progressive 
decline in cognitive function (particularly loss of short-
term memory) without confusion or loss of arousal – is 
common, particularly in the elderly, in whom Alzheimer 
disease and cerebrovascular disease (usually diffuse, 
small vessel disease) are the major causes. Metabolic and 
endocrine conditions are uncommon causes. A treatable 
cause should be sought through laboratory investiga-
tions and imaging, particularly in younger patients. The 
former should include a full blood count, erythrocyte 
sedimentation rate (ESR) and standard biochemical 
­renal- liver- and bone-related tests, thyroid function 
tests, measurement of serum vitamin B12 concentra-
tion and serology for systemic lupus erythematosus and 
syphilis (see Table 35.2). In individuals with a history of 
alcohol abuse, thiamin deficiency should be considered 
but is usually diagnosed on the basis of the therapeu-
tic response to an intravenous bolus of thiamin. Heavy 
metal and carbon monoxide poisoning may need to be 
considered if there is possibility of exposure. A syn-
drome of ‘pseudodementia’ may arise in severe depres-
sion; this should be sought clinically as investigations 
are likely to be normal.
TABLE 35.3  Metabolic and endocrine causes of delirium (acute confusional state)
Cause
Notes
Cerebral hypoxia
Secondary to, for example, cardiac failure, respiratory failure, hypotension, severe anaemia
Hypo-/hyperglycaemia
Hypoglycaemia can present with anxiety and, when chronic, with behavioural disturbance 
(see Chapter 17)
Hyponatraemia
Dependent on the rate of fall as well as the absolute value of the sodium concentration
Hypo-/hypercalcaemia
 
Renal failure
 
Liver failure
 
Adrenal failure
 
Hyper-/hypothyroidism
Depression is a far more frequent psychiatric manifestation of hypothyroidism
Hyperpyrexia
Causing rhabdomyolysis as in malignant hyperthermia or the ‘neuroleptic malignant syndrome’ 
due to central dopamine blockade
Acute porphyria
 
Vitamin deficiencies(thiamin, 
niacin and vitamin B12)
 
Drugs
Including alcohol (ethanol), illicit agents and a wide range of therapeutic drugs, particularly in 
the elderly
678	
Clinical biochemistry
Considerable effort continues to be invested in re-
search to determine the cause of Alzheimer disease and 
to identify early markers of the disease that could direct 
early intervention. To date, however, although various 
candidate markers have been investigated, none has been 
identified and the role of laboratory investigations is con-
fined to eliminating treatable causes of dementia.
The pathological hallmarks of Alzheimer disease are 
senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles throughout the 
cerebral cortex but particularly in the hippocampus. The 
first stage in the development of plaques is the deposition 
of β-amyloid protein, which is produced through the pro-
teolysis of amyloid precursor protein (APP). This protein 
is coded for on chromosome 21, which may explain why 
individuals with Down syndrome (trisomy 21) are prone 
to the early development of Alzheimer-like changes in 
the CNS. Neurofibrillary tangles develop as a result of 
the aggregation of tau protein driven by its undergo-
ing hyperphosphorylation, but the underlying cause of 
either of these processes remains unknown. As the dis-
ease develops, diffuse cerebral atrophy ensues. The most 
obvious functional abnormality in Alzheimer disease is 
a reduction in cerebral cholinergic activity. This has led 
to the development of treatments using cholinesterase 
inhibitors, but thus far, these are of limited benefit, and 
that only in early disease.
Most cases of Alzheimer disease are sporadic, but a 
small number show autosomal dominant inheritance, and 
are due to mutations in the genes coding for APP or pre-
senilins 1 and 2. Genetic factors also impinge on sporadic 
Alzheimer disease: some 80% of patients possess at least 
one ε4 allele of the gene coding for apolipoprotein E (the 
usual allele being ε3). However, the basis of this associa-
tion remains uncertain.
Depression
Introduction
Depression is one of the commonest psychiatric disor-
ders. Its typical features are low mood, loss of interest and 
enjoyment (anhedonia), reduced energy and increased fa-
tigue; other common features include psychomotor re-
tardation, poverty of movement and disordered ideation 
(e.g. hypochondriasis, feelings of unworthiness). Somatic 
symptoms, particularly headache and fatigue, are com-
mon. In severe cases, auditory hallucinations, delusions 
and suicidal ideation may be present. Recurrent distinct 
episodes are common, although some patients experience 
a chronic, low-grade depression (dysthymia). Depression 
can occur on its own (unipolar disorder) or (less fre-
quently) be a feature of bipolar affective disorder (manic 
depressive psychosis) with episodes of depression or hy-
pomania interspersed with periods of normality.
Depression can develop as a natural response to physi-
cal illness (depressive adjustment disorder) but is typically 
not as severe as depression arising without precipitating 
factors. If the associated illness is self-limiting, it may 
only be transient. However, the boundary between de-
pressive adjustment disorder and depressive illness is 
not clear-cut, and depressive symptoms arising in a pa-
tient with physical illness should not be assumed to be a 
response to the illness. Indeed, because some depressive 
symptoms can be features of organic illness, the possi-
bility of depression should be actively considered. Up to 
a third of patients with physical illness have depressive 
symptoms, and major depression is present in up to 15%, 
the prevalence correlating with the number of physi-
cal symptoms. Untreated comorbid depression worsens 
the outcome in physical illness (e.g. cardiovascular dis-
ease, diabetes, arthritis). Indicators of possible depressive 
disorder include: failure to adjust to the illness; reduced 
physical functioning; slower recovery than might be ex-
pected, and a reduction in social activity.
Depression and thyroid function
The differential diagnosis includes several other psychi-
atric disorders, and depression can coexist with other 
disorders, for example panic disorder. The most frequent 
organic disease that may be mistaken for depression is hy-
pothyroidism, although apathy is more common than true 
depressive symptoms in the latter. Other features include 
inattentiveness and loss of short-term memory. Frank 
psychosis due to hypothyroidism (‘myxoedema madness’) 
is now rare. Hypothyroidism is a common condition, par-
ticularly in the elderly; its manifestations can be protean 
and it should be excluded by measuring thyroid stimulat-
ing hormone (TSH) and free thyroxine concentrations 
in any patient presenting with depression or a decline in 
cognitive function. The psychiatric manifestations im-
prove with thyroxine replacement treatment, although 
sometimes the cognitive dysfunction persists, perhaps be-
cause of a deleterious effect of chronic thyroid hormone 
deficiency on the CNS. Depression that is refractory 
to treatment may show a pattern of ‘sick euthyroidism’ 
(low plasma TSH and free thyroxine concentrations, see 
Chapter  19), and the depression may respond to thy-
roxine treatment; thyroid function should be reassessed 
when the depression improves as there is unlikely to be 
primary hypothyroidism. In some patients, the initiation 
of thyroxine treatment can temporarily exacerbate the 
psychiatric symptoms or even, in susceptible individu-
als (e.g. those with a family history of affective disorder), 
precipitate a manic episode. It should be remembered 
that, particularly in elderly people, hyperthyroidism oc-
casionally presents atypically (apathetic hyperthyroidism) 
and may be mistaken for depression. Thyroid disease is 
discussed in detail in Chapter 19.
Depression and adrenal function
Depression is a common feature of Cushing syndrome, 
whether pituitary dependent or independent or the re-
sult or administration of exogenous steroids (though this 
can also cause euphoria). That it is cortisol, rather than 
corticotrophin (adrenocorticotrophic hormone, ACTH) 
that is the cause of the depressive symptoms is suggested 
by the absence of any excess of depression in patients 
with Nelson syndrome (in which ACTH concentrations 
are high but cortisol is low). Furthermore, metyrapone, 
which inhibits the synthesis of cortisol and causes in-
creased concentrations of ACTH, has a beneficial ef-
fect on depression in Cushing syndrome. Depression in 
	
35  Biochemical aspects of psychiatric disorders	
679
Cushing syndrome is more frequent in women and in 
older age groups, and its severity shows some correlation 
with the severity of other features of the condition. The 
acute administration of high doses of corticosteroids (e.g. 
prednisolone 30 mg/day) can lead to hyperphagia, insom-
nia and euphoria, and their sudden withdrawal can pre-
cipitate depression.
Patients with depression often fail to show suppression 
of plasma cortisol concentration in the overnight dexa-
methasone suppression test (see Chapter 18) and (though 
less frequently) in the formal low-dose test, in which 
dexamethasone 0.5 mg is administered 6-hourly for 48 h.
Depression can lead to accelerated loss of bone min-
eral density and increased risk of fracture: the hypercorti-
solaemia is likely, in part, to be responsible for this.
Depression can also be a feature of Addison disease. 
The symptoms may pre-date the classic physical signs 
of the condition but respond to cortisol replacement 
treatment.
Depression in the metabolic syndrome 
and diabetes
There is a well recognized association between diabe-
tes mellitus and depression. Dr Thomas Willis, a 17th 
century British physician, considered that diabetes was 
caused by ‘sadness or long sorrow’. One study has re-
ported a prevalence of major depression in diabetes of 
9.3%, compared with 6.1% in the general population. 
The presence of depression in diabetes is associated with 
poorer glycaemic control and poorer outcome but appro-
priate psychiatric intervention can reduce the morbidity 
associated with diabetes. Both diabetes and depression 
are risk factors for cardiovascular disease; the risk in pa-
tients with depression is approximately twice that in those 
without.
It seems more likely that diabetes predisposes to de-
pression than vice versa. A nine-year prospective study 
of people with or without depression showed no excess 
risk of diabetes in those with depression. Further, treat-
ment of depression in patients with diabetes has no ef-
fect on glycaemic control. How diabetes predisposes to 
depression is uncertain, but insulin resistance as part of 
the metabolic response to the psychosocial stress arising 
from having a chronic illness may, in part, be responsible.
The major underlying pathogenic factor in type 2 
diabetes is resistance to the actions of insulin. Insulin 
resistance also underlies the metabolic syndrome (see 
Chapter 15). This syndrome comprises a range of abnor-
malities, including visceral obesity, dyslipidaemia, hyper-
glycaemia and hypertension that are risk factors for both 
type 2 diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The preva-
lence of the metabolic syndrome in patients with diabetes 
is high. Several other abnormalities have been described 
in both depression and the metabolic syndrome, includ-
ing hypercortisolaemia, abnormal autonomic nervous 
system function (e.g. increased resting heart rate with 
reduced heart rate variability), endothelial dysfunction, 
increased platelet reactivity and evidence of persistent 
inflammation.
Plasma concentrations of nutritional factors such as 
25-hydroxyvitamin D and ω-3 fatty acids have been found 
to be consistently low in depressed patients, the former 
being linked to reduced activity and exposure to sunlight, 
the latter to modulation of cytokine activity leading to 
increased hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal and inflamma-
tory activity. There is no evidence of clinical benefit from 
dietary supplementation.
Post-traumatic stress disorder
This syndrome can arise as a result of exposure to any 
severe psychological trauma; physical trauma may also be 
involved. Examples of causes include experience of natu-
ral disasters, war, terrorism, witnessing violent death, tor-
ture and rape. Its features include:
•	 recurrent, intrusive recollections of the event (‘flash-
backs’)
•	 feelings of detachment and isolation (avoidant 
symptoms)
•	 persistent symptoms of increased arousal (e.g. exag-
gerated startle reflex).
The severity of the condition in individuals is depen-
dent both on factors related to the event itself (e.g. its 
severity, the proximity of the individual to it) and on the 
personality of the individual, any history of psychiatric 
illness and other factors.
Endocrine abnormalities associated with the post-
traumatic stress disorder include decreased cortisol secre-
tion secondary to decreased secretion of ACTH (despite 
increased secretion of corticotrophin releasing hormone, 
CRH). The ACTH response to CRH is reduced, and 
that to dexamethasone increased, suggesting enhanced 
negative feedback. This contrasts with the elevated 
cortisol and reduced sensitivity to dexamethasone that 
is characteristic of several other psychiatric disorders. 
The urinary excretion of catecholamines is increased 
and there is evidence of increased CNS noradrenaline 
(norepinephrine) and serotonin activity, these two neu-
rotransmitters being known to have a role in storing and 
retrieval of memory. Some patients with post-traumatic 
stress disorder have increased plasma concentrations of 
thyroid hormones and an enhanced TSH response to 
TRH (thyrotrophin releasing hormone), yet are clini-
cally euthyroid.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) of 
the brain suggests features in common between post-
traumatic stress disorder and obsessive–compulsive 
disorder.
Schizophrenia
The history of schizophrenia research is littered with 
the discovery, and subsequent abandonment, of puta-
tive biomarkers of the disorder or its aetiology. Recent 
interest has focused on elevated plasma concentrations of 
inflammatory cytokines found in patients with both first 
episode psychosis and chronic schizophrenia. Acute in-
flammation has been reported to increase the relapse rate 
of schizophrenic symptoms, and the widespread direct 
and indirect influences of cytokines on brain neurotrans-
mitter pathways and neural plasticity suggest a mecha-
nism. Augmentation of antipsychotic treatment with the 
anti-inflammatory drugs acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) and 
680	
Clinical biochemistry
celecoxib (a cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitor) has been ad-
vocated and may improve treatment response in some 
patients.
Despite the major functional abnormalities that may be 
present in patients with schizophrenia, significant meta-
bolic disturbances are relatively uncommon. Basal con-
centrations of most hormones are normal in schizophrenia 
(elevations in vasopressin are an exception), ­although 
the TSH and gonadotrophin responses to their respec-
tive releasing hormones are typically blunted. However, 
significant metabolic abnormalities may develop as a 
consequence of treatment with psychotropic drugs, as 
described later in this chapter. Furthermore, substance 
abuse is ­frequent in patients with schizophrenia and this 
may cause metabolic abnormalities, e.g. hyponatraemia 
with amfetamines (particularly methylenedioxymetham-
fetamine, MDMA, ‘ecstasy’), hypoglycaemia with ethanol 
(see Chapter 17) and decreased secretion of gonadotro-
phins with opioids.
ENDOCRINE AND METABOLIC  
MANIFESTATIONS OF PSYCHIATRIC DISEASE
The hypothalamus is central to the regulation of the en-
docrine system and the sympathetic nervous system, and 
is involved in behavioural responses, so it is not surprising 
that many psychiatric diseases affect endocrine function. 
Not all do, however: schizophrenia (see above) is a no-
table exception.
Abnormalities of the hypothalamo–pituitary–
adrenal axis
Abnormalities of cortisol secretion are common in psy-
chiatric disease. Approximately 50% of patients with 
depression have hypercortisolaemia (though with pres-
ervation of the normal circadian variation) secondary to 
increased secretion of CRH and hence ACTH, although 
the response of ACTH secretion to an intravenous bolus 
of CRH is reduced (in contrast to patients with Cushing 
disease, in whom it is typically exaggerated). Enhanced 
vasopressin secretion may also contribute to the increased 
secretion of ACTH in depression.
The reason for the increased CRH drive is unclear. 
It may be a result of impairment of the normal inhibi-
tory feedback of cortisol on the hypothalamus, but this 
could be part of the underlying disorder or a response 
to it.
Individuals with alcohol dependence may develop fea-
tures of Cushing syndrome (pseudo-Cushing) but these 
usually resolve rapidly on withdrawal of alcohol.
Similarity between the features of chronic fatigue 
syndrome and adrenal insufficiency have prompted re-
search into endocrine function in the former condition. 
Plasma cortisol concentrations tend to be slightly lower 
than normal, although adrenal responsiveness to ACTH 
is not impaired, and the ACTH and cortisol responses to 
insulin-provoked hypoglycaemia are normal. Treatment 
with low doses (5–10 mg/day) of hydrocortisone has been 
shown to be of benefit in some patients.
Plasma cortisol concentrations are frequently de-
creased in patients with post-traumatic stress disorder; 
these patients often demonstrate increased sensitivity to 
the suppressive effects of dexamethasone on cortisol se-
cretion. This contrasts with the findings in many other 
psychiatric disorders, in which hypercortisolaemia is 
accompanied by reduced sensitivity to dexamethasone.
The ACTH response to CRH is blunted in some 
patients with anxiety disorders but plasma cortisol con-
centrations are normal. Hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal 
function has been reported to be normal in patients with 
schizophrenia.
Abnormalities of the hypothalamo–­pituitary–
thyroid axis
Patients with depression frequently demonstrate abnor-
malities of thyroid function. Up to 20% of patients with 
depression have been reported to have ‘sick euthyroidism’ 
(see above) or subclinical hypothyroidism, with normal 
thyroxine concentrations but slightly elevated concen-
trations of TSH secondary to increased secretion of 
TRH and with increased TSH responsiveness to TRH. 
This pattern is more common in patients with bipolar 
disorder. Other patients (more particularly those with 
unipolar depression) have a blunted TSH response to 
TRH. However, this is not specific to depression, having 
been reported in schizophrenia and alcoholism as well. 
Treatment with antidepressants leads to normalization 
of thyroid function tests, although it is of interest that 
treatment with tri-iodothyronine apparently enhances 
their efficacy in some patients, both increasing the rate 
at which they become effective and the overall response. 
This suggests that there may be a specific link between 
thyroid function and mood disorder rather than to the 
symptoms just being a consequence of reduced cerebral 
metabolism. Tri-iodothyronine is widely used by psychia-
trists for this purpose.
Patients with other acute and chronic psychiatric 
illnesses may demonstrate the features of the sick eu-
thyroid syndrome (see Chapter  19), and patients with 
anorexia nervosa typically demonstrate the abnormali-
ties characteristic of starvation, with a low plasma thy-
roxine concentration, increased concentration of reverse 
tri-iodothyronine and a reduced TSH response to TRH.
Abnormalities of the hypothalamo–pituitary–
gonadal axis
The 
secretion 
of 
gonadotrophin 
releasing 
hor-
mone (GnRH) is impaired at low body weights (see 
Chapter 18), and oligo-/amenorrhoea is frequently re-
ported by women with anorexia nervosa. Amenorrhoea is 
often a feature of moderate to severe depression, and may 
result from diminution of the release of follicle stimulat-
ing hormone (FSH) and luteinizing hormone (LH) from 
the anterior pituitary. Pulsatile release of both FSH and 
LH takes place during slow-wave (i.e. non-REM) sleep 
(SWS), but this phase of sleep is shortened or absent in 
moderate to severe depression. Testosterone has been 
reported to have an anti-depressant effect in depressed 
hypogonadal men.
	
35  Biochemical aspects of psychiatric disorders	
681
Abnormalities of growth hormone secretion
Anorexia nervosa typically also causes increases in plasma 
growth hormone concentration with exaggerated re-
sponses to growth hormone releasing hormone (GHRH) 
but decreased concentrations of insulin-like growth fac-
tor 1 (IGF-1), probably due to a combination of weight 
loss and increased concentrations of glucocorticoids
Two major abnormalities of growth hormone secre-
tion have been described in depression: hypersecretion 
during daytime and reduced secretion during sleep. As 
growth hormone is also secreted from the pituitary in 
bursts during SWS, the latter abnormality may arise from 
the reduction of SWS that is found in depression.
Abnormalities of prolactin secretion
Anxiety is a common cause of hyperprolactinaemia, and 
blood for prolactin measurement should always be drawn 
under conditions that minimize stress.
Nocturnal plasma prolactin concentrations are in-
creased in some patients with schizophrenia, but elevated 
prolactin concentrations in this condition are usually a 
consequence of treatment with dopamine receptor an-
tagonists (see below).
Prolactin secretion is usually normal in depres-
sive illness, although responsiveness to stimuli such as 
l-­tryptophan may be diminished.
Other metabolic abnormalities
Several psychiatric disorders can lead to abnormalities of 
fluid, electrolyte and acid–base balance. The respiratory 
alkalosis that can occur as a result of hyperventilation in 
anxiety states has been mentioned above. Abnormalities 
associated with drug abuse are discussed in relation to 
individual drugs in Chapter 40. Examples include hypo-
phosphataemia in alcoholism and alcohol withdrawal, and 
potassium and magnesium depletion in patients abusing 
diuretics or laxatives. Severe hypokalaemia can develop in 
anorexia nervosa secondary to chronic starvation; this may 
be exacerbated by vomiting and laxative abuse. Patients 
with bulimia are particularly prone to developing potas-
sium depletion with hypochloraemic alkalosis as a result 
of self-induced vomiting. Hypophosphataemia may also 
occur but is particularly associated with refeeding (see 
p. 211). Multiple deficiencies of mineral nutrients can oc-
cur in both conditions, and in depression. Psychogenic 
polydipsia can cause profound hyponatraemia and may 
be difficult to distinguish from diabetes insipidus, as 
the chronically high urine output can lead to ‘medullary 
washout’ with a secondary decrease in the concentrating 
capacity of the kidneys (see Chapter 4).
METABOLIC COMPLICATIONS OF  
PSYCHOTROPIC DRUGS
Lithium
Lithium is a valuable mood stabilizing drug, widely used 
in the management of bipolar disorder, both for prophy-
laxis and in the treatment of acute episodes (particularly 
of mania). However, it has the potential to cause severe 
adverse effects. These are directly related to its plasma 
concentration, and monitoring of plasma concentrations 
every three months is mandatory (see Chapter 39).
Lithium reduces the responsiveness of the distal parts 
of the nephron to vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone), 
resulting in a reduced capacity to concentrate the urine. 
This effect is demonstrable in most patients being treated 
with the drug but is rarely of clinical significance, al-
though a few patients develop nephrogenic diabetes in-
sipidus. This is partially reversible if lithium is withdrawn. 
Lithium is 95% excreted by the kidneys and dehydration 
decreases the glomerular filtration rate, so increasing the 
concentration of the drug and potentially exacerbating 
the toxic effect. However, provided that acute toxicity is 
avoided, lithium rarely causes long-term renal damage.
Lithium can also interfere with thyroid function and 
cause primary hypothyroidism, the risk of this being 
greater if thyroid autoantibodies are present. For these 
reasons, plasma creatinine (and hence estimated glo-
merular filtration rate (eGFR), thyroid stimulating hor-
mone (TSH) concentrations should be measured before 
starting lithium treatment and at regular intervals (e.g. 
4–6 monthly) thereafter.
Drugs causing hyperprolactinaemia
Prolactin secretion by the anterior pituitary is inhib-
ited by dopamine, and given the fact that several anti-
psychotic drugs (e.g. phenothiazines, butyrophenones) 
are dopamine (D2 receptor) antagonists, it is not sur-
prising that these drugs are a frequent cause of hyper-
prolactinaemia. Metoclopramide and domperidone, 
two widely used antiemetic drugs, also have this effect. 
Prolactin concentration may be increased to as much 
as 2500 mU/L, well into the range seen in patients har-
bouring microprolactinomas. Clinical features of hyper-
prolactinaemia are, however, relatively uncommon, but 
amenorrhoea, galactorrhoea and breast enlargement 
may occur in women, and gynaecomastia and impotence 
in men. Hyperprolactinaemia is less frequent with the 
newer second generation antipsychotics, for example 
olanzapine and quetiapine (though it is seen with risperi-
done), whose actions are either non-dopaminergic or 
have higher affinity for 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) 
receptors than dopamine receptors.
Drugs causing hyponatraemia
Several drugs used in the management of patients with 
psychiatric disease can interfere with water homoeostasis 
(probably through stimulating vasopressin secretion) and 
lead to hyponatraemia. They include selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (e.g. paroxetine) and carbamazepine, 
primarily an anticonvulsant but also used in the pro-
phylaxis of bipolar disorder. In the majority of patients, 
any resultant hyponatraemia is only mild and is asymp-
tomatic, but there is a risk of significant water retention 
leading to intoxication, and serum sodium concentration 
(and less frequently osmolality) should be monitored in 
patients being treated with these drugs.
682	
Clinical biochemistry
Drugs causing hyperglycaemia and 
hyperlipidaemia
The prevalence of diabetes mellitus is higher in patients 
with schizophrenia in comparison with the general popu-
lation, but the introduction of chlorpromazine in 1956 
caused a significant further increase, and the term ‘chlor-
promazine diabetes’ was used to describe this. The mech-
anism appears to be insulin resistance. Newer second 
generation antipsychotics can also cause hyperglycaemia 
and hypertriglyceridaemia, and sometimes hypercholes-
terolaemia, albeit less frequently. Clozapine is particularly 
implicated, followed by olanzapine; metabolic abnormal-
ities are less common with risperidone and quetiapine, 
and least with aripiprazole. Weight gain is frequent with 
both clozapine and olanzapine. It is recommended that 
glycated haemoglobin (HbA1C) and lipid concentrations 
should be measured at inception of treatment with any 
antipsychotic, and repeated twice yearly in patients on 
clozapine (they also require to be under surveillance for 
agranulocytosis, a potentially lethal adverse effect) and 
olanzapine, and annually for other antipsychotics.
Drugs interfering with hepatic function
Many drugs can cause mild hepatic abnormalities, usu-
ally manifest as an increase in plasma aminotransferase 
and/or alkaline phosphatase activity. Examples include 
chlorpromazine, haloperidol and some tricyclic antide-
pressants. Chlorpromazine can cause cholestasis, and 
this may persist after the drug has been discontinued. 
The hepatotoxicity of valproate is a particular problem. 
This drug, primarily used as an anticonvulsant, has be-
come one of the most frequently used mood-stabilising 
drugs. Several cases of fatal hepatotoxicity have been 
reported. Patients present with lethargy, anorexia, nau-
sea, and jaundice are found to have hyperammonaemia 
(although elevated ammonia concentrations have been 
reported in patients taking valproate in the absence of 
overt toxicity). Unfortunately, this reaction is an id-
iosyncratic one, being dependent neither on the dose 
nor the concentration of the drug, so that therapeutic 
monitoring of concentrations is of no value in prevent-
ing it.
Many drugs used in psychiatric practice affect plasma 
protein binding (notably carbamazepine) or the hepatic 
cytochrome enzyme system, causing changes in the avail-
ability of other drugs utilizing the same pathway. The re-
sult may be to reduce the therapeutic effects of a drug or 
increase its adverse effects.
FUTURE DEVELOPMENTS
Simple ‘mono-neurotransmitter’ models of psychiatric 
disorders are increasingly untenable and, along with 
them, simple distinctions between mental and physi-
cal illness. Evidence is accumulating of the interplay of 
neuroendocrine and inflammatory processes in many 
psychiatric disorders, and that some disorders that clus-
ter epidemiologically (depression and cardiovascular 
disease) might not be independent but manifestations of 
the same pathogenetic process. Although it seems un-
likely that measurements of individual or even groups 
of simple analytes in peripheral blood will ever become 
of value in the diagnosis or management of the major 
psychiatric disorders, it is possible to envisage an in-
creasing role for the clinical biochemist in psychiatry. 
Pharmacogenetics – the study of the genetic influence 
on responsiveness to drugs – has the potential to facili-
tate a more tailored approach to prescribing, in relation 
both to the selection and dosage of drugs. And, given 
that some psychiatric disorders are clearly at least in 
part of genetic origin, the identification of genes con-
ferring susceptibility to these conditions will enable the 
development of microarray-based tests to identify indi-
viduals at high risk. These could then be targeted for 
intervention to manage other risk factors, or possibly 
prophylactic drug treatment.
CONCLUSION
At present, most psychiatric disorders are diagnosed clin-
ically. The purpose of biochemical investigations in pa-
tients with psychiatric symptoms is to rule out an organic 
cause. However, many psychiatric disorders can give rise 
to metabolic and endocrine abnormalities, as can treat-
ment with psychotropic drugs.
Further reading
De Jonge P, Roest AM. Depression and cardiovascular disease: the end 
of simple models. Br J Psychiatry 2012;201:337–8. 
A brief review of the interdependence of physical and psychiatric disorder.
Gelder M, Andreasen N, Lopez-Ibor J et al. New Oxford textbook of 
psychiatry. 2nd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2012. 
An advanced single volume textbook of psychiatry.
Gelder M, Mayou R, Geddes J. Psychiatry. 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press; 2005. 
A good introduction to the language of psychiatry, the major psychiatric 
disorders and their management.
Harmer CJ, Cowen PJ, Goodwin GM. Efficacy markers in depression. 
J Psychopharmacol 2011;25:1148–58. 
A review of the effects of depression and its treatment on key psychological 
factors such as emotional processing.
Krishnan V, Nestler EJ. The molecular neurobiology of depression. 
Nature 2008;455:894–902. 
An overview of the many neurobiological (behavioural, biochemical, 
electrophysiological) approaches informing current theories of depression.
Osborn DPJ, Wright CA, Levy G et  al. Relative risk of diabetes, 
dyslipidaemia, hypertension and the metabolic syndrome in people 
with severe mental illnesses: Systematic review and metaanalysis. 
BMC 
Psychiatry 
2008;8:84. 
http://www.biomedcentral.
com/1471-244X/8/84. 
An extensive review of the occurrence and features of metabolic syndrome 
in major psychiatric disorder, with emphasis on the psychoses.
Pariante C, Lightman S. The HPA axis in major depression: classical 
theories and new developments. Trends Neurosci 2008;31:464–8. 
A short review of the role of the HPA axis in stress and depression, and the 
possibility of targeted treatments.
Taylor D, Paton C, Kapur S. The Maudsley prescribing guidelines in 
psychiatry. 11th ed. Chichester: Wiley-Blackwell; 2012. 
Comprehensive coverage of the use of drug treatments, their effects and 
how to monitor them.
683
C H A P T E R  3 6
Biochemical aspects 
of neurological disease
Paul Hart  •  Clare M. Galtrey  •  Dominic C. Paviour  •  Min Htut
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  683
ENCEPHALOPATHY  683
Toxic and metabolic encephalopathy  685
Septic encephalopathy  687
Autoimmune encephalopathy  688
Dementia  688
SPINAL CORD DISORDERS  688
Vitamin B12 deficiency (subacute combined 
degeneration of the spinal cord)  688
Folate deficiency  689
Copper deficiency  689
Vitamin E deficiency  689
Hepatic myelopathy  689
Hexosaminidase A deficiency  689
Adrenomyeloneuropathy  689
PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY  689
Small fibre painful axonal neuropathy  691
Diabetic neuropathies  691
Immune mediated neuropathies  692
Acute inflammatory neuropathies and 
­variants  692
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating 
­polyneuropathies and variants including 
paraproteinaemic neuropathies  692
Chronic kidney disease and established  
renal failure  693
Liver disease  693
Endocrine disturbances  693
Nutritional peripheral neuropathies  693
Neuropathy associated with bariatric  
surgery  694
Strachan syndrome  694
Metabolic neuropathies  694
Mitochondrial disorders  696
Paraneoplastic neuropathies  696
MOVEMENT DISORDERS  697
ATAXIA  699
Friedreich ataxia  699
Ataxia with isolated vitamin E 
deficiency  699
Abetalipoproteinemia  700
Ataxia telangiectasia  700
Early onset ataxia with oculomotor apraxia 
and hypoalbuminemia  700
Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia  
syndrome  700
Hexosaminidase deficiency  
(GM2 gangliosidoses)  700
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis 
(­cholestanolosis)  700
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis  701
Coeliac disease  701
INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS OF THE CENTRAL 
NERVOUS SYSTEM  701
CONCLUSION  701
INTRODUCTION
Despite the significant advances seen in laboratory 
and imaging diagnostics, many of the conditions seen 
by ­neurologists are still diagnosed on purely clinical 
grounds. In neurology, there remains no substitute for a 
meticulous clinical history and careful examination.
Neurological 
investigations 
include 
all 
imaging 
­modalities, neurophysiological tests of both the central 
and peripheral nervous system, and laboratory based 
­investigations, 
including 
haematology, 
biochemistry, 
immunology, histopathology and cytology. This chapter will 
focus on the neurological conditions for which biochemical 
abnormalities are pertinent. Separate chapters cover the bio-
chemistry of cerebrospinal fluid and muscle disease and other 
conditions that overlap with general neurological practice.
ENCEPHALOPATHY
‘Encephalopathy’ is a term for any diffuse disease of the 
brain that alters brain function or structure. It is a com-
mon condition that encompasses coma, acute confusional 
684	
Clinical biochemistry
state, delirium and dementia. The hallmark of encepha-
lopathy is an altered mental state.
Encephalopathy is caused either by processes that 
directly affect the structure of the brain or by systemic 
and metabolic factors (see Box  36.1). Encephalopathy 
can occur acutely (over hours to days); subacutely (over 
weeks to months) or chronically (over years) (Table 36.1). 
Although the mechanism of many causes of encepha-
lopathy is well understood, the pathophysiology of meta-
bolic encephalopathy is less clear but is likely to involve 
changes in amino acids and neurotransmitter profile.
For patients presenting with altered consciousness, a 
detailed history often has to be taken from family, friends 
and other healthcare professionals, to determine pre-
existing medical conditions and time of onset of ­altered 
mental state. For example, patients presenting with 
­altered consciousness following apnoea or cardiac arrest 
are likely to be suffering from a hypoxic–ischaemic en-
cephalopathy but alternative causes need to be excluded. 
Access to medication, previous psychiatric problems or 
use of illicit drugs may suggest intoxication. If the patient 
is known to have diabetes, hypo- or hyperglycaemia is 
likely. Patients on diuretics are at risk of hyponatraemia.
Both a general systemic examination and detailed neu-
rological examination are required to determine the cause 
of encephalopathy. Specific breath smells suggest certain 
causes, e.g. ammonia-like (uraemia); fruity-smelling (ketoaci-
dosis); musty or fishy (acute hepatic failure); onion (par-
aldehyde), and garlic (organophosphates). Hypertension 
may indicate amfetamine or cocaine intoxication or a hy-
pertensive encephalopathy. Examination of the skin may 
show signs of chronic liver disease, haemodialysis fistula, 
previous sternotomy scars from cardiac surgery or injec-
tion marks from intravenous drug use.
Neurological examination should be divided into ­focal 
(localizing) and global (non-localizing) signs. Global 
signs suggest a process affecting the whole brain and 
­include altered consciousness (acute confusional state, 
delirium and coma). The level of coma can be quantified 
with the Glasgow Coma Score, for which the minimum 
score is 3/15 (Table 36.2).
Other global neurological signs include generalized sei-
zures, tremor, asterixis (abnormal jerking tremor in hands 
seen in liver flap) and myoclonus (involuntary brief jerk-like 
twitching, often multifocal). Focal signs indicate a localized 
problem within one part of the brain, for example visual or 
language disturbance from cerebral cortex pathology or eye 
movement disturbance, slurred speech or swallowing prob-
lems from brainstem pathology. Focal neurological signs usu-
ally suggest a primary neurological cause of encephalopathy.
TABLE 36.2  Glasgow coma scale (GCS)
The total is obtained by adding together the scores for each column
Best eye response
Best verbal response
Best motor response
No eye opening
1
No verbal response
1
No motor response
1
Eyes open in response 
to pain
2
Incomprehensible 
sounds
2
Extension to pain
2
Eyes open to speech
3
Inappropriate words
3
Abnormal flexion to 
pain
3
Eyes open spontaneously
4
Confused
4
Withdrawal to pain
4
 
 
Oriented
5
Localizes to pain
5
 
 
 
 
Obeys commands
6
TABLE 36.1  Neurological causes 
of encephalopathy
Acute
(hours to days)
Trauma
Infection (e.g. meningitis/
encephalitis)
Vascular (e.g. stroke)
Space occupying lesion
Subacute
(weeks–months)
Infection (e.g. HIV, progressive 
multifocal leukoencephalopathy, 
Lyme disease)
Neoplastic (primary or secondary)
Inflammatory (e.g. cerebral 
vasculitis)
Autoimmune encephalitis (immune-
mediated, paraneoplastic, 
Hashimoto)
Degenerative (e.g. Creutzfeldt–Jakob 
disease; mitochondrial disease)
Chronic (years)
Degenerative (Alzheimer disease, 
Parkinson disease)
BOX 36.1	
Some causes of metabolic 
encephalopathy
•	 Toxic
•	 Alcohol
•	 Drugs
•	 Carbon monoxide
•	 Nutritional disorders
•	 Thiamin deficiency (Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome)
•	 Vitamin B12 deficiency
•	 Organ failure
•	 Hepatic failure
•	 Established renal failure
•	 Cardiorespiratory 
failure 
(hypoxic/ischaemic 
and 
hypercapnic)
•	 Diabetic disorders
•	 Hypoglycaemia
•	 Hyperglycaemia (diabetic ketoacidosis and hyperosmo-
lar hyperglycaemic state)
•	 Disturbances of sodium and water balance
•	 Hyponatraemia
•	 Hypernatraemia
•	 Hypercalcaemia
•	 Septic encephalopathy
	
36  Biochemical aspects of neurological disease	
685
Two-thirds of encephalopathies are secondary to 
­systemic metabolic factors. It is therefore important that 
these are excluded before assuming there is a neurological 
cause. Many metabolic encephalopathies are reversible if 
corrected promptly. Investigations for a patient with en-
cephalopathy should include blood tests, urinalysis, im-
aging studies, and, when indicated, cerebrospinal fluid 
examination and an electroencephalogram. Increasingly, 
laboratory investigations can be used to make a defi-
nite diagnosis of neurological causes of encephalopathy 
­owing to the improved recognition of antibodies for 
­autoimmune encephalitis syndromes and biomarkers in 
neurodegenerative disease (Table 36.3).
Toxic and metabolic encephalopathy
Toxic encephalopathy is caused by exogenous substances 
including solvents, drugs, radiation, paints, industrial 
chemicals, and certain metals. Some of the more com-
mon causes are discussed below. More details can be 
found in Chapter 40.
Carbon monoxide
This colourless and odourless gas is the most com-
mon cause of accidental poisoning in Europe and 
North America, as well as being a major cause of sui-
cidal deaths. When 20–30% of total haemoglobin is 
bound to carbon monoxide, it causes headache, nau-
sea and shortness of breath; when 50–60% is bound, 
coma results. Carbon monoxide exposure is detected 
by measuring the carboxyhaemoglobin concentration 
in blood. Carbon monoxide poisoning is treated with 
oxygen, using hyperbaric facilities in severe cases, if 
available.
Alcohol
Alcohols, including ethanol, produce an altered mental 
state by central nervous system depression. Methanol and 
ethylene glycol similarly cause direct central nervous sys-
tem depression but are also toxic via metabolism in the 
liver to formic acid (methanol) and glycolic and oxalic 
acids (ethylene glycol).
Methanol and ethylene glycol concentrations can be 
measured in the blood but usually the suspicion is raised 
by other biochemical abnormalities. Poisoning with either 
causes a high anion gap metabolic acidosis. Treatment is 
by blocking the action of alcohol dehydrodenase with 
ethanol or fomepizole to decrease the production of toxic 
metabolites.
Opioids
Overdose causes coma, pinpoint pupils and respiratory 
depression. This can be from iatrogenic, accidental or 
suicidal overdose (e.g. morphine) or from use of illicit 
drugs (e.g. heroin). Diagnosis is usually suspected from 
the clinical triad but a rapid urine screening test can con-
firm opioid exposure. Treatment is with naloxone, given 
as a bolus dose followed by an infusion if the patient re-
sponds, in addition to supportive care.
TABLE 36.3  Investigations for encephalopathy
Test
Cause of encephalopathy
First-line
Blood/serum
Full blood count
Elevated white cell count 
(infection), macrocytosis 
(alcohol, hypothyroidism)
Serum electrolytes 
(osmolality if required)
Hypo- and hypernatraemia, 
hypercalcaemia
Glucose
Hypo- and hyperglycaemia
Urea and creatinine
Uraemia
Liver function tests
Hepatic failure
Arterial [H
+] (pH)
Diabetic ketoacidosis 
and hypercapnic 
encephalopathy
Arterial PO2 and PCO2
Hypoxia/ischaemia and 
hypercapnia
C-reactive protein
Infectious
Erythrocyte sedimentation 
rate
Infectious and autoimmune
Thyroid function tests
Hashimoto thyroiditis
Vitamin B12 and folate
Nutritional deficiency
Urine
Ketones
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Drug and alcohol screen
Toxic
Other
CT brain
Structural
Second-line (as appropriate to the suspected clinical 
condition)
Blood/serum
Ammonia
Hepatic failure, inborn 
errors of metabolism, 
sodium valproate
Angiotensin-converting-
enzyme
Sarcoidosis
Anti-nuclear, anti-
neutrophil cytoplasmic, 
anticardiolipin 
antibodies, extractable 
nuclear antigens
Cerebral vasculitis
Thyroid peroxidase 
antibodies
Hashimoto thyroiditis/
steroid responsive 
encephalopathy
Lactate dehydrogenase
Lymphoma
Syphilis, Borrelia and HIV 
serology
Infectious
Voltage gated 
potassium channel, 
N-methyl-autoimmune
d-aspartate receptor, 
glutamate receptor 
and glutamic acid 
decarboxylase antibodies
Antineuronal antibodies
Paraneoplastic
Cerebrospinal fluid
Microbiology
Infectious, inflammatory, 
autoimmune and 
paraneoplastic
Protein, glucose
Viral PCR
Infectious
Oligoclonal bands
Inflammatory
Antineuronal antibodies
Paraneoplastic
14-3-3 protein
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease
Cytology
Carcinomatous meningitis
Other
MRI brain
Structural, infectious, 
autoimmune
Electroencephalography
Seizures
686	
Clinical biochemistry
Thiamin (vitamin B1) deficiency
Wernicke–Korsakoff encephalopathy is a clinical triad of 
confusion, ataxia and ophthalmoplegia (eye movement 
disorder). It comprises two syndromes. First, Wernicke 
encephalopathy, an acute or subacute confusional state 
with ataxia and ophthalmoplegia and second, Korsakoff 
dementia, characterized by severe amnesia and confab-
ulation. The former is often reversible but the latter is 
irreversible and persistent. Wernicke–Korsakoff enceph-
alopathy is caused by thiamin deficiency and is most com-
monly seen in alcoholics but can also occur in patients 
with anorexia, hyperemesis gravidarum, those receiving 
total parenteral nutrition, or in the context of malabsorp-
tion and refeeding syndrome. The role of measurement 
of plasma thiamin concentrations in diagnosis and moni-
toring remains controversial and functional assessment by 
assay of red cell transketolase is no longer used by most 
laboratories for diagnosis. Therefore, laboratory tests are 
aimed at excluding other conditions and providing evi-
dence of risk factors (e.g. macrocytosis and deranged liver 
function tests in alcoholism). Brain magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) can show signal change in the thalami, 
mammillary bodies, tectal plate and periaqueductal grey 
matter. Treatment is with parenteral thiamin. In the UK, 
normal practice is to give thiamin in a ­vitamin complex 
of riboflavin, nicotinamide, pyridoxine and ascorbic acid. 
Early treatment can reverse the symptoms rapidly and 
prevent dementia. Administration of intravenous glucose 
(including as part of parenteral nutrition) to patients who 
are severely malnourished, can exhaust their (already 
depleted) supply of thiamin and precipitate Wernicke–
Korsakoff encephalopathy. Thiamin should therefore 
be administered before starting a glucose infusion in pa-
tients at high risk.
Vitamin B12 deficiency
This causes a typical pattern of degeneration of the white 
matter producing encephalopathy, myelopathy (subacute 
combined degeneration of the spinal cord), peripheral neu-
ropathy and optic neuropathy. Vitamin B12 concentrations 
are easily measured and, if deficiency is corrected early, 
further damage can be prevented (See p. 688 and p. 693).
Liver failure
Hepatic encephalopathy occurs as a consequence of liver 
function disturbance and its severity is graded from 0 to 4 
(Table 36.4).
Two situations can lead to severe hepatic encephalopa-
thy – acute fulminant hepatic failure and decompensation 
of chronic liver disease. In the UK, acute liver failure is 
most commonly from paracetamol overdose or viral hepa-
titis, and chronic liver disease from alcohol abuse or chronic 
hepatitis B or C infection. Encephalopathy is thought to 
develop because hepatocellular dysfunction produces 
neurotoxins (e.g. ammonia), false neurotransmitters and 
benzodiazepine-like substances. In chronic liver disease, 
there can be the additional effect of porto–systemic shunt-
ing. This allows significant quantities of ammonia, formed 
in the bowel from protein, to reach the systemic circulation. 
The severity of the neurological disorder correlates poorly 
with ammonia concentrations so measurement rarely con-
tributes to management. ‘Liver function tests’ will confirm 
that the concentration of bilirubin is high, often with ab-
normal liver enzyme activities and, more importantly, 
poor synthetic function with abnormal clotting. Plasma 
paracetamol concentration can be measured if overdose is 
a possibility. Patients with acute liver failure may require 
liver transplantation for survival but the encephalopathy of 
chronic disease may be reversed by conservative measures 
(see Chapter 14 for further details).
Chronic kidney disease and established  
renal failure
Uraemic encephalopathy presents with apathy, fatigue, 
inattentiveness and irritability, followed by confusion, 
hallucinations, slurred speech, tremor and asterixis. The 
mechanism is unclear but correction of uraemia reverses 
the encephalopathy. Suggested mechanisms include re-
tention of organic acids, elevation of phosphate con-
centration in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), increased 
calcium content of the cerebral cortex owing to the ac-
tion of PTH, and alteration of concentrations of neu-
rotransmitters or proinflammatory cytokines. Although 
the degree of the rise in urea correlates with the severity 
of encephalopathy, it is not thought to be causative. The 
investigation, monitoring and treatment of uraemia are 
discussed in Chapter 7.
Respiratory failure
Hypercapnia occurs in respiratory failure either second-
ary to lung disease (e.g. chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease) or to mechanical problems such as neurological 
TABLE 36.4  Grading of hepatic encephalopathy 
(West Haven classification system)
Grading
Symptoms
0
Minimal hepatic encephalopathy. Lack of 
detectable changes in personality or 
behaviour. Minimal changes in memory, 
concentration, intellectual function, and 
coordination. Asterixis absent
1
Trivial lack of awareness. Shortened attention 
span. Impaired addition or subtraction. 
Hypersomnia, insomnia, or inversion of 
sleep pattern. Euphoria, depression, or 
irritability. Mild confusion. Slowing of ability 
to perform mental tasks. Asterixis can be 
detected
2
Lethargy or apathy. Slurred speech. Obvious 
asterixis. Drowsiness, lethargy, gross 
deficits in ability to perform mental tasks. 
Obvious personality changes, inappropriate 
behaviour and intermittent disorientation, 
usually regarding time
3
Somnolent but can be aroused. Unable 
to perform mental tasks. Disorientation 
about time and place, marked confusion, 
amnesia. Occasional fits of rage, present but 
incomprehensible speech
4
Coma with or without response to painful 
stimuli
	
36  Biochemical aspects of neurological disease	
687
disease (e.g. myasthenia gravis). Clinically, hypercapnia 
presents with headache, papilloedema, mental slowing, 
drowsiness, confusion, coma and asterixis. The mecha-
nism is unclear but thought to be due to a direct effect of 
carbon dioxide possibly on the hydrogen ion concentra-
tion (pH) of the CSF. Hypercapnia can be confirmed by 
measurement of PCO2 on an arterial blood sample. Coma 
can occur with PCO2 >9 kPa. Treatment is of the under-
lying cause and, once corrected, there is no prolonged 
cerebral damage (see Chapter 5 for further details).
Cardiorespiratory failure
Hypoxic–ischaemic encephalopathy is caused by hypox-
aemia and/or reduced blood flow to the brain from fail-
ure of the cardiac system, the respiratory system or both 
(e.g. myocardial infarction, drowning). When cerebral 
perfusion pressure falls, there is a failure of autoregula-
tion leading to ischaemia and hypoxia and to cell death 
by both necrosis and apoptosis. The diagnosis is usually 
evident from the history. Myoclonus is common (Lance–
Adams syndrome). There is a wide spectrum of clinical 
outcomes depending on the degree and duration of the 
insult from full recovery to severe prolonged disability 
and death.
Disorders of glucose metabolism
Hypoglycaemia causes confusion, seizures and coma 
and can cause permanent neurological damage if not re-
versed quickly. Up to 15% of patients with diabetes will 
have at least one episode of hypoglycaemic coma in their 
lifetime. Recurrent hypoglycaemia, such as that caused 
by an insulinoma, can be mistaken for epilepsy. The 
brain contains 1–2 g of glucose stored as glycogen, which 
is utilized within approximately 30 min if blood glucose 
concentration remains low. Ketones can also be used as 
an energy source but this is not sufficient in prolonged 
hypoglycaemia, nor are they available when hypoglycae-
mia is caused by high insulin concentrations. The most 
common causes of hypoglycaemia are accidental or de-
liberate overdose of insulin, insulinoma, and depletion 
of liver glycogen (e.g. acute liver failure, alcohol binge, 
severe starvation). Hypoglycaemia is easily detected by 
blood glucose measurement at the bedside (although 
it should be confirmed by laboratory measurements) 
(see Chapter 17 for further details).
Hyperglycaemic coma occurs in two forms – diabetic 
ketoacidosis and the hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state. 
Coma is a late feature of diabetic ketoacidosis and de-
velops when hyperglycaemia, dehydration, acidosis and 
shock are severe. Cerebral oedema is a rare but often fa-
tal complication both of the condition and its treatment. 
The coma of the hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state 
usually develops more insidiously and occurs in elderly 
patients, often with previously undiagnosed diabetes 
mellitus. Extreme hyperglycaemia with greatly increased 
plasma osmolality, electrolyte losses and dehydration ex-
acerbated by impaired thirst awareness, are all thought to 
contribute to the development of the encephalopathy (see 
Chapter 16 for further details).
Hyponatremia
Hyponatremia has many causes, including liver and 
­cardiac failure, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis 
(neurological causes of which include head trauma, bacte-
rial meningitis, encephalitis, cerebral infarction, subdural 
and subarachnoid haemorrhage), vomiting and diuretic 
use. The severity of the symptoms is related to the rapid-
ity of decline in plasma sodium. This is because hypona-
tremia causes extracellular hyposmolarity and a tendency 
for free water to shift from the vascular space to the in-
tracellular space. When plasma sodium concentration 
falls slowly, over a period of several days or weeks, the 
brain is capable of compensating by extrusion of solutes 
to the extracellular space. This reduces the flow of free 
water into the intracellular space and symptoms are much 
milder for a given degree of hyponatraemia. When the 
plasma sodium concentration falls rapidly, this compen-
satory mechanism is overwhelmed and severe cerebral 
oedema may ensue. For example, a sodium concentration 
falling from normal to <110 mmol/L over 24–48 h will 
often cause coma. It is necessary to correct the plasma 
sodium concentration in a controlled manner because of 
the risk of central pontine myelinolysis if the increase is 
too rapid (see Chapter 4).
Central pontine myelinolysis is characterized by 
quadriparesis, dysphagia, dysarthria, diplopia and altered 
consciousness. Areas of the brain other than the pons are 
also often involved. Magnetic resonance imaging reveals 
signal change within these areas but the appearances may 
be normal early in the course of the disease. Central pon-
tine myelinolysis may prove fatal, and incomplete recov-
ery is common in survivors.
Hypernatraemia
Common causes of hypernatraemia include diabetes in-
sipidus, hyperglycaemia, diarrhoea and fluid deprivation. 
Again, it is the rate of change of sodium concentration 
that is important rather than the actual values. A so-
dium concentration of >160 mmol/L can cause coma 
due to cerebral cellular dehydration if it develops rapidly. 
Treatment depends on the cause of the disorder and the 
total body fluid volume (see Chapter 4).
Hypercalaemia
Severe hypercalcaemia (>3.4 mmol/L) can be lead to 
coma, preceded by fatigue, headache, muscle weakness, 
irritability and confusion. High concentrations of cal-
cium ions decrease neuronal excitability, which together 
with dehydration is thought to cause the neurological 
problems (see Chapter 6).
Septic encephalopathy
Severe extracranial infection can be associated with an 
impaired mental state. The pathophysiological mecha-
nism involves reduced cerebral blood flow and oxygen 
extraction by the brain, cerebral oedema, disruption 
of the blood–brain barrier owing to inflammatory me-
diators acting on the cerebrovascular endothelium, and 
688	
Clinical biochemistry
BOX 36.2	
Causes of metabolic spinal cord 
disorders
•	 Vitamin B12 deficiency
•	 Folate deficiency
•	 Copper deficiency (copper deficient myelopathy)
•	 Vitamin E deficiency
•	 Toxic myelopathy (e.g. lathyrism, fluorosis, drugs)
•	 Hepatic myelopathy
•	 Metabolic myelopathy of genetic origin
•	 Hexosaminidase A deficiency
•	 Adrenomyeloneuropathy
abnormal neurotransmitter compositions. Diagnosis 
of sepsis can be aided by the finding of a raised white 
blood cell count and raised inflammatory markers, and 
by blood cultures. Treatment is of the underlying infec-
tion with supportive care.
Autoimmune encephalopathy
The last decade has seen significant advances in our under-
standing of antibody-mediated encephalopathies. There 
are two types of antibodies detectable in blood in these 
conditions (Table 36.5): paraneoplastic antibodies to intra-
cellular targets that are associated with cancer but are not 
pathogenetic, and antibodies to the extracellular domain of 
neuronal cell-surface proteins that directly cause encepha-
litis and are also often associated with cancer. Autoimmune 
encephalitis typically presents with subacute memory loss, 
psychiatric and behavioural disturbance and seizures. The 
detection of one of the specific antibodies supports a di-
agnosis of paraneoplastic encephalitis. Treatment is of the 
underlying cancer and with immunotherapy.
Hashimoto encephalopathy presents with seizures, 
behavioural and psychiatric manifestations, movement 
disorders and coma and is associated with the presence of 
high titres of anti-thyroglobulin or anti-thyroid peroxi-
dase (TPO, antimicrosomal) antibodies. The condition 
can present without any features of thyroid disease. It is 
unclear whether the anti-thyroid antibodies are pathoge-
netic or simply represent an immune epiphenomenon but 
it is important not to miss this diagnosis as the condition 
responds to treatment with steroids.
Dementia
Dementia is a syndrome characterized by progressive 
deterioration of cognitive function without alteration of 
consciousness. Cognitive deficits most commonly affect 
memory, but other cognitive domains such as language, 
praxis, visual perception and most notably executive func-
tion are also often affected. Diagnosis of dementia is gen-
erally by clinical criteria during life, although many of its 
causes are defined on the basis of histopathological crite-
ria with the consequence that definitive diagnosis can only 
be made at post-mortem. However, over the last few years 
a number of laboratory CSF biomarkers have emerged 
and have an increasing role in diagnosis. Cerebrospinal 
fluid Aβ-40, Aβ-42, total tau and phosphorylated tau pro-
teins are the most sensitive biomarkers for the diagnosis 
of Alzheimer disease and 14-3-3 protein for the diagnosis of 
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (see Chapter 34).
SPINAL CORD DISORDERS
Spinal cord disease usually presents with motor and/or 
sensory symptoms in either the upper and lower or 
just the lower limbs, depending on the site of the in-
sult. Clinical signs include increased tone in the limbs, 
brisk reflexes and, typically, well-preserved muscle bulk. 
Bowel and bladder function can be compromised. The 
list of possible causes of spinal cord disease is extensive 
and includes vascular, degenerative, compressive, in-
flammatory, malignant, metabolic and infectious condi-
tions. Metabolic causes include vitamin B12 deficiency 
(Box 36.2) and adrenomyeloneuropathy. A normal MRI 
scan of the spinal axis will exclude a significant number of 
differential diagnoses.
Vitamin B12 deficiency (subacute combined 
degeneration of the spinal cord)
Deficiency of vitamin B12 can produce haematological 
and neurological abnormalities: features of gastrointesti-
nal disease may also be apparent (see Chapter 12). From 
an early stage, it is the spinal cord that is predominantly 
affected. The onset of symptoms is insidious, with sym-
metrical, uncomfortable, tingling paraesthesiae, initially 
in the feet but later involving the hands. As the condition 
progresses, the gait becomes ataxic (sensory ataxia owing 
to loss of proprioception) and the limbs become weaker 
and increasingly spastic. Additional problems include peri­
pheral polyneuropathy, optic neuropathy, psychiatric dis-
turbance and dementia.
The exact pathophysiological process leading to 
neuronal damage in vitamin B12 deficiency is unknown. 
Vitamin B12 is involved as a cofactor in the conversion 
TABLE 36.5  Antibody-mediated encephalopathy
Antibody
Associated tumour
Paraneoplastic antineuronal antibodies (intracellular)
Anti-Hu
Bronchial small cell 
carcinoma (SCLC)
Anti-Ma2 (anti-Ta)
Testicular tumour
Anti-collapsin response 
mediator protein 5 (anti-CV2)
Lymphoma, SCLC
Antineuronal nuclear 3
SCLC
Autoimmune receptor antibodies (extracellular)
Voltage-gated potassium 
channel
Uncommon
AMPAR receptor (glutamate 
receptor 1,2 subunits)
SCLC, breast, 
thymoma (70%)
γ-Aminobutyric acid B-receptor
SCLC (47%)
Glutamic acid decarboxylase 
receptor
Rare
N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor
Ovarian teratoma 
(20–59%), rarely 
testicular teratoma or 
SCLC.
AMPAR, amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid.
	
36  Biochemical aspects of neurological disease	
689
of homocysteine to methionine and of methylmalonyl- 
CoA to succinyl-CoA. It is possible that the impaired 
synthesis of methionine leads to a depletion of 
S-adenosylmethionine, which is required for myelin 
synthesis.
The diagnosis is confirmed by measuring vitamin B12 
concentration in the serum. In some patients, the con-
centration may be only ‘low-normal’. In borderline cases, 
measurement of homocysteine and methylmalonate con-
centrations can be useful. It is important that the diag-
nosis is made as early as possible as this is a potentially 
reversible condition. Magnetic resonance imaging of the 
spine often shows the spinal cord to be atrophic and can 
show signal change in the dorsal columns.
Folate deficiency
Folate deficiency is usually associated with other nutri-
tional deficiencies. Folate antagonists (e.g. methotrex-
ate, trimethoprim and pyrimethamine) are also potential 
causes. Neurological manifestations are rare and the 
same as with vitamin B12 deficiency. Treatment is by fo-
late replacement, although any vitamin B12 deficiency 
should be treated first to prevent exacerbation of spinal 
cord degeneration.
Copper deficiency
Copper deficiency is rare and causes both haematologi-
cal and neurological disease. Neurological manifesta-
tions include myelopathy, peripheral neuropathy and 
optic neuropathy. Copper deficiency was recognized in 
ruminants (swayback disease) long before it was identi-
fied in humans. The presentation can be similar to that 
of subacute combined degeneration of the spinal cord. 
It is usually secondary to gastric surgery, gastrointestinal 
diseases or total parenteral nutrition, or to excess intake 
of zinc or iron, which reduce copper absorption in the 
gut. Copper deficiency myelopathy has been attributed 
to ingestion of zinc contained in denture cream in some 
patients. Treatment is with oral or intravenous copper 
replacement.
Vitamin E deficiency
Vitamin E deficiency is rare, and causes a spinocerebellar 
ataxia, retinopathy, myopathy and anaemia. Poor diet is 
not usually sufficient cause unless associated with mal-
absorption. Abetalipoproteinemia is a rare inherited dis-
order of fat metabolism that results in poor absorption 
of dietary fat and vitamin E. Vitamin E deficiency is dis-
cussed further below (see ataxia).
Hepatic myelopathy
Hepatic myelopathy is a rare complication of chronic 
liver disease. It has been suggested that it is caused by 
the neurotoxicity of ammonia or other metabolites by-
passing normal liver metabolism. It is characterized by 
spastic paraparesis with minimal sensory and sphinc-
teric involvement. Diagnosis is a process of exclusion 
requiring normal CSF analysis and brain imaging. Liver 
transplantation may result in improvement, especially if 
performed early in the course of the disease.
Hexosaminidase A deficiency
This is a progressive neurodegenerative disease with vari-
able age of onset and rate of progression and hence vari-
able prognosis. The clinical presentation of the chronic 
form of hexosaminidase A deficiency may mimic spi-
nocerebellar degeneration, Friedreich ataxia, or amyo-
trophic lateral sclerosis (see below).
Adrenomyeloneuropathy
This is the commonest clinical variant of adrenoleuko-
dystrophy, a disorder of peroxisomal fatty acid oxidation 
causing the accumulation of very long chain fatty acids 
in myelin, adrenal cortex and Leydig cells of the testes. 
Patients with an adrenomyeloneuropathy presentation of 
this X-linked recessive disorder present in their third de-
cade with a progressive spastic paraparesis and sphincter 
dysfunction. A sensorimotor peripheral neuropathy may 
be a feature and ataxia and dementia are seen occasionally. 
Adrenal insufficiency will often have been present since 
childhood and there may be hypogonadism. Around 50% 
of heterozygous females will show some symptoms later 
in life. The clinical findings and magnetic resonance im-
aging point to the diagnosis, which is confirmed by dem-
onstrating hypoadrenalism and elevated concentrations 
of very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) in plasma and 
cultured skin fibroblasts. Genetic testing is available. The 
only gene in which mutations are known to cause adreno-
leukodystrophy is ABCD1, which codes for a peroxisomal 
membrane transporter protein, although molecular ge-
netic testing is rarely required to confirm the disease, es-
pecially in a male. Treatment is with steroid replacement, 
symptomatic management and supportive care.
PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY
Peripheral nerve disorders are the most common 
­neurological diseases and their prevalence has been es-
timated to be 2–8% of the adult population. There are 
many causes of peripheral neuropathy and the range of 
clinical presentation is wide. Peripheral neuropathy can 
be categorized by the clinical pattern: mononeuropathy 
(e.g. carpal tunnel syndrome); multiple mononeuropa-
thy (e.g. mononeuritis multiplex in vasculitis), or distal 
symmetrical polyneuropathy (e.g. neuropathy in diabe-
tes mellitus). With the help of electrodiagnostic test-
ing (nerve conduction studies and electromyography), 
neuropathies can be further categorized as demyelinat-
ing, axonal or mixed type of neuropathy. Appropriate 
laboratory tests may help to identify a specific diagnosis. 
Neuropathies with a specific metabolic basis are listed in 
Box 36.3. Peripheral neuropathies of toxic or metabolic 
aetiologies are usually symmetrical, distal, sensorimotor 
and axonal. The American Academy of Neurology has 
published practice parameters to guide laboratory and 
genetic testing in distal symmetric polyneuropathy (see 
Further reading).
690	
Clinical biochemistry
Neuropathy can present with a variety of signs and 
symptoms. Symptoms can be classified as either posi-
tive or negative. Positive symptoms reflect inappropriate 
nerve activities, whereas negative symptoms reflect re-
duced nerve activity. Positive sensory symptoms are burn-
ing or lancinating pain and paraesthesiae, whilst negative 
sensory symptoms are numbness, lost of proprioception 
and difficulty differentiating cold and hot sensations. 
Weakness and fatigue can be considered as negative motor 
symptoms, while cramps, muscle twitching and myoky-
mia are positive motor symptoms. The findings on clini-
cal examination of the sensory systems include sensory 
loss, trophic skin changes, sensory ataxia and Charcot 
joints. Features of motor dysfunction are dominated by 
lower motor neuron wasting, normal tone, absent reflexes 
and flexor plantar responses. Peripheral nerves should 
also be palpated to check for thickening, which occurs 
in leprosy, amyloidosis and acromegaly. Gastrointestinal 
and cardiovascular symptoms can be prominent features 
in autonomic dysfunction, causing bloating, constipa-
tion, diarrhoea, light headedness, palpitations and exces-
sive sweating. Blood pressure should be checked with the 
patient lying and standing to document a postural drop 
caused by autonomic dysfunction. Neuropathies with a 
metabolic cause tend to be symmetrical, other than for 
some types related to diabetes, and with variable onset.
The investigations should be guided by the clinical 
picture. Polyneuropathy can arise in the course of many 
illnesses, particularly diabetes (Table 36.6). Initial investi-
gations would reasonably include the tests listed in Box 36.4 
and should yield a diagnosis in 60–90% of patients. The 
majority of patients will have diabetes or alcohol exposure. 
There are no diagnostically useful antibody assays. More 
invasive tests (Box 36.5) are best undertaken after consul-
tation with a physician or neurologist with an interest in 
peripheral neuropathy. The nerve conduction tests will 
reveal whether the neuropathy is axonal or demyelinating.
Despite all efforts, about one-third of patients with 
peripheral neuropathies remain without a diagnosis. 
About 40% of these will be found to have impaired glu-
cose tolerance, although how much this contributes di-
rectly to the development of neuropathy is still debated. 
Treatment with diet and exercise reduces the rate of 
progression to diabetes and may also improve the neu-
ropathy, at least in the short term.
BOX 36.5	
Further investigation of patients 
with peripheral neuropathy
•	 Glucose tolerance test
•	 Nerve conduction studies, electromyography
•	 Bence–Jones protein in urine
•	 Immunological tests for antineuronal antibodies, anti-
ganglioside antibodies, markers for vasculitis, anti myelin-
associated glycoprotein antibodies, other connective 
tissue disorders
•	 Microbiology tests including for Lyme disease; HIV se-
rology in at risk patients
•	 Cerebrospinal fluid for cells, protein, oligoclonal bands
•	 Tests for Sjögren syndrome, e.g. salivary flow rate, 
Schirmer test, Rose Bengal test
•	 Search for carcinoma, lymphoma or myeloma
•	 Molecular genetic tests
•	 Toxicology screening
TABLE 36.6  Most common causes of a 
­symmetrical neuropathy
Condition
Proportion of symmetrical 
neuropathies (%)
Diabetes
11–41
Chronic idiopathic axonal 
neuropathy
10–40
Paraproteinaemia
9–10
Alcohol misuse
7
Chronic kidney disease
4
BOX 36.4	
Initial investigation of patients with 
peripheral neuropathy
•	 Full blood count and erythrocyte sedimentation rate 
(ESR)
•	 Fasting glucose
•	 Thyroid function tests
•	 Creatinine
•	 Liver function tests
•	 Vitamin B12 with metabolites (methylmalonic acid with or 
without homocysteine) if low-normal
•	 Antinuclear antibodies (ANA)
•	 Serum protein electrophoresis with immunofixation if 
required
•	 Chest X-ray
BOX 36.3	
Metabolic causes of peripheral 
neuropathy
•	 Diabetes
•	 Chronic kidney disease
•	 Liver disease
•	 Endocrine
•	 Immune mediated and paraproteinaemic
•	 Nutritional deficiency
•	 Vitamin deficiency
•	 Vitamin B12
•	 Thiamin
•	 Pyridoxine
•	 Vitamin E
•	 Niacin (vitamin B3)
•	 Pantothenic acid (vitamin B5)
•	 Folic acid
•	 Neuropathy associated with bariatric surgery
•	 Hypophosphataemia
•	 Copper deficiency
•	 Strachan syndrome
•	 Metabolic
•	 Refsum disease
•	 Porphyria
•	 Fabry disease
•	 Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis
•	 Tangier disease
•	 Amyloid
•	 Mitochondrial disorders
•	 Paraneoplastic
	
36  Biochemical aspects of neurological disease	
691
Patients with non-painful chronic idiopathic neuropa-
thies have been found to have higher blood triglyceride 
concentrations and more exposure to environmental 
toxins compared with controls. Currently, it is unclear 
whether these observations will translate into any thera-
peutic benefit.
Small fibre painful axonal neuropathy
There is a small subset of patients in whom small nerve 
fibres alone are affected and in whom pain and tempera-
ture sensation but not large fibre modalities (vibration 
and proprioception) are impaired. Conventional clinical 
neurophysiological tests are normal because they do not 
assess small nerve fibre function. Most patients with a 
small fibre neuropathy have diabetes mellitus or at least 
impaired glucose tolerance but a few have Sjögren syn-
drome and other rare causes.
Diabetic neuropathies
Peripheral neuropathy is rarely encountered in young 
patients with newly diagnosed diabetes mellitus but dia-
betes presenting in older patients is frequently associ-
ated with a neuropathy and this may be the presenting 
problem. Studies have suggested that after 25 years of 
diabetes, about 50% of patients will have evidence of a 
neuropathy, most commonly chronic diabetic peripheral 
neuropathy. Poor glycaemic control, duration of diabe-
tes, hyperlipidaemia (particularly hypertriglyceridae-
mia), increased albumin excretion and obesity are risk 
factors for the development of neuropathy.
Although distal symmetrical peripheral neuropathy is 
the commonest presentation, the manifestations of dia-
betic neuropathy are varied and can be subdivided clini-
cally into the symmetric polyneuropathies and the focal 
or multifocal neuropathies (Box 36.6).
Symmetrical polyneuropathies
The onset of distal sensory and sensorimotor polyneu-
ropathy is insidious, with mild symptoms of numbness 
and paraesthesiae affecting the toes and feet. A burning 
pain, worse at night, may be a prominent symptom. The 
typical findings on examination are sensory loss to pin-
prick, light touch and vibration sensation in a stocking 
distribution, with absent ankle reflexes. Occasionally, 
there may be mild distal weakness. Foot ulceration and 
neuropathic arthropathy are potentially serious compli-
cations related to loss of pain sensation. Ulcers tend to be 
situated at pressure points – over the toes, heels, malleoli 
and metatarsal heads. In some patients, neuropathy may 
be precipitated by the institution of therapy with either 
insulin or oral hypoglycaemics and even dietary control. 
The neuropathy then becomes evident 4–6 weeks after 
starting treatment, with painful paraesthesiae affecting 
the lower half of the legs.
Acute painful neuropathy is a distinct entity character-
ized by marked weight loss over a short period of time 
followed by severe burning pains in the feet with contact 
discomfort. By maintaining good glycaemic control, pa-
tients slowly improve.
Proximal symmetrical motor neuropathy and asym-
metrical proximal neuropathy (see below) are now 
termed lumbosacral radiculoplexus neuropathy (diabetic 
amyotrophy). There is often diffuse lower back pain at 
the onset, followed by progressive proximal weakness and 
wasting of the muscles. The knee reflexes are absent but 
sensory loss is minimal. Good glycaemic control leads to 
slow recovery over 12–30 months.
Focal and multifocal neuropathies
An isolated third nerve lesion is the commonest of the 
cranial nerve palsies, usually with sparing of pupillary 
function; in about half of patients, there is aching retro-
orbital pain. The lesion is thought to be an infarct in the 
nerve trunk (i.e. it has microvascular aetiology).
Diabetic patients are more prone to isolated periph-
eral nerve palsies (mononeuropathy), suggesting in-
creased susceptibility to compressive injury as the nerves 
are damaged at sites of pressure (e.g. the ulnar nerve at 
the elbow, the median nerve at the wrist).
Lower limb asymmetrical proximal motor neuropathy, 
also called lumbosacral radiculoplexus neuropathy, is prob-
ably caused by an underlying microvasculitis. The onset is 
usually subacute, with thigh pain, followed by asymmetric 
weakness and wasting of the lower limb muscles, most of-
ten affecting hip and knee flexors. Sensory loss is minimal. 
The weakness can be very severe. Recovery is slow, occur-
ring over 2–4 years and is often incomplete.
Pathophysiology of diabetic neuropathy
The pathophysiology of diabetic neuropathy is only par-
tially understood. A combination of direct axonal injury 
from hyperglycaemia, insulin resistance, central adipos-
ity (visceral fat produces toxic adipokines), endothelial 
injury and microvascular dysfunction is possibly respon-
sible. Hyperglycaemia is known to increase flux through 
the polyol pathway, increase nonenzymatic glycation of 
proteins and enhance oxidative stress.
Polyol pathway. Aldose reductase converts glucose to 
sorbitol, which is then converted to fructose by sorbitol 
dehydrogenase. In nerves from diabetic patients, accu-
mulation of sorbitol leads to a compensatory reduction 
in other osmolytes such as myoinositol and taurine. The 
loss of myoinositol may lead to a reduction in nerve 
Na
+,K
+-ATPase, which then causes nerve conduction 
defects. Aldose reductase inhibitors showed early prom-
ise by ­reversing the biochemical changes in ­experimental 
BOX 36.6	
Presentations of diabetic neuropathy
•	 Symmetrical polyneuropathy sensory/sensorimotor and 
autonomic neuropathy
•	 Lumbo-sacral plexopathy
•	 Focal and multifocal neuropathies
•	 Cranial nerve palsies
•	 Trunk and limb mononeuropathy
•	 Asymmetric lower limb motor neuropathy
•	 Thoracoabdominal neuropathy
692	
Clinical biochemistry
TABLE 36.7  Antibodies associated with Guillain–Barré syndrome
Clinical syndrome
Anti-ganglioside antibody
Isotypes
Comment
Acute inflammatory demyelinating poly 
neuropathy
LM1
IgG
Present in 5–20% of patients. 
Not clinically useful
Acute motor (and sensory) axonal neuropathy
GM1, GM1b, GD1a
IgG
 
Miller–Fisher variant of Guillain–Barré syndrome
GQ1b, GT1a
IgG
Highly specific and sensitive, 
found in 90% of patients
Adapted from Willison HJ, Yuki N. Peripheral neuropathies and anti-glycolipid antibodies. Brain 2002; 125: 2591–2625.
­diabetic nerves but, in clinical trials, these compounds 
have had no significant impact on human diabetic 
neuropathy.
Non-enzymatic glycation. The formation of irrevers-
ible advanced glycation end products of various compo-
nents in the nerves of patients with diabetes is believed 
to contribute to the structural changes that are seen in 
diabetic neuropathy. Myelin components and axonal cy-
toskeletal proteins are glycated, leading to impaired cy-
toskeletal assembly with consequently abnormal axonal 
transport and axonal atrophy. Aminoguanidine, devel-
oped as a potential inhibitor of glycation, causes improve-
ment in Na
+,K
+-ATPase activity and nerve conduction 
velocity when administered to experimental diabetic rats. 
It has not been tested in humans.
Oxidative stress. Diabetes is associated with the in-
creased production of free radicals, which have the poten-
tial to cause damage to arteries. Endothelial cell function 
is altered and this may impair nerve blood flow and nerve 
oxygenation. Thioctic acid (α-lipoic acid) reduces oxida-
tive stress, and is available in some countries for the treat-
ment of diabetic patients with neuropathic pain.
Immune mediated neuropathies
Immune mediated neuropathies are heterogeneous disor-
ders, with a wide range of presentations. The pathologi-
cal process affects the nervous system either directly (e.g. 
demyelination) or indirectly (e.g. secondary to vasculitis).
Acute inflammatory neuropathies and 
variants
Guillain–Barré syndrome is an acute immune mediated 
polyradiculoneuropathy, usually with demyelination. In 
two thirds of patients it is preceded by an infection. The 
presentation is acute and evolves over a few weeks, typi-
cally with an ascending flaccid paralysis, early loss of deep 
tendon reflexes and minimal sensory signs. Sphincteric 
functions are usually spared. Significant autonomic fea-
tures are common and neuropathic pain may be prob-
lematic. The salient feature of CSF analysis is elevated 
protein with a normal cell count. The finding of an in-
creased cell count warrants further investigation for con-
ditions such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and 
Lyme disease. Antibodies associated with Guillain–Barré 
syndrome are shown in Table 36.7.
A variety of infections can precede the onset of 
Guillain–Barré syndrome and these can be associated 
with various anti-ganglioside antibodies. Campylobacter 
jejuni is associated with GM1, GM1b, GD1a, GalNAc-
GD1a, GD3, GT1a and GQ1b. Haemophilus influenzae is 
associated with GM1 and GT1a. Mycoplasma pneumoniae 
and cytomegalovirus are associated with galactocerebro-
side GM2 antibody.
The mainstay of treatment for Guillain–Barré syn-
drome is intravenous immunoglobulin or plasmapheresis, 
usually in an intensive care setting.
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating 
­polyneuropathies and variants including 
paraproteinaemic neuropathies
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyneuropathy 
(CIDP) is a heterogeneous group of acquired immune-
mediated neuropathies. It may present in isolation or as 
part of a systemic disease. The classic form of CIDP is 
symmetrical with motor involvement greater than sen-
sory. Weakness is present in both proximal and distal 
muscles. It can be associated with various systemic dis-
eases such as HIV infection, connective tissue disorders 
and paraproteinaemia (see Chapter 30). Serum protein 
electrophoresis is therefore one of the investigations that 
should be carried out routinely in all adult patients pre-
senting with a peripheral neuropathy. Treatment of CIDP 
includes intravenous immunoglobulin, plasmapheresis 
and immunomodulating treatment including steroids.
Monoclonal gammopathy of unknown 
significance
This can cause a neuropathy that is slowly progressive 
over many years and has a symmetrical distribution, first 
affecting the feet with numbness and paraesthesiae but 
later involving the hands. Muscle weakness and wasting 
occurs months or years after the onset of sensory symp-
toms. The cause of the neuropathy is unknown. The 
commonest paraprotein to be detected is IgM, which can 
bind to peripheral nerves via the carbohydrate moiety in 
myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG). Antibodies to 
MAG are found in 60% of patients. IgG and IgA neu-
ropathies are less common, but are more responsive than 
IgM neuropathy to immunotherapy and plasmapheresis.
Multiple myeloma
This rarely causes an isolated neuropathy. When it does 
occur, it is sensorimotor in type and may be axonal and 
demyelinating. Treatment of the myeloma may stabilize 
the neuropathy.
	
36  Biochemical aspects of neurological disease	
693
Waldenström macroglobulinaemia
This is commonly associated with a sensorimotor neu-
ropathy in addition to the more generalized symptoms of 
fatigue, weakness and a bleeding diathesis.
POEMS syndrome
Polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, mono-
clonal gammopathy and skin changes (POEMS syn-
drome) has a peak incidence at age 50–60  years. It is 
distinct from the neuropathy associated with myeloma 
and its pathogenesis remains unknown. The main clinical 
features are of a progressive sensorimotor neuropathy as-
sociated with a monoclonal plasma cell proliferative dis-
order and osteosclerotic bone lesions. The light chain is 
invariably λ rather than κ, and when present, the heavy 
chain is either A or G and only occasionally M. The en-
docrine disturbance can appear at any stage of the illness 
and can involve adrenal, thyroid, pituitary, parathyroid, 
gonadal or pancreatic function. There is no specific diag-
nostic test for POEMS syndrome.
Chronic kidney disease and established 
renal failure
Peripheral neuropathies are not uncommon in patients 
with chronic kidney disease (CKD). A variety of periph-
eral nerve disorders may occur: carpal tunnel syndrome, 
ulnar and femoral neuropathy and uraemic polyneu-
ropathy. The pathogenesis probably involves anatomical 
vulnerability, ischaemia, deposition of β2-microglobulin-
associated amyloid and tissue compression around nerves.
The neuropathy associated with non-diabetic renal 
disease is of insidious onset, progressing over months and 
is present in 60–100% of patients on dialysis. Neuropathy 
generally develops only at CKD stage 5 and is character-
ized by paraesthesiae, tingling and burning of the feet, 
cramps and restlessness of the legs. Weakness is uncom-
mon and, when present, is relatively mild. Patients may 
also develop autonomic features, with postural hypo-
tension, impaired sweating, diarrhoea, constipation or 
impotence. Although there is a correlation between the 
impairment of nerve conduction and decreased glomeru-
lar filtration rate, starting dialysis or increasing its rate 
does not seem to improve an established neuropathy. 
However, improvement is seen after renal transplanta-
tion. The neuropathy has been attributed to the inability 
of dialysis membranes to clear ‘middle molecules’ (see 
Chapter 7), which are thought to be neurotoxic. The evi-
dence to support this hypothesis is conflicting.
Liver disease
The prevalence of peripheral neuropathy in chronic liver 
disease is variable. Alcohol is the commonest cause of 
neuropathy associated with liver disease owing both to 
the direct neurotoxic effect of alcohol and to liver fail-
ure. Peripheral neuropathy can occur as a direct result of 
a primary liver disease although the underlying mecha-
nism of neuropathy is unclear. It can also be part of a 
systemic disease that affects both the liver and peripheral 
nervous system for example, vasculitis. Most patients 
with chronic liver disease have evidence of an axonal neu-
ropathy. There may be an additional autonomic neuro­
pathy, which carries a poor prognosis, and carpal tunnel 
syndrome is common. Acute peripheral neuropathy, es-
pecially Guillain–Barré syndrome, can be associated with 
viral hepatitis. Primary biliary cirrhosis is associated with 
a painful sensory neuropathy with sensory ataxia.
Endocrine disturbances
Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism frequently causes carpal tunnel syn-
drome because of deposition of mucopolysaccharide 
complexes within the carpal tunnel. Adequate thyroxine 
replacement is often the only treatment necessary.
Hyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidism can also cause carpal tunnel syndrome 
that typically resolves with treatment. The mechanism is 
thought to be the same as in hypothyroidism. Thyroid 
storm can be associated with acute neuropathy.
Acromegaly
Acromegaly causes swelling of the median nerve from 
oedema and/or hypertrophy, resulting in an increased 
incidence of carpal tunnel syndrome. Treatment of the 
acromegaly improves the symptoms. There can also be a 
polyneuropathy, which is often painful. The relationship 
between peripheral neuropathy and excess growth hor-
mone is not clear and can be complicated by coexisting 
diabetes mellitus.
Nutritional peripheral neuropathies
Nutritional deficiencies and excess alcohol are associated 
with peripheral neuropathies as well as encephalopathy 
and spinal cord disorders (see previous sections).
Vitamin B12 deficiency
This is commonly associated with peripheral neu-
ropathy, which may be precipitated by nitrous oxide 
anaesthesia. Measurement of plasma vitamin B12 concen-
tration may give a low-normal value even though there is 
a true functional deficiency. It is therefore recommended 
that, for patients with a neuropathy and borderline B12 
value, plasma methylmalonate and homocysteine con-
centrations should also be checked. In one review, pa-
tients with abnormal methylmalonate and homocysteine 
concentrations accounted for 15% of those previously 
labelled as ‘cryptogenic neuropathy’ as the plasma vi-
tamin B12 concentrations were within reference limits. 
Interestingly, a megaloblastic anaemia is rarely seen in 
patients with a vitamin B12 deficiency state and neuro-
logical complications.
Intramuscular injection of vitamin B12 is the standard 
treatment for such deficiency, but the recovery of neu-
ropathy is variable, and may not occur at all.
694	
Clinical biochemistry
Thiamin (vitamin B1) deficiency
Also known as beri-beri, this is now rarely encountered 
in developed countries; when it does occur, it is most 
often associated with alcoholism and severe anorexia. 
Thiamin and its coenzyme thiamin pyrophosphate are 
required for mitochondrial function and myelin forma-
tion. A deficiency state has to be more prolonged before 
the peripheral nerves become affected than is the case 
with encephalopathy. The symptoms are numbness and 
pain that start in the feet and may later involve the hands. 
Although direct measurements of thiamin concentration 
are available, their use in diagnosing thiamin deficiency 
is controversial. If deficiency is suspected clinically, treat-
ment should be given immediately either orally or intra-
venously. Reversal of the neuropathy is unpredictable and 
it may take 12 months for any improvement to be seen.
Vitamin B6 (pyridoxine) deficiency
This deficiency causes an axonal neuropathy that devel-
ops very slowly and typically results in distal numbness 
and mild weakness. In contrast, a severe ataxic painful 
neuropathy can result from vitamin B6 toxicity at doses of 
more than 200 mg/day.
Vitamin E deficiency
Vitamin E deficiency only rarely causes an isolated neurop-
athy; measuring plasma vitamin E concentrations should 
not be part of the routine screen in neuropathy. Chronic 
vitamin E deficiency in developed countries is usually as-
sociated with disorders of lipid absorption. Vitamin E has 
a role in maintaining cell membrane structure and as a 
free radical scavenger. After long exposure to low concen-
trations of vitamin E, ataxia and axonal neuropathy may 
develop. The neurological features can improve with oral 
vitamin E treatment and it is also recommended that high 
doses of vitamin A should be given at the same time.
Niacin (vitamin B3), pantothenic acid (vitamin B5) 
and folic acid deficiencies
These are also associated with peripheral neuropathy.
Chronic hypophosphataemia
This is seen most commonly in patients on long-term 
parenteral nutrition and may result in a Guillain–Barré 
like syndrome.
Copper deficiency
Copper deficiency may be associated with gastric surgery 
and may mimic subacute combined degeneration of the 
cord (see p. 689).
Neuropathy associated with bariatric  
surgery
Untreated, up to 62% of patients who have had bariatric 
surgery develop a peripheral neuropathy. The neuropa-
thy is predominantly sensory. Some 31% develop features 
of encephalopathy, and 28% have Wernicke–Korsakoff 
syndrome. The onset varies from 3 to 20 months follow-
ing surgery; outcomes are mixed. The most frequent as-
sociated deficiencies are iron, thiamin, folate, vitamin D 
and calcium. Delayed (>2 years after surgery) deficiency 
of copper has also been reported. Current guidelines 
recommend trace element and vitamin replacement and 
careful monitoring after surgery to minimize the devel-
opment of neurological and other complications.
Strachan syndrome
Previously termed Jamaican neuritis, Strachan syndrome 
was first identified in the West Indies during periods of 
famine. It is characterized by a painful, predominantly 
sensory, ataxic neuropathy, and may also be associated 
with optic neuropathy, sensorineuronal hearing loss, 
dorsal lateral myelopathy, glossitis and stomatitis. It is 
thought to be caused by multiple deficiencies of thiamin, 
niacin, riboflavin, pyridoxine and cobalamin, and hence 
treatment is administration of multivitamins, although 
recovery may only be partial.
Metabolic neuropathies
Refsum disease (heredopathica atactica 
polyneuritiformis)
This is an autosomal recessive metabolic disease, char-
acterized by accumulation of phytanic acid in plasma 
and tissues. It is caused by deficiency of peroxisomal 
phytanoyl-CoA hydroxylase (phytanic acid oxidase), 
which converts phytanic acid to α-hydroxyphytanic acid; 
mutations in the gene for this enzyme (located on chro-
mosome 10p13) have been identified in most patients, al-
though other genes may also be involved. A progressive 
symmetrical demyelinating sensorimotor neuropathy, 
cerebellar ataxia, retinitis pigmentosa initially presenting 
with night blindness, and ichthyosis are hallmarks of the 
disease. The age of onset of the disease can vary from 
childhood to adulthood, and as the condition progresses, 
the patient develops an ataxic gait, distal limb weakness 
and numbness. Other important clinical features include 
a ‘salt and pepper’ type of retinal pigmentation (flecks 
of dark ­pigment with areas of whitish depigmentation), 
nerve deafness, cataracts and cardiomyopathy. Skeletal 
deformities, including kyphoscoliosis, pes cavus, and 
shortened metacarpals and metatarsals, are also encoun-
tered. Optic atrophy, cataract and vitreous abnormalities 
cause further deterioration of vision.
The neuropathy starts distally with marked wasting 
and weakness. Symptoms of pain and paraesthesiae occur 
in some but not all patients. The tendon reflexes are lost 
as the condition progresses and there is loss of sensation 
(especially vibration sensation and joint position sense) in 
a glove and stocking distribution. The peripheral nerves 
may be enlarged. Without treatment, there is gradual de-
terioration, but about half of those affected may enter a 
phase of remission that can last for several years.
The diagnosis of Refsum disease is made on the basis 
of clinical findings and a plasma phytanic acid concen-
tration >200 μmol/L. However, plasma accumulation of 
phytanic acid is not specific for the condition as raised 
	
36  Biochemical aspects of neurological disease	
695
concentrations may occur in other peroxisomal dis-
orders. In addition, patients have been recorded with 
defective α-oxidation but normal phytanic acid concen-
trations. Therefore, to be certain of the diagnosis of 
Refsum disease, it has to be shown that there is a defect in 
­α-oxidation. This can be done by measuring the produc-
tion of 
14CO2 from a cultured skin fibroblast monolayer 
using (1-
14C) phytanic acid as substrate. Cerebrospinal 
fluid protein concentration is often raised. Molecular ge-
netic testing is available.
Phytanic acid is derived exclusively from the diet, 
therefore dietary control is the treatment of choice. This 
requires the elimination, as far as possible, of all dairy 
products and any fatty meat or oily fish. However, such a 
diet is protein and energy poor so liquid nutritional sup-
plements are often required. In those who respond with 
a fall in plasma phytanic acid concentrations, progression 
of the neurological damage is halted, and in those with 
neuropathy, there is improvement in nerve conduction 
velocities. As dietary manipulation takes time to cor-
rect plasma phytanic acid concentrations, weekly plasma 
exchange can be used to attain normal concentrations 
quickly for patients with more rapid clinical progression.
Porphyric neuropathy
Porphyria is a rare but important cause of peripheral 
neuropathy. Its diagnosis depends on demonstrating an 
abnormality in haem metabolism (see Chapter 28). Only 
the hepatic porphyrias (acute intermittent porphyria, 
AIP, hereditary coproporphyria and variegate porphyria) 
are associated with neuropathy, the most severe attacks 
being associated with AIP. Within 2–3 days of the onset 
of an acute attack, the neuropathy begins with back and 
limb pains and the early development of marked sym-
metrical limb weakness, which may spread to involve the 
cranial nerves and respiratory muscles. The patient may 
have paraesthesiae and the sensory loss may be either in 
a symmetrical glove and stocking distribution or patchy. 
Autonomic features can also be present – hyperten-
sion, tachycardia, constipation and bladder disturbance. 
Other clinical problems such as seizures or psychiatric 
disturbance and a normal CSF protein may help to dis-
tinguish porphyric neuropathy from the Guillain–Barré 
syndrome. The exact pathogenetic mechanism is not 
clear but evidence suggests that both direct toxic effects 
of 5-­aminolaevulinic acid and intracellular metabolic 
derangements, including reduced activity of Na
+,K
+-
ATPase, contribute to the neurological disorders.
Treatment of an acute episode includes avoiding any 
drugs that may exacerbate the condition, and appropri-
ate sedation and pain relief. A glucose infusion should be 
commenced. The use of specific measures, for example 
haematin, is discussed in Chapter 28. Recovery is usually 
good but may be incomplete in some patients.
Fabry disease (angiokeratoma corporis diffusum; 
α-galactosidase deficiency)
This is an inherited X-linked recessive disorder of gly-
cosphingolipid metabolism resulting from a deficiency 
of the enzyme ceramide trihexosidase (α-galactosidase). 
The gene for this enzyme (GLA) lies on the long arm 
of the X chromosome between Xq21.33 and Xq22. 
However, females heterozygous for the condition have 
low enzyme activity and can be mildly affected clinically. 
The accumulating ceramide trihexoside consists of sphin-
gosine (a long chain amino alcohol) linked to a long chain 
fatty acid. The trihexose (glucose–galactose–galactose) is 
linked to the primary alcohol group on C1 of ceramide. 
Because of the low ceramide trihexosidase activity, cleav-
age of the terminal galactose from the ceramide trihexo-
side does not occur.
The clinical effects are produced by the deposition of 
ceramide trihexoside (globotriaosylceramide) in the vas-
cular endothelium. The characteristic manifestations are 
renal impairment, neuropathic pain and cutaneous angoi-
keratomas in a bathing trunk distribution. The onset of 
symptoms is in late childhood or early adolescence, with 
episodes of severe shooting and burning pains and par-
aesthesiae in the feet and hands (Fabry crisis), which may 
be severe enough to confine the patient to a wheelchair. 
Exercise, fatigue and emotional stress are recognized 
precipitants of acute painful episodes. The symptoms 
subside as the patient gets older. In contrast, the char-
acteristic purple skin lesions, corneal dystrophy and re-
nal involvement causing hypertension and CKD become 
more evident with age. Involvement of the myocardium 
and mitral valve disease (incompetence and prolapse) are 
very common, but established renal failure is the usual 
cause of death. Clinical examination reveals only mini-
mal abnormalities suggesting a peripheral neuropathy. 
Anhidrosis may suggest autonomic involvement and 
nerve conduction studies show a mild axonal neuropathy 
with a selective loss of small myelinated fibres and unmy-
elinated axons.
Diagnosis in males is reliably made by measuring ce-
ramide trihexosidase activity in plasma, leukocytes or 
cultured skin fibroblasts. Blood spots can be used for 
screening at-risk populations. Enzyme activity can also 
be measured in duodenal or jejunal biopsy material. 
Glycolipid can be measured in urine sediment. Molecular 
genetic testing is the most reliable method for the diag-
nosis of carrier females. Predictive testing is available for 
at-risk asymptomatic adults and for high risk pregnancies. 
Standard treatment is enzyme replacement therapy. There 
have been no human trials of gene replacement to date.
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis 
(cholestanolosis)
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis is a rare, autosomal 
recessive lipid storage disease with multiorgan involve-
ment. The clinical manifestations usually start at in-
fancy and develop during the first and second decades 
of life. Peripheral neuropathy, especially the subtype of 
axonal sensorimotor neuropathy, is common. Patients 
may also develop a progressive cerebellar ataxia, juve-
nile cataracts, chronic diarrhoea and tendon xanthomas. 
A deficiency of hepatic mitochondrial 27-hydroxylase 
has been identified. Biochemical findings include high 
plasma and tissue cholestanol concentration, normal to 
low plasma cholesterol concentration, decreased cheno-
deoxycholic acid, increased concentration of bile alcohols 
696	
Clinical biochemistry
TABLE 36.8  Neuropathy in mitochondrial disease
Type
Mitochondrial disease
Axonal
MELAS (A3243G mutation). 
Sensorimotor neuropathy can be 
acute or subacute
Demyelinating
MNGIE. Symmetrical sensorimotor 
neuropathy (occasionally axonal 
change predominates)
MELAS
MELAS, mitochondrial encephalomyopathy with lactic acidosis and 
stroke-like episodes; MNGIE, mitochondrial neurogastrointestinal 
encephalopathy.
and their glycoconjugates and increased concentrations of 
cholestanol and apolipoprotein B in cerebrospinal fluid. 
Molecular genetic testing for CYP27A1, the only gene in 
which mutations are known to cause cerebrotendinous 
xanthomatosis, is available.
Treatment with chenodeoxycholic acid inhibits abnor-
mal bile acid synthesis and is most effective in reducing 
elevated plasma cholestanol concentrations and reducing 
bile alcohols. The use of hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA 
(HMG-CoA) reductase inhibitors (statins) may offer 
some help in slowing the neurological progression.
Tangier disease
This is a rare autosomal recessive disorder of lipid trans-
port, characterized by a deficiency of plasma high den-
sity lipoprotein (HDL) and tissue storage of cholesteryl 
esters, especially in the tonsils, giving them a distinct 
orange–grey colour (see also Chapter 37). The cause of 
the neuropathy is not clear, but it seems unlikely that low 
HDL alone is responsible. Neuropathy occurs in about 
two-thirds of patients and may be the initial symptom 
in one half of cases, although in others it is evident only 
on clinical examination. The low plasma concentrations 
of HDL are thought to be from increased breakdown. 
There is hypocholesterolaemia with normal or increased 
concentrations of triglycerides. There is no specific 
treatment.
Amyloidosis
There are several types of amyloidosis, including pri-
mary, secondary, familial and dialysis-related. The asso-
ciated constitutional symptoms of weight loss and other 
organ involvement (e.g. heart or kidneys) should provide 
the clue to consider amyloid as a cause of neuropathy.
Amyloid neuropathy occurs in approximately 15% of 
patients with primary amyloidosis, and the median dura-
tion of symptoms before diagnosis is 29 months. It can 
be symmetrical or focal, and can have variable degrees 
of sensory and/or motor involvement. The neuropa-
thy is chronic, debilitating and relentlessly progressive. 
Autonomic disturbances also occur. Associated biochemi-
cal abnormalities are summarized in Box 36.7.
Secondary amyloidosis occurs in conditions such as 
chronic infection and rheumatoid arthritis and will not 
be discussed in detail here.
Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP) is usually 
dominantly inherited and caused by a mutation in the 
gene coding for transthyretin (TTR, prealbumin), a 
protein that is produced in the liver and normally func-
tions as a carrier molecule for thyroxine and retinol. As 
the same mutation is found in Swedish, Portuguese and 
Japanese patients, it is likely that the original mutation 
was in the Viking population that travelled to Europe and 
the Far East.
The diagnoses of primary and familial amyloidosis can 
only be made by demonstrating amyloid deposits in ap-
propriately selected tissue. Initial samples are obtained 
from low-risk sites such as abdominal wall subcutaneous 
fat, bone marrow or rectum, and only if these are normal 
should an affected organ be biopsied. If TTR amyloid 
is detected, the gene should be sequenced to confirm 
the mutation, which will allow appropriate genetic 
counselling.
In FAP, younger patients with aggressive disease may 
be considered for liver transplantation, which seems to 
have a favourable effect on the course of neuropathy but 
not on cardiac or ocular lesions. Oral administration of 
tafamidis meglumine, which prevents misfolding and de-
position of mutated TTR, is under evaluation in patients 
with FAP. High dose melphalan and stem cell transplan-
tation can be effective. Supportive treatment such as 
management of neuropathic pain and gastroparesis is also 
very important. Treatment with melphalan and predni-
sone gives a survival benefit for patients with primary 
amyloidosis.
Mitochondrial disorders
The term ‘mitochondrial encephalomyopathy’ reflects 
the major neurological features – central nervous sys-
tem and muscle – associated with mitochondrial disor-
ders. Muscle disorders and the relevant mitochondrial 
enzyme defects are discussed in Chapter  33. It is not 
uncommon to find some minor peripheral nerve in-
volvement in mitochondrial diseases (approximately 
30% of patients), but it is rare for it to be the presenting 
or dominant clinical feature. Table 36.8 summarizes the 
main associations.
Paraneoplastic neuropathies
The paraneoplastic neurological syndromes occur in 
<1% of malignancies and can present months or years 
before a cancer diagnosis. More than 25% of paraneo-
plastic neurological syndromes present as diseases of the 
peripheral nervous system, including sensory and auto-
nomic neuropathies and Lambert–Eaton myasthenic 
syndrome.
BOX 36.7	
Biochemical abnormalities 
­associated with primary amyloidosis
•	 Proteinuria (80%) with elevated plasma creatinine 
concentration
•	 Bence–Jones protein (20%)
•	 Serum paraprotein (60–70%): IgG > IgA > IgM
	
36  Biochemical aspects of neurological disease	
697
The most common underlying malignancy in paraneo-
plastic neuropathies is a small cell carcinoma of bronchus, 
occurring in 50–75% of patients, presenting classically 
with a subacute sensory neuropathy and associated with 
anti-Hu antibodies (also known as antineuronal nuclear 
antigen antibodies or ANNA-1) in the plasma or CSF. 
In the majority of patients, the neurological involvement 
extends beyond the peripheral nervous system, and in-
cludes brain stem or limbic encephalitis and cerebellar 
degeneration.
The other nervous system-specific antibodies are out-
lined in Table 36.9. Although useful to confirm a clini-
cal diagnosis of paraneoplastic syndrome, most of these 
markers are not specific enough to determine the origin 
of the cancer. Examination of CSF often shows an el-
evated protein with oligoclonal bands and an increased 
lymphocyte count. The tumour remains undetectable in 
15% of patients.
The response to immunomodulatory therapies (ste-
roids, immunosuppressants, intravenous immunoglobu-
lin and plasma exchange) is variable.
MOVEMENT DISORDERS
The term ‘movement disorders’ refers to the neurologi-
cal conditions that have as their predominant feature an 
excess or a paucity of movement, which may be voluntary 
or automatic. Disorders in which there is a predominant 
excess of movement are often referred to as hyperkine-
sias. Dyskinesia is also often used as a term referring to 
hyperkinetic involuntary movements. The five major cat-
egories of dyskinesias, in alphabetical order, are chorea, 
dystonia, myoclonus, tics and tremor.
Disorders with a paucity of movement are referred 
to as the hypokinesias. The characteristic hypokinetic 
disorder is Parkinson disease, in which there is brady-
kinesia (a slowness of movement), reduced amplitude 
of movements, rigidity and loss of postural reflexes. 
Tremor (a dyskinesia) is also a common feature of 
Parkinson disease.
Many of the movement disorders are associated with 
alterations in the basal ganglia or their connections. They 
can also arise as a consequence of cerebellar disease, which 
typically results in impairment of coordination (asynergy, 
ataxia), problems with judgement of distance (dysmetria) 
and a kinetic limb tremor.
Myoclonus and many forms of tremors do not appear 
to be related primarily to basal ganglia pathology, and 
often arise as a consequence of abnormal neural activity 
elsewhere in the central nervous system. Myoclonus can 
also be present in diseases that involve the cerebellum, 
such as mitochondrial diseases and storage disorders (e.g. 
sialidosis and ceroid lipofuscinosis).
In the late onset sporadic movement disorders, pro-
tein misfolding and aggregation, with neuronal dysfunc-
tion and cell death, is the likely underlying pathological 
process. In diseases with a younger age of onset, genetic 
abnormalities leading to cell damage (often owing to de-
ficiencies of proteins involved in mitochondrial function) 
or biochemical abnormalities (such as deficiencies in en-
zymes involved in dopamine synthesis) as well as meta-
bolic or storage disorders are more likely.
Parkinsonism
Parkinsonism may be caused by many conditions other 
than Parkinson disease (PD). However, by far the com-
monest cause of parkinsonism is idiopathic PD, which 
is the commonest condition seen in adult movement 
disorder clinics. Whilst a large number of other move-
ment disorders are genetic in aetiology, patients with a 
monogenic form of PD are rare. Abnormalities in ten ge-
netic loci have so far been identified in PD. Mutations 
of the PARK2 gene, which encodes the protein parkin (a 
component of a ligase complex that has a role in protein 
degradation) are the commonest autosomal recessive 
mutations in young onset patients. Mutations of PARK8, 
which result in abnormalities of LRRK2 (leucine-rich re-
peat kinase 2, a protein kinase) are the commonest domi-
nant mutations identified. There are likely to be a large 
number of susceptibility genes for the development of 
PD, the most recently recognized significant one being a 
glucocerebrosidase gene mutation, which in homozygous 
individuals causes Gaucher disease.
The clinical syndrome of PD arises predominantly as 
a consequence of loss of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neu-
rons but other neuronal populations including serotoner-
gic, noradrenergic and cholinergic neuronal transmission 
are also important and are increasingly recognized as 
having a likely role in the development of the non-motor 
features of PD, such as autonomic dysfunction (postural 
hypotension, abnormal sweating, bladder, bowel and 
sexual dysfunction), mood disorders, sleep disorders and 
dementia.
The phenotype of monogenic PD is almost identi-
cal to that of sporadic disease; individuals are very re-
sponsive to medication but dystonia in the limbs may 
be present at onset and patients often develop early mo-
tor complications. The so-called ‘atypical parkinsonian 
syndromes are much less common than idiopathic PD 
and are generally not responsive to the usual first line 
treatment, levodopa, progress more rapidly and lead to 
a greater loss of independence with a mean survival of 
3–9 years.
TABLE 36.9  Autoantibodies in paraneoplastic 
syndromes with peripheral neuropathy
Antibody
Malignancy
Neuropathy
Anti-Hu
Small cell carcinoma 
of bronchus (SCLC)
Sensory
Sensorimotor
Motor
Autonomic
Anti-Ri
SCLC, breast
Sensorimotor
Anti-Yo
Breast, ovary
Sensorimotor
Motor
Anti-CV2
SCLC, breast, colon, 
prostate, thymus, 
non-Hodgkin 
lymphoma
Sensorimotor
Autonomic
Voltage-gated 
potassium 
channel
Thymoma, 
SCLC, Hodgkin 
lymphoma
Neuromyotonia
698	
Clinical biochemistry
There are other rarer causes of parkinsonism, in-
cluding mitochondrial disorders and neurometabolic 
disorders. Drug-induced parkinsonism from dopamine 
blocking drugs is an important differential diagnosis in 
anyone presenting with a relatively acute disorder.
Tremor
Tremor is a rhythmic oscillation of one or more body 
parts and is probably the commonest type of movement 
disorder presenting to neurologists. Tremor can be classi-
fied according to its phenomenology (rest, action, kinetic, 
task specific and body part involved), frequency and am-
plitude or, more specifically, by aetiology (e.g. Parkinson 
disease, essential tremor or secondary tremor as in thy-
rotoxicosis). The parkinsonian syndromes and other de-
generative disorders are the commonest causes of rest 
tremor, along with secondary causes, such as toxins and 
drug therapies. The commonest causes of action or ki-
netic tremors are enhanced physiological tremor (stress, 
anxiety and exercise), essential tremor and cerebellar 
disease.
Dystonia
Dystonic contractions of muscles have a longer dura-
tion than myoclonus or chorea, involve simultaneous 
contractions of agonist and antagonist muscles, result in 
twisting (torsion) postures of the body parts involved, 
and consistently involve the same pattern of muscle 
movements.
Dystonia can be classified based upon the age of on-
set (important as the younger the age of onset, the more 
likely it is that it will spread to involve other body parts) 
the body part involved (focal, multifocal, hemidystonia, 
segmental or generalized) and additionally whether it is:
•	 primary (usually genetic or undetermined)
•	 a ‘dystonia plus’ syndrome with associated parkin-
sonism or myoclonus
•	 a secondary dystonia (as a consequence of brain in-
jury or drug therapy)
•	 heredodegenerative dystonia (associated with dis-
eases such as Huntington chorea)
•	 dystonia as a feature of other neurological diseases, 
such as Parkinson disease.
Adult-onset primary focal dystonia is the common-
est form and typically affects the neck muscles (cervical 
dystonia or spasmodic torticollis). Task-specific action 
dystonias include writer’s cramp and musician’s dystonia. 
A comprehensive description of all of the dystonic dis-
orders is beyond the scope of this chapter but important 
and treatable causes based on the aetiologic classification 
are briefly described below.
DYT1 dystonia (Oppenheim dystonia). This is an 
autosomal dominant condition with a penetrance of 
between 30% and 40%. There is a deletion of one of a 
pair of CAG triplets in the TOR1A gene (also known as 
DYT1) on chromosome 9q. This gene codes for torsin 
A, a heat shock protein. The mutation is commoner 
in the Ashkenazi Jewish population (1 in 2000). The 
onset of dystonia is typically before the age of 40 and 
it usually involves the upper or lower limbs first. It is 
a pure dystonic syndrome and conventional imaging 
(MRI) is normal. Patients with severe generalized dys-
tonia as a consequence of this condition may respond 
well to deep brain stimulation.
Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD). Some forms of dys-
tonia respond to levodopa therapy (e.g. dystonia associated 
with Parkinson disease) but the term ‘dopa-responsive 
dystonia’ is specifically reserved for the syndrome aris-
ing as a consequence of an autosomal dominant muta-
tion in the GTP-cyclohydrolase 1 gene. It is a disorder 
of tetrahydrobiopterin synthesis leading to inhibition of 
phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan hydroxylases and 
failure of production of catecholamines and indoleam-
ines. Dopa-responsive dystonia should be considered in 
anyone with early onset dystonia because treatment with 
l-dopa can lead to dramatic resolution of symptoms. It is 
an important differential to consider in any patient with 
presumed dystonic cerebral palsy or young onset spastic 
paraparesis. The most important diagnostic test is a trial 
of l-dopa. Other helpful tests include:
•	 sequence analysis of the GTP-cyclohydrolase 1 
gene (positive in approximately 60% of patients 
with DRD)
•	 CSF analysis to detect reduced total biopterin and 
neopterin concentrations
•	 an oral phenylalanine loading test: a positive result 
is an elevated plasma phenylalanine:tyrosine ratio 
following oral phenylalanine.
The gene causing DRD has been mapped to chromo-
some 14q, although approximately 40–50% of patients 
with DRD have no identified mutation. If a patient is di-
agnosed with DRD, there should be an assiduous search 
for other possibly affected family members (misdiagnosed 
in some cases to have multiple sclerosis or cerebral palsy), 
who may benefit from l-dopa therapy.
Tetrahydrobiopterin (TH) deficiency is usually a more 
serious form of DRD and is transmitted as an ­autosomal 
recessive disorder, presenting with dystonia and par-
kinsonism in infancy. Biochemical analysis of CSF will 
provide some evidence, but ultimately testing for the 
gene mutation is required to establish the diagnosis. 
Decreased CSF concentrations of homovanillic acid and 
3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylethylene glycol, with nor-
mal 5-­hydroxyindoleacetic acid concentrations, are the 
biochemical hallmarks of TH deficiency.
Wilson disease
Wilson disease arises as a consequence of an inborn er-
ror of copper metabolism manifesting as hepatic cirrhosis 
and basal ganglia damage (hepatolenticular degenera-
tion). It can present in a number of different ways and so 
any patient with a movement disorder under the age of 
50 years should be tested. Nearly all patients with neu-
ropsychiatric Wilson disease have Kayser–Fleischer rings 
(copper deposition at the edge of the corneas), hence slit-
lamp examination is an effective screening tool. The av-
erage delay from symptom onset to diagnosis is close to 
24 months. The initial manifestations of the illness are 
neurological in ~40% of patients (usually after the age of 
	
36  Biochemical aspects of neurological disease	
699
12 years). The remainder present with features of liver 
disease (~40%) or a psychiatric illness.
Wilson disease is inherited as an autosomal reces-
sive trait. The gene responsible lies on chromosome 
13q14.3 encoding for a copper-transporting P-type 
ATPase (ATP7B). The enzyme binds copper in its large 
N-terminal domain and aids in intracellular processing in 
the hepatocyte. Intestinal absorption of copper is normal 
in Wilson disease. There are two pathways for copper 
excretion from the hepatocyte aided by ATP7B. One is 
by attachment to caeruloplasmin in the Golgi apparatus, 
and subsequent delivery of the copper–­caeruloplasmin 
complex into the plasma. A second is promotion of cop-
per excretion into the bile. Mutations of ATP7B lead to 
failure to excrete copper by both routes, with accumula-
tion of free copper in the circulation and in the tissues, 
including liver, brain, eyes, kidneys and bones.
The diagnosis and treatment of Wilson disease are dis-
cussed in Chapter 14.
Chorea
The term chorea is derived from a Greek word meaning 
‘dance’. Historically, it was first used to describe St Vitus 
dance, which may have simply described chaotic but vol-
untary movements occurring in the context of religious 
fervour. Sydenham chorea describes a childhood chorea 
occurring as a parainfectious component of acute rheu-
matic fever but the best known ‘choreic’ disorder is prob-
ably Huntington disease.
Chorea consists of involuntary, continual, abrupt, 
rapid, brief, unsustained, irregular movements. Its causes 
can be divided into inherited and acquired. Huntington 
disease is the commonest inherited disorder: the rest are 
all rare. Inherited neurometabolic disorders such as the 
lysosomal storage disorders, amino acid disorders and 
glucose transporter deficiency syndromes can also have 
chorea as a predominant phenotypic feature. Of the ac-
quired causes, focal striatal pathology (strokes and space 
occupying lesions), drug-induced disorders (such as the 
chorea seen as a complication of long-term dopaminer-
gic therapy in Parkinson disease), chorea gravidarum 
and thyrotoxicosis are important causes, as are systemic 
lupus erythematosus, primary antiphospholipid syn-
drome and central nervous system (CNS) infection.
Myoclonus
The literal meaning of myoclonus is a ‘quick movement 
of a muscle’. Myoclonus can be positive (an active muscle 
contraction) or negative (sudden and brief loss of muscle 
tone). The commonest pathological form is probably 
cortical myoclonus caused by metabolic or toxic enceph-
alopathies. Brief muscle jerks as a consequence of corti-
cal motor discharges, sometimes in response to action or 
sensory stimuli, are seen.
Asterixis is a form of negative myoclonus in which 
there is a brief loss of muscle tone, most commonly 
­affecting gait and sustained upper limb posture. ‘Liver 
flap’, with an irregular loss of wrist extensor tone seen in 
hepatic failure and carbon dioxide retention, is a form of 
metabolic upper limb myoclonus.
Tics
Tics are brief and intermittent movements of muscles and 
groups of muscles resulting in sudden, abrupt and repeti-
tive movements that may mimic gestures or be fragments 
of normal behaviour. Tics may therefore be simple or 
complex movements. Gilles de la Tourette syndrome is 
the commonest tic disorder and is characterized by motor 
and vocal or phonic tics beginning in childhood, often ac-
companied by obsessive–compulsive disorders, poor im-
pulse control and other behavioural problems.
ATAXIA
Ataxia, meaning a ‘lack of order’, is a term which re-
fers to the type of clumsiness produced by dysfunction 
of the cerebellum or cerebellar pathways. Impaired 
balance, gait disorder and clumsiness of the hands, 
together with dysarthria and jerky tremor of the eyes 
(nystagmus) are the typical clinical signs. The com-
monest causes of acquired cerebellar ataxia are acute 
and chronic alcohol consumption, prescribed drug in-
toxication (often anti-epileptic drugs), cerebrovascular 
disease, metastatic cancer and multiple sclerosis. The 
differential diagnosis in patients where these are ex-
cluded is very long and includes all types of neurologi-
cal pathological processes. The most important feature 
in the history is the age at onset of ataxia. Ataxia pre-
senting in childhood is more likely to be due to an in-
herited disorder and onset in adulthood is more likely 
to be a sporadic ataxia.
The autosomal dominantly inherited cerebellar ataxias 
(or spinocerebellar ataxias) may be caused by a daunting 
list of genetic abnormalities, many of which are trinucle-
otide repeat disorders. No single clinical feature is spe-
cific for a particular mutation and even within families 
there is considerable variability in the phenotype. There 
are a large number of recessive ataxias but the common-
est by far is Friedreich ataxia, which has a prevalence of 
about 1 in 50 000.
Friedreich ataxia
In this condition, in addition to the ataxia and dysarthria, 
there may be sensory loss and corticospinal tract signs 
with absent reflexes. Neurophysiological testing reveals 
an axonal peripheral neuropathy and skeletal abnormali-
ties (e.g. kyphoscoliosis), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy, 
and diabetes are common. The genetic abnormality is an 
expanded trinucleotide repeat of GAA in a gene on chro-
mosome 9q coding for the protein called frataxin. Point 
mutations are less common. Frataxin is a mitochondrial 
protein encoded by nuclear DNA and is probably in-
volved in iron transport. Excessive iron accumulation in 
mitochondria is a feature of the condition.
Ataxia with isolated vitamin E deficiency
This is a rare, but important, disorder that has a phe-
notype similar to Friedreich ataxia but with additional 
ophthalmoplegia and retinitis pigmentosa. It arises as 
700	
Clinical biochemistry
a consequence of defects in the TTP1 gene coding for 
α-tocopherol transfer protein that incorporates α-
tocopherol into lipoproteins secreted by the liver. The 
reason for its importance is that it can be treated with 
vitamin E.
Abetalipoproteinemia
This is a rare autosomal recessive deficiency of apoli-
poprotein B-containing lipoproteins. The abnormal-
ity arises as a consequence of microsomal triglyceride 
transfer protein (MTP) deficiency. The age of onset is 
typically in teenage years or early adulthood and the 
syndrome itself arises as a result of vitamin E defi-
ciency. The main features are a cerebellar ataxia with 
polyneuropathy, 
acanthocytosis 
(characteristically 
shaped abnormal red blood cells), a coeliac syndrome, 
and retinal degeneration. It can be treated with high 
doses of vitamin E.
Ataxia telangiectasia
Ataxia telangiectasia arises as a consequence of a muta-
tion in the ‘ataxia telangiectasia mutated’ (ATM) gene, 
which codes for a protein kinase that plays an important 
role in cell cycle control, apoptosis and DNA double-
strand break repair. As well as an ataxic neurodegen-
erative disorder, the abnormality leads to an increased 
incidence of malignancy. The disorder begins early in 
childhood, typically at the age of 1–2 years, with truncal 
ataxia and dysarthria. Oculocutaneous telangiectasias, 
recurrent sino­pulmonary infections and malignan-
cies, particularly leukemia or lymphoma are charac-
teristic features. Plasma α-fetoprotein concentration 
is elevated, there is evidence of both B cell and T cell 
immune deficiency and chromosome breaks can be 
identified.
Early onset ataxia with oculomotor apraxia 
and hypoalbuminemia
This is caused by a mutation in the aprataxin gene. 
Cerebellar ataxia and peripheral neuropathy are the 
commonest features along with oculomotor apraxia. 
Choreiform movements of the limbs and mental dete-
rioration are also seen. Hypoalbuminemia and hyper-
cholesterolemia are typical and brain MRI or computed 
tomography show marked cerebellar atrophy. Ataxia with 
oculomotor apraxia type 2 has also been identified with 
a similar clinical picture but with mutations in the sena-
taxin gene.
Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia  
syndrome
This condition is associated with a tremor that appears 
very similar to that of essential tremor. Other clinical 
features include a cerebellar ataxia and mild to moder-
ate executive dysfunction. Both sexes can be affected. 
The disease is rare and is characterized pathologically 
by intranuclear inclusions. An increased T2 signal in the 
middle cerebellar peduncle is a relatively specific MRI 
appearance.
Hexosaminidase deficiency 
(GM2 gangliosidoses)
This group of conditions is characterized by accumu-
lation of GM2 ganglioside and glycosphingolipids 
within neuronal cells (and other cell types) owing to a 
genetically determined deficiency of the enzyme hex-
osaminidase. Depending on subunit composition, there 
are three possible isoenzymes: hexosaminidase A (αβ), 
hexosaminidase B (β2) and hexosaminidase S (α2). The 
two classic subtypes are Tay–Sachs disease and Sandhoff 
disease.
In Tay–Sachs disease, there is absence of hexosamini-
dase A (αβ) and hexosaminidase S (α2). Hexosaminidase 
B (β2) activities are normal or slightly elevated. The 
abnormality lies in the α-subunit, possibly owing to a 
mutation at the locus on chromosome 15. In Sandhoff 
disease, there are low activities of both hexosaminidase A 
and B. Hexosaminidase S activity is increased. There is 
a deficiency of the β-subunit owing to a mutation at the 
locus on chromosome 5.
There is a spectrum of clinical presentations of these 
conditions:
•	 infantile onset is the best known and presents at the 
age of six months with myoclonic seizures and pro-
gressive visual loss. A macular cherry-red spot is 
seen. There is progressive dementia and death with-
in 4–6 years. This group includes both Tay–Sachs 
and Sandhoff disease
•	 juvenile onset is at 1–4 years, with dementia, seizures 
and ataxia. A cherry-red spot at the macula may or 
may not be present
•	 an ataxic form of GM2 gangliosidosis is characterized 
by a slowly progressive cerebellar or spinocerebel-
lar ataxia with onset in late childhood or the ado-
lescent period, which can be the manifestation of 
either hexosaminidase A or hexosaminidase A and B 
deficiencies
•	 a spinal muscular atrophy form is recognized with 
slowly progressive generalized muscle wasting and 
weakness. Only a deficiency of hexosaminidase A 
has been identified in this form, which can present 
in childhood or early adulthood
•	 an adult onset type is characterized by early onset of 
dementia, seizures and normal pressure hydroceph-
alus.
In addition to measuring hexosaminidase activities in 
plasma, leukocytes or cultured skin fibroblasts, a rectal 
biopsy should be done in adult onset cases to look for the 
characteristic changes in autonomic nerve fibres that are 
apparent on electron microscopy.
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis 
(cholestanolosis)
This is a leukodystrophy characterized by severe pro-
gressive ataxia and limb spasticity by the age of 30. 
	
36  Biochemical aspects of neurological disease	
701
Characteristic appearances include tendon xanthomas 
and zonular cataracts. Dementia may occur at a young 
age before the other physical signs are evident and it can 
be difficult to make a clinical diagnosis at this early stage. 
Pathologically, there is widespread CNS demyelination 
with degeneration of the spinal cord. See page 695 for 
further details about the underlying biochemical abnor-
malities and potential treatment.
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis
This is another condition in which the age of presenta-
tion determines the subtype. Early development is usu-
ally normal, with the age of onset from six months to 
30 years. Patients present with myoclonus, ataxia and vi-
sual loss (except in the late onset variety). If seizures are 
a feature, they tend to be refractory to treatment. Most 
cases are autosomal recessive but the adult onset can be 
autosomal dominant. The incidence varies throughout 
the world with a particular predilection for the infantile 
subgroup in Finland of 1:13 000 live births.
Histological examination reveals an accumulation 
of autofluorescent lipopigment inclusions in body tis-
sues and the diagnosis is made from biopsy of skin, 
conjunctival or rectal tissue. Abnormal accumulation of 
S-methylated methionine has been found in the brains 
of affected infants and of ε-N-trimethyl lysine in those 
from patients with the juvenile onset form. There is a 
profound deficiency of endo-β-N-acetylglucosaminidase, 
which is required for the cleaving of chilobiosyl residues. 
All forms of this condition lead to learning disability, sei-
zures, ataxia and, in the early onset types, visual loss. Life 
expectancy is severely limited.
Coeliac disease
This is an immunologically mediated disease (see also 
Chapter 12) strongly associated with certain human leu-
kocyte antigens. It is common and in large case series, 
neurological complications have been reported in up to 
6% of patients. Cerebellar ataxia is one of the commonest 
neurological associations. The occurrence of antigliadin 
antibodies in otherwise idiopathic ataxia requires further 
dedicated research studies and it remains possible that 
adult onset sporadic ataxia with no clear cause and associ-
ated coeliac disease is no more than a chance occurrence.
INFLAMMATORY DISORDERS OF THE 
­CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
Inflammation is a common pathological process within 
the CNS, by far the commonest form being multiple 
sclerosis (MS). Diagnosis is made on clinical grounds to-
gether with MRI evidence. Oligoclonal bands are pres-
ent in the CNS in up to 95% of patients with clinically 
definite MS (see Chapter 34). Other inflammatory con-
ditions affecting the CNS include systemic lupus erythe-
matosus, Sjögren disease, Behçet disease, polyarteritis 
nodosa, paraneoplastic disorders, acute disseminated 
encephalomyelitis and vasculitis. Mimics of MS also 
include granulomatous disorders (sarcoidosis, Wegener 
granulomatosis), diseases of myelin (metachromatic leu-
kodystrophy, adrenomyeloleukodystrophy), vitamin B12 
deficiency, and certain infectious diseases (Lyme disease, 
neuroborreliosis, human T-lymphotropic virus type 1, 
HIV, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy and 
neurosyphilis).
CONCLUSION
The conditions discussed above represent a very small 
fraction of all neurological disorders. There are many 
more for which clinical biochemistry, at our current level 
of understanding, has little to offer in everyday clinical 
practice. These include headache, epilepsy, sleep disor-
ders, cerebrovascular disease (beyond glucose and lipid 
chemistry), neurological malignancies, dementia and 
neurological trauma. There are also many conditions, for 
which biochemical perturbations are an important part of 
diagnoses, however a full discussion is beyond the scope 
of this chapter. These include many other inherited met-
abolic diseases, a multitude of which have neurological 
manifestations.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
We would like to acknowledge the contribution of 
J. Gareth Llewelyn, Mark Cossburn, Alistair Church and 
Huw R. Morris, who wrote the chapter for the previous 
edition of the book.
Further reading
Albers JW, Fink JK. Porphyric neuropathy. Muscle Nerve 
2004;30:410–22.
Daroff RB, Fenichel GM, Jankovic J et al. editors. Bradley's neurology 
in clinical practice. 6th ed Philadelphia: Saunders; 2012.
Donaldson I, Marsden CD, Schneider S et  al. Marsden’s book of 
movement disorders. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2012. 
This book represents the final work of the late Professor C. David 
Marsden, who was the most influential figure in the field of movement 
disorders, in terms of his contributions to both research and clinical practice, 
in the modern era.
Hauser AC, Lorenz M, Sunder-Plassmann G. The expanding clinical 
spectrum of Anderson-Fabry disease: a challenge to diagnosis 
in the novel era of enzyme replacement therapy. J Intern Med 
2004;255:629–36.
Hughes R. Rational testing: investigation of peripheral neuropathy. Br 
Med J 2010;341:c6100.
Mehta A, Beck M, Sunder-Plassmann G, editors. Fabry disease: perspectives 
from 5 years of FOS. Oxford: Oxford PharmaGenesis; 2006.
Pop-Busui R, Sima A, Stevens M. Diabetic neuropathy and oxidative 
stress. Diabetes Metab Res Rev 2006;22:257–73.
Sullivan KA, Feldman EL. New developments in diabetic neuropathy. 
Curr Opin Neurol 2005;18:586–90.
Surtees R. Biochemical pathogenesis of subacute combined degeneration 
of the spinal cord and brain. J Inherit Metab Dis 1993;16:762–70.
Internet resources
Washington Neuromuscular Disease Center: neuromuscular.wustl.
edu; [Accessed March 2013].
Website of the Washington Neuromuscular Disease Center.
American Academy of Neurology. www.aan.com/go/practice/guidelines; 
[Accessed March 2013].
The clinical practice guidelines page of the American Academy of Neurology.
702
C H A P T E R  3 7
Lipids and disorders of 
lipoprotein metabolism
Graham R. Bayly
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  703
LIPIDS  703
Sterols  703
Fatty acids  704
Triglycerides  704
Phospholipids  704
Eicosanoids  705
Sphingolipids  705
Nuclear lipids  706
LIPOPROTEINS  706
Chylomicrons  707
Very low density lipoproteins  708
Intermediate density lipoproteins  708
Low density lipoproteins  708
High density lipoproteins  708
Lipoprotein(a)  708
Lipoprotein X  708
APOLIPOPROTEINS  708
Apolipoprotein A  709
Apolipoprotein B  709
Apolipoprotein C  709
Apolipoprotein D  710
Apolipoprotein E  710
Apolipoprotein M  710
Apolipoprotein(a)  710
CHOLESTEROL ABSORPTION  710
TRIGLYCERIDE DIGESTION  711
BILE ACID METABOLISM  711
LIPOPROTEIN METABOLISM  711
Assembly of apolipoprotein B-containing 
lipoproteins  711
Exogenous pathway  713
Endogenous pathway  713
High density lipoprotein  
metabolism 714
ENZYMES INVOLVED IN LIPOPROTEIN 
METABOLISM  716
Lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase  716
Lipases  716
Acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase  718
TRANSFER PROTEINS INVOLVED IN LIPOPROTEIN 
METABOLISM  718
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP)  718
Phospholipid transfer protein (PTP)  718
Fatty acid transport proteins  718
RECEPTORS INVOLVED IN LIPOPROTEIN 
METABOLISM  718
The LDL receptor  718
LDL receptor-related protein  719
Scavenger receptor class B type 1  719
Other scavenger receptors  719
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
family  720
Other nuclear receptors  720
OTHER PROTEINS INVOLVED IN LIPOPROTEIN 
SYNTHESIS, TRANSPORT AND 
METABOLISM  720
Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein  720
ATP binding cassette transporter family  720
Proprotein convertase subtilisin kexin 9  720
Sterol regulatory element binding proteins  721
Sortilins  721
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored  
HDL-binding protein 1  721
Angiopoietin-like protein 3  721
CLASSIFICATION OF LIPOPROTEIN 
DISORDERS  721
THE PRIMARY DYSLIPOPROTEINAEMIAS  723
Hypobetalipoproteinaemia  723
Familial combined hyperlipidaemia  724
Familial hypertriglyceridaemia  724
Remnant hyperlipoproteinaemia  725
Familial hypercholesterolaemia  726
Polygenic hypercholesterolaemia  728
Dysalphalipoproteinaemias  728
Disorders of HDL metabolism   728
ACQUIRED HYPERLIPIDAEMIAS  729
Diabetes mellitus  729
Hypothyroidism  730
Nephrotic syndrome  730
Chronic kidney disease  730
Renal transplantation  731
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
703
TABLE 37.1  Major classes of lipids and  
their function
Lipid
Function
Cholesterol
Structural component of membranes; 
precursor for bile acid and steroid 
synthesis
Fatty acids
Energy source
Triglycerides
Energy store
Phospholipids
Structural component of membranes
Eicosanoids
Multiple, including effects on blood 
coagulation, bronchial and vascular 
contractility, reproduction
Sphingolipids
Central nervous system; blood group 
substances
Fat-soluble vitamins
  Vitamin A
Vision
  Vitamin D
Calcium homoeostasis and 
maintenance of bone integrity; 
various other functions, e.g. in 
immunomaturation
  Vitamin E
Neural function; antioxidant
  Vitamin K
Activation of clotting factors
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH3
CH2
CH2
CH2
CH3
CH
CH
HO
FIGURE 37.1  ■  Structure of cholesterol.
INTRODUCTION
‘Lipid’ is the term used to describe a number of substances 
of diverse chemical structure that bear little functional 
relationship to each other but which have in common the 
property of being soluble in organic solvents and virtu-
ally insoluble in water. Lipoproteins are ­macromolecular 
protein complexes that allow hydrophobic lipids to be 
transported within the hydrophilic environment of the 
circulation. Lipids are essential for health, but excessive 
concentrations of cholesterol and triglycerides in the circu-
lation, whether due to lifestyle factors or to inherited dis-
orders of lipoprotein metabolism, are major factors in the 
development of atherosclerosis and cardiovascular disease. 
These conditions are the focus of this chapter, although 
other lipids and their functions are discussed briefly.
LIPIDS
Lipids can be broadly divided into sterols, including cho-
lesterol; fatty acids or substances containing fatty acids 
such as triglycerides and phospholipids; eicosanoids; the 
fat-soluble vitamins (A, D, E and K), and sphingolipids. 
The major classes of lipids and their principal functions 
are summarized in Table 37.1.
Sterols
Cholesterol
Cholesterol (Fig. 37.1) is the major sterol in humans, be-
ing present in all body cells and most body fluids. The 
majority of the cholesterol in the body is in the free, un-
esterified form; it is this form that is the structural com-
ponent of cell membranes. Cholesteryl esters in normal 
cells represent a store for future use and appear micro-
scopically as intracellular droplets. Cholesterol is present 
in the diet but most cholesterol in the body is made by 
de novo synthesis from acetate. The rate-limiting step in 
the synthetic pathway is the conversion of 3-­hydroxy-3-
methylglutaryl-coenzyme A (HMG-CoA) to mevalonate, 
catalysed by the enzyme HMG-CoA reductase. The liver 
is responsible for most cholesterol synthesis. Cholesterol 
is a precursor for the synthesis of gonadal and adrenal 
steroid hormones, vitamin D and bile acids.
Although only a small amount of the body’s cholesterol 
pool comes from dietary cholesterol, this has an impor-
tant role in regulating the rate of cholesterol synthesis. 
The liver is the key organ in maintaining cholesterol bal-
ance; any excess cholesterol is excreted by the liver into 
the bile, either directly, or after conversion into bile acids.
Cholesterol and membranes. Cholesterol is a major 
component of cell membranes. Cholesterol and sphingo-
myelin form plasma membrane ‘lipid rafts’ or caveolae. 
Caveolae are cell surface invaginations found in differ-
entiated cells and characterized by the presence of a pro-
tein, caveolin-1; they are sites where signalling molecules 
are concentrated. In order for these signalling molecules 
to function, the cholesterol concentration of the plasma 
membrane must remain constant. This is achieved by a 
regulatory system that senses the cholesterol content of 
Liver disease  731
Alcohol  731
Drug-related hyperlipidaemia  731
ACQUIRED HYPOLIPIDAEMIA  732
INVESTIGATION OF LIPID DISORDERS  732
Total cholesterol  732
Triglycerides  732
High density lipoprotein cholesterol  732
Low density lipoprotein cholesterol  732
Apolipoproteins  733
Post-heparin lipolytic activity  733
Lipoprotein separation techniques  733
Genotyping  734
TREATMENT OF HYPERLIPIDAEMIA  734
CONCLUSION  736
704	
Clinical biochemistry
the membrane and modulates the transcription of genes 
encoding proteins involved in cholesterol synthesis (e.g. 
HMG-CoA synthase and HMG-CoA reductase) and 
cholesterol uptake (e.g. the LDL receptor). The system 
that does this is a family of membrane-bound transcrip-
tion factors called sterol regulatory element-binding pro-
teins (see p. 721).
Phytosterols
Phytosterols are sterols derived by plants; they differ 
slightly from cholesterol. There are two general types: 
δ
5-phytosterols (e.g. β-sitosterol) and 5α-reduced phy-
tosterols, otherwise referred to as ‘stanols’. In natural 
foods, the sterols predominate. Both sterols and stanols 
are incorporated into commercially available foods pro-
moted as cholesterol-lowering agents: they act by com-
peting with cholesterol for absorption from the gut, and 
may lower plasma cholesterol concentration by 10–15%.
Fatty acids
Fatty acids (Fig. 37.2) have the general chemical formula 
RCOOH. Those relevant to human nutrition are the 
long chain (C12–C20) fatty acids containing even num-
bers of carbon atoms. They are further defined as satu-
rated, for example stearic (C18:0); monounsaturated, for 
example oleic (C18:1), and polyunsaturated, for example 
linoleic (C18:2) and linolenic (C18:3), the second fig-
ures indicating the number of double bonds. In general, 
dietary saturated fatty acids originate from animals and 
the unsaturated fatty acids from plants. There are, how-
ever, exceptions, for example palmitic acid (C16:0) is 
saturated but derived from palm oil, and the ω-3 series, 
which are unsaturated but found in fish. The position of 
the carbon of the first double bond in the polyunsatu-
rated fatty acids differentiates the ω-6 series (where the 
fist double bond starts beyond the 6th carbon atom from 
the methyl end of the molecule), from the ω-3 series, 
where it starts beyond the 3rd carbon atom.
The long chain fatty acids are oxidized for energy 
production by a process known as β-oxidation; this re-
sults in the sequential shortening of the chain by two 
carbon atoms and the production of acetyl-CoA. Small 
amounts of long chain fatty acids are elongated to very 
long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs), which have a structural 
function in certain specialized cells.
Triglycerides
Triglycerides (see Fig. 37.3) comprise three fatty acids 
esterified with a glycerol backbone. ‘Triacylglycerols’ 
is the correct chemical name but they are more com-
monly known as ‘triglycerides’ and this term will be 
used throughout this chapter. Triglycerides are the ma-
jor dietary fat. They are hydrolysed in the gut by lipases 
to fatty acids and monoglycerides. The monoglycer-
ides undergo re-esterification in enterocytes and sub-
sequent incorporation into chylomicrons. The major 
sites of ­endogenous triglyceride synthesis are the liver 
and ­adipose tissue. In normal circumstances, hepatic 
triglyceride is secreted in very low density lipoproteins 
(VLDL). In certain pathological states, triglyceride ac-
cumulates in hepatocytes, leading to hepatic steatosis. 
Adipose ­tissue triglyceride represents the major energy 
store of the body. Fatty acids are mobilized from adipose 
tissue triglycerides by the action of ­hormone-­sensitive 
lipase (HSL), which is activated by glucagon and adren-
aline (epinephrine) and inhibited by insulin.
Phospholipids
Phospholipids, like triglycerides, have a glycerol back-
bone; in phospholipids, this is esterified with two fatty 
acids and the third hydroxyl group is linked via a phos-
phodiester bond to an amino alcohol such as choline, 
serine or ethanolamine (Fig.  37.4). Phospholipids are 
therefore amphipathic molecules, with both hydrophilic 
(phosphate group) and hydrophobic (fatty acid) domains. 
This property is responsible for the capacity of phospho-
lipids to solubilize other lipids and accounts for their lo-
cation on the surfaces of lipoprotein molecules and in the 
cell membrane lipid bilayer.
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
O
O
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
O
H
C
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
H
H
H
H
C
C
O
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
O
H
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
Saturated 
Monounsaturated 
Trans 
Cis 
FIGURE 37.2  ■  Structure of fatty acids.
H
H
O
O
H
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
C
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
H
O
O
C
O
O
C
FIGURE 37.3  ■  Structure of triglycerides.
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
705
Eicosanoids
This group of compounds takes its name from the sys-
tematic name of C20 (eicosa-) fatty acids from which they 
are derived. It includes prostaglandins, thromboxanes 
and leukotrienes. These were originally named because 
they were found in prostate, platelets (thrombocytes) and 
white cells (leukocytes), respectively. They have major 
effects on the immune response, reproductive function 
(including the induction of labour), cholesterol metabo-
lism, smooth muscle function (causing vasoconstriction 
or dilatation), platelet aggregation and thrombosis.
Prostaglandins contain a substituted cyclopentane ring. 
Thromboxanes are oxygenated eicosanoids closely ­related to 
the prostaglandins. The rate-limiting step in the synthesis of 
both (see Fig. 37.5) is the phospholipase ­A2-mediated release 
of fatty acids from phospholipids. The principal ­precursor 
of prostaglandins is arachidonic acid (C20:4, eicosatet-
raenoic acid). The first two steps in their ­synthesis are 
catalysed by prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase, which 
has both cyclooxygenase and peroxidase activity. The 
major products of this enzyme’s activity are prostaglandin 
G2 (PGG2) and prostaglandin H2 (PGH2). These are both 
prostaglandins of the 2 series, having 2 ­carbon–carbon 
­double bonds. Prostaglandin H2 is converted to throm-
boxane A2 (TXA2) in platelets and prostacyclin (PGI2) in 
the arterial wall. Arachidonic acid also serves as a substrate 
for various lipoxygenases, which generate the leukotrienes, 
inflammatory mediators and potent stimulators of muscle 
contraction. Eicosatrienoic acid (20:3) and eicosapentenoic 
acid (20:5), are alternative precursors for prostaglandin syn-
thesis. The latter generates prostaglandins of the 3 series 
and leukotrienes of the 5 series.
Eicosanoid imbalance is of interest in atherosclerosis 
because several recognized risk factors for atherosclero-
sis, such as smoking, hypertension and diabetes mellitus, 
are associated with changes in eicosanoid production.
Aspirin inhibits cyclooxygenase, thereby reducing 
prostaglandin, especially platelet TXA2, synthesis. This 
is the rationale for the use of aspirin in the prophylaxis 
of atherosclerotic vascular disease. Steroids directly in-
hibit the release of arachidonic acid from membrane 
phospholipids.
Sphingolipids
The backbone of sphingolipids is sphingosine or a simi-
lar long chain base. The sphingolipids vary in chain 
length from C14 to C20. Sphingosine itself has 18 carbon 
atoms and is formed from the condensation of palmi-
toyl CoA (C16:0) with serine. Another fatty acid chain 
is joined to sphingosine through an amide link to form 
a ceramide. Ceramides have a free hydroxyl group that 
allows reaction with another component. If this con-
tains a phosphate group, then the resultant products are 
a type of phospholipid called sphingophospholids, also 
termed sphingomyelins (Fig. 37.6), which are essential 
components of nerve cells. If a carbohydrate group is 
attached to ceramide then glycosphingolipids, or sim-
ply glycolipids, are formed. These include cerebrosides, 
sulfatides, globosides and gangliosides. Glycosides of 
ceramide are referred to as cerebrosides: they are pres-
ent in relatively high concentrations in brain. Many 
glycosphingolipids contain oligosaccharides; those that 
contain more than one molecule of sialic acid are re-
ferred to as gangliosides.
Cell
membrane
Hydrophilic
head
Choline
Phosphate
Glycerol
Fatty acids
Hydrophobic
tails
H2C
C
O
CH2
O
P O-
O
(CH3)3 N
CH2
O
CH2
CH
O
O
C O
+
FIGURE 37.4  ■  Structure of phospholipids.
706	
Clinical biochemistry
Nuclear lipids
The nucleus is a highly structured organelle. For a long 
time, it was thought that lipids, which quantitatively are a 
minor component of the nucleus, only served a structural 
role and originated in the cytoplasm. It is now recognized 
that lipids serve other functions including signalling and 
modulating. Lipid-metabolizing enzymes have been dem-
onstrated to be present within the nucleus. Phospholipids 
are the predominant class of lipid in the nucleus, with 
lesser amounts of cholesterol, free fatty acids, diglycer-
ides and sphingolipids. The nucleus is surrounded by 
the nuclear envelope, which comprises an outer nuclear 
membrane and an inner nuclear membrane. Cholesterol 
has a structural role in the outer nuclear membrane, 
which is continuous with the endoplasmic reticulum; the 
inner nuclear membrane is associated with the nuclear 
lamina and chromatin and is deficient in cholesterol. The 
inner and outer nuclear membranes are joined by the 
pore membranes at the nuclear pores, which are associ-
ated with the nuclear pore complexes that allow passive 
transfer of molecules <50 kDa between the cytoplasm 
and nucleoplasm. The passage of larger molecules is en-
ergy dependent and requires a nuclear localization signal. 
Lipids with very long chain fatty acids are associated with 
the pore membrane–nuclear pore complexes and appear 
to be essential for maintaining their function.
LIPOPROTEINS
The lipoproteins are submicroscopic, macromolecular 
complexes of lipids (cholesterol, triglycerides, phospho-
lipids) and proteins (apolipoproteins, enzymes), held by 
non-covalent forces. The basic structure of lipoproteins 
is a hydrophobic core of triglycerides and/or cholesteryl 
esters surrounded by a layer of amphipathic phospholip-
ids, unesterified cholesterol and proteins (see Fig. 37.7). 
The hydrophilic surface protects the hydrophobic core 
from the aqueous environment. Lipoproteins differ in their 
relative concentrations of protein to lipid and in their con-
stituent lipids and proteins (Table 37.2). The densities of 
lipoproteins are inversely related to their size. The lipo-
proteins can be classified on the basis of their size, den-
sity or protein composition. The nomenclature of the 
­lipoproteins is based on their density: chylomicrons 
(<0.95 g/mL); VLDL (0.95–1.006 g/mL); intermediate den-
sity lipoproteins (IDL) (1.006–1.019 g/mL); low density 
Cyclo-
oxygenase
Bradykinin,
thrombin
Membrane 
phospholipids
Phospholipase A2
Steroids
Arachidonic
acid
Leukotrienes
(4 series)
PGG2
TXA2
PGI2
PGH2
HPETE
Lipoxygenase
Peroxidase
TXA2
synthase
PGI2
synthase
PGE2
PGD2
PGF2
NSAIDs
e.g. Aspirin
Pain,
fever
Smooth muscle 
contraction
Vasodilatation,  
inhibition of 
platelet 
aggregation
Vasoconstriction,  
platelet 
aggregation
Leukocyte 
chemotaxis,  
increased vascular 
permeabilty, 
bronchoconstriction
+
-
-
Key
PGD2, E2, F2, G2, H2 – Prostaglandins D2, E2, F2, G2, H2
PGI2 – Prostacyclin 
TXA2 – Thromboxane A2
HPETE – Hydroperoxyeicosotetraenoic acid
NSAIDs – Non steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
FIGURE 37.5  ■  An outline of eicosanoid synthesis.
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
707
lipoproteins (LDL) (1.019–1.063 g/mL) and high density 
lipoproteins (HDL) (1.063–1.210 g/mL). The classes are 
not homogeneous; each represents a continuum of par-
ticles of differing size, density and fate and, in the case 
of VLDL, also of origin. The physicochemical charac-
teristics of the principal lipoproteins are summarized in 
Table 37.3.
The apolipoprotein (apo) B-containing lipoproteins 
contain only one molecule of apo B per lipoprotein par-
ticle whereas multiple molecules of the other apolipopro-
teins are present in other lipoprotein particles.
Chylomicrons
Chylomicrons are the largest and most buoyant class of 
lipoprotein. The major protein component is apo B-48 
but they also contain apo A-I, apo A-II and apo A-IV. 
After secretion, they acquire apo E and apo C from 
HDL. Chylomicrons are formed in the intestine and are 
the transport vehicle for dietary fat. The largest chylomi-
cron particles have a diameter of over 1000 nm, whereas 
the smallest (75–200 nm) overlap with the apo B-100-
containing lipoproteins. Some of the smaller particles 
within the chylomicron range are this size when they are 
TABLE 37.2  Characteristics and major functions of apolipoproteins
Name
Chromosome
Amino acids
Mol wt (kDa)
Structural role
Function
A-I
11
243
29
HDL
LCAT activator
A-II
1
77
17 (dimer)
HDL
LPL regulator, LCAT and CETP 
cofactor
A-IV
11
396
44
Chylomicrons, HDL
LCAT activator
A-V
11
366
41
Chylomicrons, VLDL, HDL
LPL activator, chylomicron 
assembly
C-I
19
57
7
Chylomicrons, VLDL, HDL
LCAT activator
C-II
19
79
9
Chylomicrons, VLDL, HDL
LPL activator
C-III
11
79
9
VLDL, chylomicrons, HDL
LPL inhibitor, VLDL assembly
B-100
2
4536
500
VLDL/IDL/LDL
LDL-R ligand
B-48
2
2152
240
Chylomicrons and remnant 
particles
Structural component of 
chylomicrons
D
3
169
33
 
Transport of small lipophilic 
molecules
E
19
299
34
Chylomicrons, VLDL, 
remnants
LDL-R ligand for chylomicron 
remnants; LRP ligand
M
6
188
26
 
Transport of small lipophilic 
molecules
(a)
6
Variable
200–800
Lp(a)
 
Choline
Phosphate
A sphingomyelin
Sphingosine
Ceramide
CH
HN
C
O
CH2
CH2
O
P O
-O
O
CH2
CH2
(CH3)3     N
CH
HC
CH
CH2
OH
FIGURE 37.6  ■  Structure of sphingolipids.
Phospholipid
Protein
Tryglyceride and
cholesteryl ester
FIGURE 37.7  ■  Generic lipoprotein structure.
708	
Clinical biochemistry
secreted by enterocytes, while others represent partially 
delipidated ‘remnant’ particles. The core of chylomicrons 
is composed predominantly of triglycerides derived from 
the diet.
Very low density lipoproteins
These are the largest of the lipoproteins containing en-
dogenously produced lipids. The major protein compo-
nent of VLDL is apo B-100 but they also contain apo 
C-I, apo C-II, apo C-III, apo E and small amounts of apo 
A. Like chylomicrons, VLDLs acquire the majority of 
their component apo E and apo C from HDL in the cir-
culation; the core of VLDLs is composed predominantly 
of triglycerides. In contrast to chylomicrons, the triglyc-
erides in VLDL are endogenous in origin.
Intermediate density lipoproteins
These particles are produced during the conversion of 
VLDL to LDL; their densities lie between those of these 
lipoproteins. The core of IDLs contains cholesteryl es-
ters and triglycerides.
Low density lipoproteins
These are the major cholesterol-containing lipoproteins 
and represent the end-product of VLDL catabolism. 
The core of LDLs comprises mainly cholesteryl esters; 
the protein component is apo B-100.
High density lipoproteins
These are the smallest and densest of the lipoproteins. 
They may be sub-classified on the basis of size, density, 
shape, surface charge and electrophoretic mobility, as well 
as apolipoprotein composition (Table 37.3). High density 
lipoprotein is usually divided into three major subclasses. 
Nascent, discoidal or pre-β1HDL comprises predominantly 
apo A-I and phospholipid. It is the preferred substrate for 
the ATP binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1), which 
actively exports free cholesterol from peripheral cells and 
macrophages. HDL3 is formed from pre-β1HDL by the 
acquisition of free cholesterol. It is the preferred substrate 
for lecithin cholesterol acyl transferase (LCAT), which es-
terifies free cholesterol, increasing the size of the particle 
and allowing the uptake of more free cholesterol, produc-
ing the larger and more ­cholesterol-rich HDL2.
High density lipoprotein particles may contain apo A-I 
alone (LpA-I), both apo A-I and apo A-II (LpA-I/A-II) or 
apo A-II alone (LpA-II). LpA-I predominates in HDL2, 
whereas LpA-I/A-II predominate in HDL3. LpA-II 
represents a very small proportion of both HDL2 and 
HDL3.
Lipoprotein(a)
Lipoprotein(a) (Lp(a)) consists of LDL with its apo B-100 
bound by a disulfide bond to apolipoprotein(a) (apo(a)). 
It is thought to be assembled extracellularly, either in the 
circulation or on the surfaces of hepatocytes.
The plasma concentration of Lp(a) is genetically de-
termined and is inversely related to the length of the 
apo(a), so that the greater the chain length, the lower 
the concentration. Epidemiological studies suggest that 
a high Lp(a) concentration is an independent risk factor 
for cardiovascular disease (CVD), particularly in subjects 
with familial hypercholesterolaemia.
Lipoprotein X
Lipoprotein X is a lipoprotein that is found only in the 
plasma of subjects with cholestasis or who have familial 
lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency. It is com-
posed of phospholipids, free cholesterol and proteins; the 
major protein is albumin but small amounts of apo C and 
apo D are also present. It contains no apo B. Unlike all 
other lipoproteins, it migrates towards the cathode on 
agarose gel electrophoresis.
APOLIPOPROTEINS
The apolipoproteins are amphipathic; their hydrophobic 
regions interact with the lipids in the lipoprotein particle 
while their hydrophilic regions allow interaction with the 
aqueous environment. They have three functions: they 
provide the structural element to the lipoprotein parti-
cles, they act as ligands for specific receptors and they 
also act as activators or inhibitors of specific enzymes in-
volved in lipoprotein metabolism.
On the basis of electrophoretic mobility, HDL and 
LDL were originally referred to as α- and β-lipoproteins. 
The nomenclature of the corresponding apolipoproteins 
has arisen from this, apo A being the apolipoprotein de-
rived from HDL (α-lipoprotein) and apo B being derived 
from LDL (β-lipoprotein).
TABLE 37.3  Characteristics of the major lipoprotein classes
Lipoprotein
Hydrated density 
(g/mL)
Diameter (nm)
Molecular weight 
(kDa)
Electrophoretic 
mobility
Major 
apolipoprotein
Chylomicron
<0.95
75–1200
50 000–1 000 000
Origin
B-48
VLDL
0.95–1.006
30–200
10 000–80 000
Pre-β
B-100
IDL
1.006–1.019
25–35
5000–10 000
Slow pre-β
B-100
LDL
1.019–1.063
18–25
2300
β
B-100
HDL2
1.063–1.12
9–13
400
α
A-I (and A-II)
HDL3
1.12–1.21
7–9
200
α
A-I
Pre-β1 HDL
1.21
5–7
70
Pre-β
A-I
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
709
Apolipoprotein A
Apolipoprotein A-I
Apolipoprotein A-I (apo A-I) (molecular weight 29 kDa) 
is the major protein of HDL, constituting 70–80% of 
HDL protein. It is synthesized primarily in the liver and 
small intestine. In addition to its structural role in HDL, 
it is also an activator of lecithin cholesterol acyltransfer-
ase (LCAT). Reverse cholesterol transport is dependent 
on the ability of apo A-I to promote cellular cholesterol 
efflux, to bind to lipids, to activate LCAT and, within 
mature HDL, to interact with lipid transfer proteins and 
specific receptors. The gene for apo A-I (APOA1) is part 
of a gene cluster on the long arm of chromosome 11 that 
includes APOC3, APOA4 and APOA5.
Epidemiological studies have shown that plasma 
apo A-I concentrations, like those of HDL-cholesterol 
(HDL-C), are inversely related to cardiovascular risk.
Apolipoprotein A-II
Apolipoprotein A-II (apo A-II) (molecular weight 17 kDa, 
as homodimer) is also synthesized in the liver and, to a 
lesser extent, the small intestine. It accounts for about 
20% of HDL protein. Some HDL contains apo A-I 
and apo A-II while some HDL contains apo A-I alone. 
A  small amount of plasma apo A-II is associated with 
chylomicrons and VLDL. Apo A-II regulates lipoprotein 
lipase (LPL) activity, and is a cofactor for LCAT and for 
cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP). Like apo A-I, 
it appears to be inversely related to the risk of coronary 
disease. It may play a role in the remodelling of HDL, 
possibly by an effect on the reactivity of HDL towards 
lipid transfer proteins, enzymes and receptors, including 
the scavenger receptor B1 (SRB1) (see p. 719).
Apolipoprotein A-IV
Apolipoprotein A-IV (apo A-IV) (molecular weight 
44 kDa) is synthesized only in the small intestine. It has 
been suggested that it may have a role in intestinal lipid 
transport, increasing the residence time of nascent chylo-
micron particles, allowing for greater expansion of their 
cores and thus capacity to transport triglycerides. The 
majority of apo A-IV in plasma exists in the free form. 
A small amount is associated with HDL and chylomicrons. 
In  vitro, apo A-IV activates LCAT, although not as ef-
fectively as does apo A-I. It may also be necessary for the 
maximal activation of LPL by apo C-II. Over-expression of 
APOA4 in mice results in increased plasma concentrations 
of total- and HDL-cholesterol, and triglycerides; despite 
this, it protects against diet-induced atherosclerosis. In hu-
mans, apo A-IV deficiency has been reported in patients 
with apo A-I and apo C-III deficiency, and this may account 
for the fat malabsorption seen in affected individuals.
Apolipoprotein A-V
The APOA5 gene is expressed in liver, and apolipopro-
tein A-V (apo A-V), in contrast to other apolipopro-
teins, is present at very low concentrations in the plasma 
(approximately 5 nmol/L). It is found primarily in HDL. 
Apo A-V affects plasma triglycerides through an effect on 
the lipolysis of the triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, possibly 
by binding to the lipoprotein, endothelial proteoglycans 
and LPL and thus stabilizing the lipolytic machinery. 
Although plasma concentrations of apo A-V show little 
correlation with plasma triglyceride concentration or 
with prevalence of cardiovascular disease, genetic stud-
ies have shown polymorphisms in APOA5 to be strong 
determinants of both. Genetic variants in humans have 
been identified, in association with both high and low 
triglyceride concentrations. Deficiency leads to reduced 
LPL activity and a type V dyslipidaemia (p. 726).
Apolipoprotein B
This lipoprotein exists in two forms; apolipoprotein B-100 
(apo B-100), which is made in the liver and is the structural 
protein of VLDL, IDL and LDL, and apo B-48, which is 
synthesized in the intestine and is incorporated into chy-
lomicrons. Both apo B molecules remain with the lipo-
protein particle in which they are secreted throughout the 
lifespan of that particle, unlike the other apolipoproteins, 
which readily transfer between different classes of lipopro-
teins. Increased plasma concentrations of apo B-containing 
lipoproteins confer an increased risk for the development 
of atheroma. Both forms of apo B are produced from the 
APOB gene; post-transcriptional editing of the mRNA in 
the intestine leads to the production of apo B-48.
Apolipoprotein B-100
Apolipoprotein B-100 (apo B-100) (molecular weight 
500 kDa) is necessary for the assembly and secretion of 
VLDL. It contains several very hydrophobic areas that 
serve as strong lipid-binding domains. It also has several 
domains that could serve as binding sites for heparin-like 
molecules and form the basis for some of the cell surface 
interactions of the apo B-containing lipoproteins. In ad-
dition, apo B-100 contains an LDL receptor binding do-
main (amino acids 3100–3400), which allows the specific 
uptake of LDL by the LDL receptor.
Apolipoprotein B-48
The amino terminal 48% of apo B-100 forms apolipo-
protein B-48 (apo B-48) (molecular weight 240 kDa). 
This apolipoprotein is produced from the APOB gene 
in the intestine by an mRNA editing process; a cytidine 
deaminase, APOB mRNA editing enzyme complex 1 
­(apobec-1), binds to and acts on the cytosine molecule 
at base 6666 of the mRNA to form a uracil. The edit-
ing enzyme complex is only found in intestinal epithelial 
cells. Its action results in the glutamine 2153 triplet of 
CAA being converted into the stop codon, UAA. Thus 
protein synthesis is prematurely terminated at amino acid 
2152 and, as a result, apo B-48 does not contain the LDL 
receptor binding domain present in apo B-100.
Apolipoprotein C
There are three apolipoprotein Cs, all of which are syn-
thesized in the liver. In plasma, they transfer between the 
710	
Clinical biochemistry
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (chylomicrons, VLDL and 
their remnants) and HDL.
Apolipoprotein C-I
Apolipoprotein C-I (apo C-I) (molecular weight 7 kDa) 
forms a minor component of VLDL, IDL and HDL; it 
acts as an activator of LCAT.
Apolipoprotein C-II
Apolipoprotein C-II (apo C-II) (molecular weight 9 kDa) 
is a component of chylomicrons and VLDL, in which it 
functions as an activator of LPL. Apo C-II is also found 
in IDL and HDL.
Apolipoprotein C-III
Apolipoprotein C-III (apo C-III) (molecular weight 
9 kDa) is synthesized mainly in the liver and, to a lesser 
extent, the intestine. It forms a major structural compo-
nent of VLDL but is also present in chylomicrons and 
HDL. It acts as an inhibitor of LPL, and has more re-
cently been shown to promote hepatic assembly and se-
cretion of VLDL. Apo C-III also inhibits hepatic uptake 
of chylomicron and VLDL remnant particles, possibly by 
preventing interaction of apo E on these remnant par-
ticles with the hepatic receptor. High plasma apo C-III 
concentrations are associated with high plasma triglycer-
ide concentrations.
Null mutations have been reported which are asso-
ciated with low plasma triglyceride and LDL, and high 
HDL concentrations. However, the APOC3 gene is close 
to the APOA1 gene, and both are deficient in some forms 
of apo A1 deficiency, which cause low plasma HDL and 
triglyceride concentrations.
Apolipoprotein D
Apolipoprotein D (apo D) (molecular weight 33 kDa) is 
a lipoprotein-associated glycoprotein, forming a minor 
component of HDL, VLDL, IDL and LDL. It trans-
ports small hydrophobic ligands, including sterols and 
cholesterol. Apo D is associated with increased activity 
of lipoprotein lipase, and missense mutations cause ele-
vated triglycerides. The apo D concentrations in the hip-
pocampus and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with 
Alzheimer disease are increased.
Apolipoprotein E
Apolipoprotein E (apo E) is a 299 amino acid glycopro-
tein (molecular weight 34 kDa) synthesized by the liver 
and found in all classes of lipoproteins except LDL. It 
is involved in the control of chylomicron and VLDL 
remnant removal from the circulation. It also has anti-
oxidant properties, and controls the efflux of cholesterol 
from cells, together with apo A-I. Apo E is a polymor-
phic protein: three common isoforms occur, which can 
be separated by isoelectric focusing and are designated 
apo E2, apo E3 and apo E4. Apo E2 differs from apo E3 
by only a single amino acid, Cys being substituted for Arg 
at residue 158. Apo E4 also differs from apo E3 by only a 
single amino acid, Arg being substituted for Cys at resi-
due 112. The apo E3/E3 phenotype is the most common, 
comprising 50–70% of the population, whereas the apo 
E2/E2 phenotype is the least common, occurring in 
about 1% of the population.
The apo E3 isoform is associated with normal chylo-
micron and VLDL metabolism. The E2 isoform does not 
function as an effective ligand for the receptor-mediated 
uptake of remnant particles, having less than 2% of nor-
mal apo E3 binding to the LDL receptor. As a result, 
remnant lipoproteins tend to accumulate in the plasma 
of individuals homozygous for apo E2/E2. The E4 iso-
form is associated with higher concentrations of LDL-
cholesterol than E3. Apo E4 homozygotes are also at 
increased risk of Alzheimer disease. Apo E synthesis is 
upregulated to aid cell repair in response to cellular stress 
or injury. Apo E4 is more susceptible to proteolytic cleav-
age than E2 or E3. This results in accumulation of intra-
cellular fragments that cause changes in the cytoskeleton 
and the formation of neurofibrillary tangles.
Apolipoprotein M
Apolipoprotein M (apo M) (molecular weight 26 kDa) ful-
fills the criteria for being an apolipoprotein as it is not found 
free in plasma but is predominantly associated with HDL. 
Like apo D, it is a member of the lipocalin family of pro-
teins, which contain a binding domain for small lipophilic 
ligands, and may therefore have a role in transport of small 
lipid molecules. Although apo M is found in association 
with only 5% of HDL particles, where it may potentiate 
the antioxidant effect of HDL, its concentration is posi-
tively correlated with cholesterol concentration, suggesting 
that it may also have a role in cholesterol metabolism.
Apolipoprotein(a)
This apolipoprotein (apo(a)) is a large glycated protein of 
variable size (molecular weight 200–800 kDa). It contains 
multiple kinks in the polypeptide chain that are termed 
‘kringles’. Apo(a) is a homologue of plasminogen; it con-
tains a single copy of plasminogen kringle 5, multiple 
copies of plasminogen kringle 4 and an inactive protease 
domain. Kringle 4 shows wide variation in the number of 
repeats within the apo(a) molecule. In a subpopulation 
of LDL particles, apo(a) forms disulphide bridges with 
apo B-100 to form a distinct lipoprotein class termed 
lipoprotein(a) (Lp(a)) (see p. 708). The function of apo(a) 
is unknown. It has a strong homology with plasminogen 
and may interfere with fibrinolysis.
CHOLESTEROL ABSORPTION
Cholesterol of both dietary and biliary origin is absorbed 
in the upper jejunum facilitated by a specific transporter 
protein, the Niemann–Pick C1-like 1 (NPC1L1) pro-
tein. This has 50% homology with the product of the 
NPC1 gene, the Niemann–Pick C1 disease protein, 
which is involved in intracellular cholesterol trafficking. 
­Niemann–Pick C1-like 1 protein transports plant sterols 
as well as cholesterol.
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
711
In small intestinal enterocytes, dietary cholesterol is 
released by the action of lysosomes and selectively esteri-
fied by acyl-CoA cholesteryl acyltransferase 2 (ACAT2) 
prior to incorporation into chylomicrons. Any excess free 
cholesterol in enterocytes, together with any absorbed 
plant sterol, is excreted back into the intestinal lumen. 
The apical excretion of cholesterol and other sterols back 
into the gut lumen is a function of two hemitransporters 
of the ATP binding cassette transporter family, ABCG5 
and ABCG8. These are also responsible for the excretion 
of cholesterol and other sterols into the bile by hepato-
cytes. Expression of ABCG5 and ABCG8 in hepatocytes 
and enterocytes is under the control of the liver X recep-
tor (LXR) and is induced by cholesterol feeding.
Cholesterol absorption reflects the imbalance between 
the movement of cholesterol across the brush border into 
enterocytes and its excretion by enterocytes back into 
the intestinal lumen. In normal individuals, the rate of 
cholesterol absorption correlates with the plasma sterol 
concentrations. The rate of cholesterol absorption is 
a predictor of benefit of statin treatment and response 
to ezetimibe (a selective inhibitor of NPC1L1). Those 
with higher rates of cholesterol absorption show reduced 
CVD benefit from statins, and increased cholesterol low-
ering with ezetimibe.
β-Sitosterolaemia, also referred to as phytosterolae-
mia, is an autosomal recessive disorder caused by muta-
tions in ABCG5 or ABCG8, in which there is increased 
absorption of dietary non-cholesterol sterols, and con-
sequently an increased concentration (30–100-fold) of 
these sterols in blood. A ‘normal’ Western diet contains 
similar amounts (200–500 mg/day) of cholesterol and 
of non-cholesterol sterols (mainly plant but also some 
fish sterols). Approximately 55% of the cholesterol 
is usually absorbed, but normally less than 1% of the 
non-­cholesterol sterols. In the absence of a functional 
ABCG5/8 heterodimer, subjects overabsorb cholesterol 
and non-cholesterol sterols from enterocytes, because 
these transporters usually excrete some cholesterol and 
almost all non-cholesterol sterols back into the gut lumen. 
They also fail to excrete cholesterol and non-cholesterol 
sterols into the bile. These sterols become deposited at 
various sites in the body causing tendon xanthomas and 
premature atherosclerosis. Clinical features also include 
arthritis and haemolytic episodes. Treatment comprises a 
diet low in dietary sterols. Ezetimibe is also effective by 
inhibiting sterol absorption via NPC1L1.
TRIGLYCERIDE DIGESTION
Fat (triglyceride) digestion starts in the stomach, where 
lingual and gastric lipases hydrolyse 25–30% of ingested 
triglycerides into diglycerides and free fatty acids. In the 
duodenum, partially digested lipids mix with bile and 
pancreatic secretions. The latter contains a mixture of en-
zymes, including carboxyl ester lipase and pancreatic tri-
glyceride lipase, which are capable of further hydrolysing 
dietary lipids to monoglycerides, free fatty acids, glycerol 
and cholesterol. The bile acids serve to solubilize the lip-
ids and result in the formation of micelles, the contents 
of which are absorbed by enterocytes. The absorption of 
monoglycerides is by passive diffusion. Within the en-
terocytes, triglycerides are resynthesized from free fatty 
acids and either monoglycerides or glycerol.
BILE ACID METABOLISM
Approximately 500 mg of cholesterol is converted, in the 
liver, to bile acids each day. This replaces the bile acids 
lost in the stools and represents approximately 5% of the 
bile acid pool, as the enterohepatic circulation is 95% ef-
ficient. The synthesis and secretion of bile acids, together 
with hepatic cholesterol secretion into bile, represents 
the major pathway for the elimination of cholesterol 
from the body. The synthesis of the full complement of 
bile acids from cholesterol requires 17 enzymatic steps. 
It is under negative feedback control: accumulation of 
bile acids leads to reduced activity of the key enzymes 7α-
hydroxylase and sterol 12α-hydroxylase. The products of 
the bile acid synthetic pathway are the primary bile acids, 
cholic and chenodeoxycholic acids. In the gut, these pri-
mary bile acids are converted into secondary and tertiary 
bile acids by the action of anaerobic bacteria. The bile 
acids present in bile are a mixture of primary, secondary 
and tertiary, the latter being a consequence of enterohe-
patic circulation.
A number of enzymatic defects in the synthetic path-
way of bile acids have been described; in general, the ear-
lier in the pathway, the earlier in life clinical problems 
become manifest and the greater their severity. One of 
these disorders, due to defective sterol 27-hydroxylase ac-
tivity, is cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX). In this 
condition, cholesterol and its 5α-reduced derivative, cho-
lestanol, accumulate in the blood and tissues. As a result 
of this accumulation, affected individuals develop tendon 
xanthomas like those found in familial hypercholesterol-
aemia. In CTX, however, these sterols also accumulate 
in myelin sheaths, leading to progressive neurological 
dysfunction.
The bile acids act to solubilize fats during absorption 
from the gut, but they also have a solubilizing action in 
the bile. If the proportions of bile acids, cholesterol and 
phospholipid in the bile are disturbed, there is an in-
creased risk of gallstones being formed.
LIPOPROTEIN METABOLISM
Lipoprotein metabolism is summarized in Figure 37.8.
Assembly of apolipoprotein B-containing 
lipoproteins
The assembly of the apo B-containing lipoproteins re-
quires the coordinated synthesis of apo B and lipids. 
First, apo B has lipid added to it by microsomal triglyc-
eride transfer protein (MTP) as it is being synthesized 
in the endoplasmic reticulum, to form a nascent lipopro-
tein particle. Further triglyceride may be added, forming 
VLDL2. In the next step, VLDL2 is exported from the 
endoplasmic reticulum by a membrane associated protein 
712	
Clinical biochemistry
complex comprising a coatomere protein (COPII) and a 
GTPase (sar1b). The resulting sar1/COPII vesicles then 
fuse with the Golgi apparatus. Apo A-IV, apo C-III and 
apo A-I are added to the surface of the lipoprotein. In the 
presence of large amounts of free fatty acids and triglycer-
ides, phospholipase D1 and extracellular signal-regulated 
kinase 2 (ERK2) increase the formation of lipid droplets 
that deliver lipids to the Golgi apparatus and promote 
the further addition of lipid to VLDL2, which is thereby 
converted to VLDL1.
In healthy individuals, most VLDL particles are small 
and relatively triglyceride-poor VLDL2. In conditions 
such as insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes there is in-
creased production of larger, triglyceride-rich VLDL1, 
which in turn generate atherogenic remnants, small 
dense LDL particles and triglyceride rich HDL particles 
that are more readily catabolized, leading to low concen-
trations of circulating HDL.
Apolipoprotein B is constitutively synthesized, but the 
rate of production of apo B-containing lipoproteins is re-
lated to the availability of fatty acids for triglyceride syn-
thesis. When there is a plentiful supply of fatty acids, the 
majority of the apo B that is synthesized is incorporated 
into lipoproteins; however, when fatty acids are in short 
supply, the apo B is degraded intracellularly.
Once lipoprotein particles are fully formed, they are 
transferred to the cell surface for secretion. Very low 
density lipoprotein particles (200 nm) and chylomicrons 
(1000 nm) are large in the context of classic transport ves-
icles (range 50–80 nm). The intracellular transport of chy-
lomicrons and some VLDL particles relies on sar1/COPII 
vesicles. Defects in the SARA2 gene that codes for sar1b 
result in chylomicron retention disease, in which there is 
an inability to secrete chylomicron particles. Apo B-48 
is absent from the circulation, but apo B-100 containing 
lipoproteins are still present, although in reduced amounts, 
Liver
Vascular endothelium
(e.g. adipose tissue)
CE
BA
TG
FC
Cholesterol
Dietary TG
FFA
+
MG
FFAs
FFA
Albumin
FFAs
BILE
Dietary
fat
Apo E
VLDL
Apo C-II
Apo B-I00
LDL
LRP
HL
LDL-R
Apo E
Apo C-II
LPL
LPL
CM
Biliary
Dietary
FC
ACAT
CE
LDL-R
Peripheral
cells
ACAT – acyl-coenzyme A cholesteryl transferase
BA – bile acids
CE – cholesteryl ester
CM – chylomicrons
CMR – chylomicron remnants
FC – free cholesterol
FFA – free fatty acids
HDL – high density lipoprotein
HL – hepatic lipase
IDL – intermediate density lipoprotein
LDL – low density lipoprotein
LDL-R – LDL receptor
LPL – lipoprotein lipase
LRP – LDL receptor related protein
MG – monoglyceride
TG – triglyceride
VLDL – very low density lipoprotein
Intestine
TG
ACAT
LPL/HL
IDL
CMR
Apo B-100
Apo B-100
Apo B-48
Apo B-48
FIGURE 37.8  ■  Outline of the metabolism of the apo B-containing lipoproteins.
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
713
as sar1b is also involved in later stages of the VLDL path-
way. Newly synthesized VLDL is not necessarily secreted 
from the cell, and may undergo immediate degradation. 
Sortilins (see p. 721) are now recognized to be involved in 
routing newly synthesized lipoproteins either to intracel-
lular degradation or for export into the circulation.
Exogenous pathway
Enterocytes absorb dietary cholesterol and triglyceride 
from the gut in the form of free cholesterol, fatty acids and 
monoglycerides. After re-esterification, cholesteryl esters 
and triglycerides (containing fatty acids of chain length 
C14 and greater) are incorporated into the cores of chy-
lomicron particles. Enterocytes synthesize apo B-48 (the 
major protein of chylomicrons), apo A-I, apo A-II and apo 
A-IV that, together with phospholipids, form the surface 
layer of chylomicrons. Apolipoprotein B-48 is essential 
for chylomicron secretion. Secretory vesicles bud off from 
the Golgi apparatus and migrate to the basolateral regions 
of enterocytes. Here, they fuse with the plasma membrane 
and release chylomicrons into the intestinal lymphatics. 
The chylomicrons pass in the lymphatics to the thoracic 
duct and enter the circulation via the left subclavian vein.
There is only one apo B-48 molecule per chylomi-
cron particle and it remains with the particle throughout 
its life until, as a chylomicron remnant, it is taken up 
by the liver. In contrast, multiple copies of the other 
apolipoproteins are present in a single chylomicron par-
ticle. These other apolipoproteins do not remain with 
a given chylomicron particle throughout its life but are 
exchanged with other lipoproteins. From the time of se-
cretion, chylomicrons undergo constant modification, 
gaining apo C-II, apo C-III, apo E, phospholipids and 
cholesterol from HDL. The acquisition of apo C-II al-
lows chylomicrons to interact with LPL, which is sited 
on the vascular endothelium, especially in adipose tis-
sue and muscle. Lipoprotein lipase acts extracellularly 
to hydrolyse triglycerides within the chylomicron cores; 
the fatty acids thus released can be either utilized as an 
energy source or re-esterified and stored in adipose tis-
sue as triglycerides. As hydrolysis proceeds, the cores 
of the chylomicrons reduce in size and excess surface 
components – phospholipids, free cholesterol, apo 
C-II and apo C-III – are transferred back to HDL. 
Apolipoprotein C-III may exert a modulating effect 
on LPL-catalysed chylomicron hydrolysis. Both apo 
C-II and LPL are necessary for normal chylomicron 
catabolism. Continuing loss of apo C-II as the mass of 
individual chylomicron particles is reduced eventually 
prevents further interaction with LPL, and chylomicron 
remnant particles are generated. These remnants have a 
relatively high content of cholesteryl esters and apo E.
Chylomicron remnants are normally cleared quickly 
from the plasma by the liver. They enter the space of 
Disse through the fenestrated sinusoidal endothelium, 
together with lipoprotein lipase. The space of Disse is 
rich in heparan sulfate proteoglycans (HSPRG) as well 
as hepatic lipase (HL) and apo E, which are secreted 
by hepatocytes. The proteoglycans and apo E bind the 
remnants that are further catabolized by HL and LPL, 
becoming enriched in apo E and further depleted in 
triglycerides. The remnants may then be taken up in 
a process directly mediated by HSPRG or via apo E 
binding to the LDL receptor related protein (LRP). 
This LRP mediated uptake may be of remnant particles 
alone, or of remnants bound to HSPRG. The LDL re-
ceptor is also able to uptake chylomicron remnants via 
apo E binding in a process independent of HSPRG.
The cholesteryl esters delivered to the liver by chylo-
micron remnant particles may be utilized for the synthe-
sis of bile acids or membranes or be secreted in VLDL, 
while the apo B-48 undergoes degradation.
In summary, chylomicron metabolism essentially com-
prises two steps. In the first step, most of the fatty acids 
derived by peripheral lipolysis of chylomicrons enter adi-
pocytes for storage as triglycerides or other cells for oxida-
tion for energy production. A small fraction of the released 
fatty acids is bound to plasma albumin and transported in 
the blood to the liver and other tissues. The second step 
involves remnant particles delivering the remaining tri-
glycerides and almost all the cholesterol to the liver.
Lipolysis in adipose tissue
Triglycerides in white adipose tissue, far from being an 
inert store, are continuously undergoing lipolysis and 
re-esterification. In the fasting state, and at times of in-
creased energy demand, free fatty acids are released into 
the circulation and transported to other tissues. The li-
polysis of triglycerides in white adipose tissue is initiated 
by adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL). Its action results 
in the production of diglycerides and free fatty acids, 
but it has very little hydrolytic activity towards diglycer-
ides. Hormone sensitive lipase, which until recently was 
thought to be the rate-limiting enzyme involved in the 
release of free fatty acids from adipose tissue, is actually 
rate limiting for the hydrolysis of diglycerides rather than 
triglycerides. The monoglycerides resulting from the ac-
tion of HSL are acted on by a third enzyme, monoglyc-
eride lipase (MGL).
Adipocyte lipolysis is controlled by a number of lipo­
lytic and antilipolytic hormones, including catechol-
amines and insulin.
Endogenous pathway
Hepatocytes are the originators and often also the ac-
ceptors of particles involved in the endogenous pathway, 
which shows many points of similarity with the exoge-
nous pathway.
The liver secretes VLDL, a triglyceride-rich lipopro-
tein. The triglycerides are produced either de novo by 
hepatocytes or taken up from the plasma. These triglycer-
ides, together with cholesterol derived from chylomicron 
remnants or from de novo synthesis, are secreted with 
phospholipids and apo B-100 as nascent VLDL. Some apo 
C-I, apo C-II, apo C-III and apo E are also present in the 
nascent VLDL particle, but the majority of these apoli-
poproteins are probably acquired from HDL within the 
circulation in the same way as in the exogenous pathway. In 
situations where there is an excess of hepatic triglyceride, 
large VLDL particles are secreted. Large VLDL particles 
are also secreted in familial hypertriglyceridaemia, whereas 
714	
Clinical biochemistry
in familial combined hyperlipidaemia (see p. 724), the rate 
of VLDL secretion is increased but a relative scarcity of 
triglycerides ensures that the individual VLDL particles 
are smaller and relatively poor in triglycerides.
The initial metabolic transformation of VLDL is a 
progressive LPL-mediated lipolysis analogous to the 
process involving chylomicrons. This requires apo C-II 
and produces cholesteryl esters and apo E-rich remnant 
particles. As in chylomicron metabolism, the surface 
components of VLDL are transferred back to HDL as 
the cores shrink. VLDL remnants comprise small VLDL 
particles and IDL. About half are cleared by the liver in 
a process that involves uptake by LRP, which recognizes 
apo E. The remainder undergoes further hydrolysis by 
HL to form LDL.
Low density lipoprotein is the major cholesterol-
carrying lipoprotein in the plasma and usually accounts 
for 70% or more of the total plasma cholesterol. Virtually 
the only protein contained in the LDL particle is a single 
molecule of apo B-100, which acts as the ligand for the 
LDL receptor. LDL receptors are present on hepatocytes 
as well as the cells of peripheral tissues. Approximately 
50% of plasma LDL uptake by the LDL receptor-
mediated mechanism is hepatic. The major determinant 
of plasma LDL-C concentration is the number of func-
tional LDL receptors.
Low density lipoprotein receptors recognize both apo 
B-100 on LDL and apo E on remnant particles and HDL. 
Once a lipoprotein has been bound to the receptor, the 
receptor-­lipoprotein complex localizes in the coated pit 
region from where it is internalized by endocytosis. The 
LDL receptor is recycled while the lipoprotein under-
goes lysosomal degradation to unesterified cholesterol 
and amino acids. The cholesterol thereby released is 
available for further metabolic transformations as well 
as to regulate the transcription and/or translation of the 
HMG-CoA reductase and the LDL receptor genes. The 
cholesterol may be re-esterified by the action of ACAT 
and stored, or may be utilized for bile acid, steroid or 
membrane synthesis.
Hepatic cholesterol trafficking
The liver is the key organ for the regulation of 
cholesterol; not only is it responsible for the majority of 
cholesterol synthesis but it also acquires cholesterol from 
all lipoprotein classes. The cholesterol secreted into bile 
is mostly derived from lipoproteins with only a small 
contribution coming from de novo hepatic synthesis or 
hepatic cholesteryl ester stores. This involves preferential 
trafficking of lipoprotein-derived cholesterol, which 
involves multiple cholesterol transport-related gene 
products, the expression of which is regulated by the 
concerted activity of sterol-activated transcription factors.
High density lipoprotein metabolism 
(see Fig. 37.9)
Assembly of lipoproteins
Apo A-I is exported into the circulation by liver and in-
testinal cells. Here it may combine with phospholipids to 
form nascent (discoidal or pre-β1) HDL.
Pre-β1HDL may also be formed from spare surface com-
ponents of triglyceride rich lipoproteins (VLDL, chylomi-
crons, and their remnants) following the action of lipases.
Liver
Apo A-1
CE
FC
Bile
sPLA2
EL
SRB1
SRB1
CMR/
IDL
HDL2
HDL3
FC
/P
L/A
po
LPL
CE
CETP
TG
LCAT
PLTP
Pre β1 HDL
Peripheral cell/
macrophage
ABCA1
FC/PL
HL
PL
CM/
VLDL
ABCG1
+
+
SRB1
FC
ABCA1 – ATP binding cassette transporter A1
ABCG1 – ATP binding cassette transporter G1
CE – cholesteryl ester
CETP – cholesteryl ester transfer protein
CM – chylomicrons
CMR – chylomicron remnants
EL – endothelial lipase
FC – free cholesterol
HDL – high density lipoprotein
HL – hepatic lipase 
IDL – intermediate density lipoprotein
LCAT – lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase
PL – phospholipid
PLTP – phospholipid transfer protein
sPLA2 – secretory phospholipase A2
SRB1 – scavenger receptor B1
TG – triglyceride
VLDL – very low density lipoprotein
FIGURE 37.9  ■  Outline of HDL metabolism and its role in reverse cholesterol transport.
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
715
Cholesterol efflux
Except in steroidogenic tissues (adrenals and gonads), 
the catabolism of cholesterol in peripheral cells is lim-
ited to its partial degradation by 27α-hydroxylase. 
Excess free cholesterol has to be removed. This occurs 
by an active process, or by diffusion. Free cholesterol 
is actively exported by ATP binding cassette trans-
porter A1 (ABCA1), which preferentially binds pre-
β1HDL. Expression of ABCA1 is regulated by the liver 
X receptor/retinoid X receptor (LXR/RXR) system; the 
physiological ligand of LXR is oxysterol, the cellular 
concentration of which increases in parallel with that of 
cholesterol.
Diffusion is non-specific efflux of cholesterol from 
cell surface membranes to an extracellular ‘acceptor’. All 
HDL particles can act as acceptors of free cholesterol. 
This is a bidirectional process. Net efflux is increased by 
the activity of LCAT, which esterifies free cholesterol in 
lipoproteins, thereby increasing the concentration gradi-
ent between HDL and the cell membrane. Cholesterol 
efflux by diffusion is not as dependent on the activity of 
LCAT as previously thought, as it may also be facilitated 
by the SRB1 and the ATP binding cassette transporter 
G1 (ABCG1). The SRB1 binds preferentially to larger 
(HDL2) particles. In peripheral cells, SRB1 forms a hy-
drophobic channel through which free cholesterol can 
readily diffuse, enhancing the rate of efflux. The ABCG1 
increases the concentration of free cholesterol within the 
plasma membrane and makes it more readily desorbed. 
This promotes the step which is normally rate limiting 
in cholesterol efflux by diffusion. Cholesterol efflux ca-
pacity correlates inversely with atherosclerosis, after 
adjustment for plasma HDL concentration. However, 
although both plasma apo A-I and HDL predict efflux 
capacity, they account for <50% of the variation seen. 
This emphasizes the importance of overall flux through 
the pathway of reverse cholesterol transport rather than 
simply plasma HDL concentration in the development 
of atheroma.
Reverse cholesterol transport
Free cholesterol exported from peripheral cells or 
macrophages combines with apo A-I to form ‘nascent’ 
pre-β1HDL. Esterification of free cholesterol on the 
surface of the HDL particle by LCAT produces hy-
drophobic cholesteryl esters that migrate to the cen-
tre of the particle, releasing capacity to accept more 
free cholesterol, and transforming it into a larger, 
more spherical particle (HDL3). HDL3 accepts more 
cholesterol by active export or facilitated diffusion, 
and LCAT further increases particle size. More free 
cholesterol, phospholipids and apolipoproteins (C-II, 
C-III, E) are also transferred from triglyceride-rich 
lipoproteins (TGRLs) and their remnants as triglyc-
erides are removed from these particles by the action 
of LPL. The HDL particle increases in size to become 
HDL2, which contains a greater proportion of apo 
A-II and is the preferred ligand for the hepatic SRB1 
receptor. When HDL2 is bound, cholesteryl esters are 
taken up into the cell, converted to free cholesterol and 
may then be excreted in bile. Scavenger receptor B1 
is present on the basolateral membrane of hepatocytes 
where it promotes influx of cholesterol, and on the 
canalicular membrane where it promotes efflux to bile. 
Cholesterol taken up into the hepatocyte by SRB1 may 
also be trafficked across the cell and pumped into bile 
by ABCG5/G8 at the canalicular membrane.
High density lipoprotein 2 may also transfer cho-
lesterol to TGRLs in exchange for triglycerides, ca-
talysed by CETP. This potentially ‘diverts’ cholesterol 
from the ‘normal’ reverse cholesterol transport path-
way into potentially atherogenic lipoproteins, and may 
therefore be proatherogenic. However, in transferring 
cholesterol to the VLDL/LDL pathway, it allows for 
cholesterol clearance via hepatic LDL receptors, and 
may theoretically be antiatherogenic in situations 
where clearance of cholesterol from HDL via SRB1 is 
saturated. The triglycerides that enrich HDL as a re-
sult of this exchange are hydrolysed by lipases and this 
results in small dense HDL, which is more readily ca-
tabolized by the kidney, depleting plasma HDL. This 
CETP-mediated exchange is increased in the presence 
of increased circulating amounts of TGRLs and this ac-
counts for the inverse relationship between plasma tri-
glycerides and HDL. HDL2 is a substrate for hepatic 
and endothelial lipases (ELs) and secretory phospholi-
pase A2 (sPLA2). These may regenerate pre-β1HDL or 
HDL3, but if HDL is triglyceride-enriched by exces-
sive CETP activity then the HDL particle may disinte-
grate, promoting catabolism in the kidneys.
High density lipoprotein  therefore exists as a complex 
interchange of lipoproteins. ABCA1, ABCG1, LCAT and 
LPL all increase particle size, while CETP, SRB1, HL, 
EL and sPLA2 tend to reduce size, with net transport of 
free cholesterol from peripheral cells to the liver. These 
interactions also have the potential to ‘divert’ cholesterol 
to atherogenic TGRLs, with loss of apo A-I, especially in 
conditions where TGRLs are increased.
High density lipoprotein  cholesterol (HDL-C) shows 
an inverse relationship with atherosclerosis in epidemio-
logical studies, although this is not a straightforward as 
previously thought. Very high concentrations of HDL-C 
are associated with increased risk of atherosclerosis, which 
could be due to HDL being ‘trapped’ as a ‘dysfunctional’ 
pool in plasma rather than reflecting an increased flux 
through the reverse cholesterol transport pathway. This 
highlights the importance of qualitative changes in HDL 
that may affect its function, and the overall net flux through 
the reverse cholesterol transport pathway (see p. 714) as 
well as total plasma concentration.
High density lipoprotein  has direct anti-atherogenic 
properties including:
•	 downregulation of the expression of adhesion mol-
ecules on the surface of the vascular endothelium
•	 inhibition of platelet aggregation
•	 prevention of the inhibition of nitric oxide synthase 
by oxidized LDL
•	 upregulation of ATP binding cassette transporter A1 
(ABCA1) and activation of intracellular signalling 
leading to stimulation of cholesterol efflux.
In addition, paraoxonase, an ester hydrolase that is 
transported bound to HDL, has antioxidant properties.
716	
Clinical biochemistry
ENZYMES INVOLVED IN LIPOPROTEIN 
METABOLISM
Lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase
Lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) is a glycopro-
tein that has both a phospholipase A2 and an acyltransferase 
action. It is essential for the normal maturation, intercon-
version and rearrangements of all lipoprotein classes and is 
involved in reverse cholesterol transport. It is synthesized 
by the liver and circulates in the plasma reversibly bound 
to HDL and LDL. Lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase 
catalyses the esterification of free cholesterol on the sur-
faces of lipoproteins. The preferred substrate for LCAT 
is HDL, which contains apo A-I, its most potent activator. 
The ability of apo A-I to activate LCAT depends on the 
lipid composition of HDL, being most effective in small 
HDL particles, which have a low ratio of phospholipid to 
apo A-I. The cholesteryl esters formed by the action of 
LCAT expand the cores of the HDL particles. Lecithin 
cholesterol acyltransferase activity may be a rate limiting 
step in reverse cholesterol transport, making it a potential 
therapeutic target in the prevention of atherosclerosis, al-
though evidence as to the effect of LCAT on the develop-
ment of atherosclerosis is conflicting. Both recombinant 
LCAT and small molecule activators of LCAT activity are 
being explored as possible therapies.
Mutations in the LCAT gene cause either familial 
LCAT deficiency, when there is no LCAT activity or fish 
eye disease, with partial LCAT deficiency (see p. 729).
Lipases
Lipoprotein lipase
Lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is an extracellular enzyme that 
is bound by the glycosaminoglycan heparan sulphate to 
capillary endothelial cells. It is present in large amounts 
in the capillaries of adipose tissue and muscle, both skele-
tal and cardiac. Lipoprotein lipase belongs to the triglyc-
eride lipase gene family, which also includes HL, EL, and 
pancreatic triglyceride lipase (PTL). It is the major lipo-
lytic enzyme involved in the intravascular metabolism of 
the triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. Myocytes and adipo-
cytes secrete LPL in a catalytically inactive form, which 
is then transported to the capillary endothelial surface.
Along with HL and EL, LPL is a homodimer. 
Interaction of the dimer with heparan sulphate on the en-
dothelial surface serves to anchor and stabilize the LPL. 
LPL monomers that are catalytically inactive are found in 
the circulation in association with remnant particles and 
may play a role in enhancing their clearance. Presence of 
apo C-II is required for full activity.
Lipoprotein lipase catalyses the partial hydrolysis of 
the core triglycerides of chylomicrons and VLDL to 
monoglycerides and fatty acids. The fatty acids are taken 
up by the tissue and either re-esterified and stored (in adi-
pose tissue), utilized as an energy source (in muscle) or 
secreted (in lactating breast tissue). The monoglycerides 
are further hydrolysed to glycerol and fatty acids.
Lipoprotein lipase binds to heparin, which results in 
its release into the circulation. This is used in the assay 
of LPL activity (post-heparin lipolytic activity, PHLA). 
Lipoprotein ­lipase regulates the plasma concentrations of 
triglycerides and HDL. Individuals with low PHLA, such 
as those who are heterozygous for LPL deficiency, have 
high triglyceride and low HDL concentrations in plasma, 
and an increased risk of atherosclerosis.
A large number of mutations in the LPL gene have 
been described. Some are a cause of the familial chylo-
micronaemia syndrome (see p. 725), while others have 
less severe effects. It is estimated that 20% of patients 
with hypertriglyceridaemia are carriers of LPL gene mu-
tations. The Asn291Ser mutation is present in 2–5% 
of Caucasians and is associated with a 31% increase in 
plasma triglyceride concentrations and an increased risk 
of coronary heart disease and type 2 diabetes. Asn291 is 
located in part of the molecule involved in homodimer 
formation, so it is likely that this mutation causes an in-
crease in the relative amount of LPL present as inactive 
monomer. The risk of Alzheimer disease is also increased 
in Asn291Ser carriers.
Small amounts of LPL have been demonstrated to be 
present on arterial endothelium and also within the in-
tima of arteries. LDL binds to LPL with an affinity simi-
lar to chylomicrons and VLDL. Although LDL is not the 
physiological substrate for LPL, the LPL present in the 
arterial wall may, by binding to LDL, increase the resi-
dence time of LDL in the arterial wall, thus promoting 
atherogenesis.
Hepatic lipase
This enzyme is a product of the same gene family as LPL. 
It is synthesized in the liver, where 95% remains, bound 
to the exterior of the hepatocyte membrane in the spaces 
of Disse; the remainder is found in the adrenals, ovaries 
and macrophages. HL has a role in the remodelling of 
chylomicron remnants, IDL, LDL and HDL and is in-
volved in reverse cholesterol transport. Its concentration 
is inversely related to that of HDL. Its predominant ac-
tivity on HDL is as a phospholipase, whereas in other 
lipoproteins it acts as a triglyceride lipase. In addition, 
HL may influence lipoprotein metabolism by means of 
its capacity to form a ‘bridge’ between lipoproteins and 
lipoprotein receptors.
Enzyme activity is lower in females than males and is 
modulated by insulin resistance, dietary fat intake, vis-
ceral obesity, physical activity, smoking and certain drugs. 
The size and buoyancy of LDL are inversely related to 
HL activity; when its activity is high, small, dense LDL 
particles are produced.
Like LPL, HL can bind to heparin, which results in 
its release into the circulation. This activity is utilized in 
HL assays.
Endothelial lipase
Endothelial lipase is the third member of the triglyceride 
lipase gene family and like the others it exists as a ho-
modimer. It is produced by hepatic endothelial cells, and 
unlike HL and LPL it functions at the site of synthesis. 
It is also found in macrophages. Its predominant activ-
ity is as a phospholipase A1. Transcription is induced by 
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
717
cytokines and physical forces, which has led to the sug-
gestion that it may play a role in the development of ath-
eroma. Overexpression is associated with reduced plasma 
concentrations of HDL.
Lipase maturation factor 1
This membrane bound protein located in the endoplas-
mic reticulum is essential to the folding and assembly 
of the dimeric lipases (LPL, HL, EL). Loss of function 
mutations in LMF1 cause failure in the assembly of ho-
modimers, thus preventing these lipases from attaining 
normal catalytic activity. This produces combined lipase 
deficiency with marked hypertriglyceridaemia.
Pancreatic triglyceride lipase
This enzyme, synthesized by pancreatic acinar cells, 
is ­essential for the digestion of dietary triglycerides. 
Enzyme activity requires formation of a complex with 
its protein cofactor, colipase. Following emulsification, 
the second step in the digestion of dietary triglycerides 
involves their hydrolysis to fatty acids and monoglyc-
erides, which are incorporated into micelles with bile 
salts. Pancreatic triglyceride lipase (PTL) accounts for the 
majority of triglyceride lipase activity in the upper small 
intestine of adults.
The pancreatic acinar cells also synthesize two pan-
creatic lipase-related proteins (PLRP1, PLRP2) that 
have a high degree of structural and sequence homology 
to PTL. PLRP2 may play a role in dietary fat digestion 
in the newborn but no catalytic activity has, as yet, been 
demonstrated for PRLP1.
Hormone sensitive lipase
This enzyme is not related to any of the above lipases. 
It is a neutral intracellular lipase that has catalytic activ-
ity against diglycerides, monoglycerides and cholesteryl 
esters. It is predominantly located in adipose tissue. It is 
also expressed in the adrenals, testes and ovaries and, to 
a lesser extent, in skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle, macro-
phages and pancreatic islets. The activity of HSL is rate 
limiting in the release of fatty acids from adipose tissue. It 
is subject to a complex control mechanism, which involves 
both prolipolytic (ACTH and catecholamines) and anti-
lipolytic (insulin) hormones, via cyclic AMP-dependent 
protein kinase phosphorylation. HSL interacts with adi-
pocyte lipid binding protein (ALBP), which is a member 
of a family of lipid binding proteins that bind fatty acids 
and other hydrophobic ligands. In vitro, monoglycerides 
and fatty acids exert feedback inhibition on HSL; the in-
teraction with ALBP, which sequesters these products, 
may prevent this happening in vivo. HSL is also respon-
sible for most cholesteryl ester hydrolase activity in the 
adrenals.
Carboxyl ester lipase
This enzyme is a non-specific lipase capable of hydro-
lysing cholesteryl esters, triglycerides, diglycerides, 
monoglycerides, phospholipids, lysophospholipids and 
ceramide. It is the only enzyme in the gut with cholesteryl 
esterase action; all its other actions can also be effected by 
other enzymes, for example the triglyceride lipase action 
of pancreatic triglyceride lipase. Most carboxyl ester li-
pase (CEL) is synthesized by pancreatic acinar cells but 
it is also synthesized by the liver, macrophages and lac-
tating breast tissue. In the intestine, CEL is attached to 
the brush borders of enterocytes by means of its heparin 
binding domain. It is taken up by enterocytes, possibly 
by endocytosis and may be involved in the intracellular 
processing of lipids during the assembly of chylomicrons. 
The fact that CEL acts on ceramide is important be-
cause ceramide can disrupt intracellular lipid and protein 
trafficking, resulting in a block in the assembly of large 
lipoproteins and their secretion by enterocytes; CEL pre-
vents ceramide disrupting this process.
Vitamin A is ingested in the form of retinyl palmitate 
or retinyl acetate, which need to be hydrolysed prior to 
absorption. It is likely that this hydrolysis is a function of 
CEL in the neonatal period, although in the adult, other 
enzymes may be involved.
Lysosomal acid lipase
Lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) is secreted as a 399-amino 
acid precursor, which includes a 27-amino acid signal 
peptide for transport across the membrane of the en-
doplasmic reticulum. Further processing, including 
N-glycosylation in the endoplasmic reticulum and the at-
tachment of mannose 6-phosphate residues in the Golgi, 
leads to lysosomal targeting. LAL is responsible for the 
breakdown of cholesteryl esters and triglycerides that are 
delivered to lysosomes as a result of receptor-mediated 
uptake of lipoproteins.
Wolman disease is an autosomal recessive disease that 
presents in the neonate and is characterized by hepato-
splenomegaly, steatorrhoea and abdominal distention, re-
sults from complete lack of LAL activity, causing massive 
accumulation of both cholesteryl esters and triglycerides 
in macrophages throughout the body. Affected children 
usually die before their first birthday. Enzyme replace-
ment therapy has now been developed but its efficacy re-
mains to be fully established.
Cholesteryl ester storage disease is caused by partial 
deficiency of LAL. It is a rare autosomal recessive dis-
order, characterized by hepatomegaly, abnormal liver 
function tests, hypercholesterolaemia and premature 
atherosclerosis. The hepatomegaly is a consequence of 
accumulation of cholesteryl esters and triglycerides in 
both hepatocytes and Kupffer cells.
Phospholipase A2
Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) is one of a family of phospho-
lipases, enzymes that hydrolyse phospholipids. It exists in 
five forms. Three are found within cells. Two are secreted, 
one of which, lipoprotein-associated PLA2 (LpPLA2) 
is also known as platelet activating factor acetyl hydro-
lase (PAF-AH). Lipoprotein-associated PLA2 promotes 
the hydrolysis of oxidized phospholipids in lipoproteins, 
718	
Clinical biochemistry
generating lysophospholipids and proinflammatory oxi-
dized fatty acids.
There is a correlation between plasma LpPLA2 con-
centration and atherosclerosis. It is unclear whether this 
association is causal, but inhibition of LpPLA2 is of po-
tential therapeutic value, and clinical trials are underway.
Acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase
Acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT) catalyses the 
esterification of cholesterol. Two forms have been identi-
fied: ACAT1 is found ubiquitously in the endoplasmic 
reticulum of cells; ACAT2 is predominantly found in the 
endoplasmic reticulum of the liver and intestine. ACAT1 
is sensitive to the degree of membrane cholesterol enrich-
ment, and it is thought that its function is to maintain the 
cholesterol content of cell membranes at an optimal level 
by catalysing the esterification of excess free cholesterol. 
ACAT2 is responsible for the secretion of cholesteryl es-
ters into the apo B-containing lipoproteins.
TRANSFER PROTEINS INVOLVED IN  
LIPOPROTEIN METABOLISM
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP)
This is a hydrophobic glycoprotein that is secreted mostly 
by the liver. In the blood, it is mainly bound to HDL. It 
facilitates the transfer of cholesteryl esters from HDL to 
the ­triglyceride-rich lipoproteins and LDL, and of tri-
glyceride from ­triglyceride-rich lipoproteins to HDL. 
The extent of this exchange depends on the plasma con-
centration of triglycerides; the more triglyceride is trans-
ferred into HDL, the more is available as a substrate for 
HL, and the greater the capacity for HDL to become 
more delipidated (and so more rapidly degraded). This is 
the explanation for the well-recognized inverse relation-
ship between plasma triglyceride and HDL-cholesterol 
concentrations.
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein has been viewed as 
both anti-and pro-­atherogenic. Its anti-atherogenic action 
is related to its role in reverse cholesterol transport: its 
pro-atherogenic action is related to its capacity to transfer 
cholesteryl esters from HDL to the atherogenic lipopro-
teins (VLDL, IDL and LDL). Under normal conditions, 
CETP-mediated cholesteryl ester transfer from HDL is 
predominantly to LDL. When the plasma concentration of 
VLDL is increased, as in type 2 diabetes, CETP-mediated 
cholesteryl ester transfer is preferentially directed towards 
the large VLDL particles, which consequently become 
cholesterol enriched and more atherogenic.
Although there is uncertainty about the potential effects 
of CETP activity on atheroma formation, it is a target for 
lipid-modifying drug therapy. Drugs that inhibit CETP 
may raise plasma HDL concentrations by over 100%. The 
results of clinical trials to see if this translates into effective 
reduction of clinical cardiovascular endpoints are awaited.
Phospholipid transfer protein (PTP)
This glycoprotein is a member of the same gene family as 
CETP. Along with other genes involved in lipid metabolism 
the PLTP gene is under control of the liver X receptor 
(LXR). Phospholipid transfer protein is important in the 
remodelling of HDL, the generation of pre-β1HDL, the 
transfer of surface lipids from the ­triglyceride-rich lipo-
proteins to HDL during intravascular lipolysis and the 
facilitation of HDL-mediated efflux of phospholipids and 
cholesterol from cells. PTP activity is higher in hypertri-
glyceridaemic than normotriglyceridaemic individuals, 
and is correlated with the degree of insulin resistance. Its 
activity has also been found to be increased in subjects 
with familial combined hyperlipidaemia.
Fatty acid transport proteins
Fatty acid transfer proteins (FATPs) are membrane 
proteins that facilitate the uptake of fatty acids by cells. 
They also have acyl-CoA synthase activity. They form 
a family of six proteins that differ in tissue expression, 
intracellular localization and responsiveness to insulin. 
FATP1 and FATP4 have been implicated in insulin re-
sistance. The former is highly expressed in adipose tis-
sue and skeletal muscle whereas the latter is principally 
expressed in the small intestine. FATP2 is located in 
peroxisomes of the kidney and liver. It is important for 
the formation and oxidation of very long chain fatty acyl-
CoA and is involved in the activation of bile acids in the 
liver; it is therefore sometimes referred to as very long 
chain acyl-CoA synthase. FATP3 is located in mitochon-
drial membranes. FATP5 is located in the membrane of 
the endoplasmic reticulum and is also involved in the 
activation of bile acids. FATP6 is located in the plasma 
membrane of cardiac myocytes, where it probably plays 
an important role in the supply of fatty acids as an energy 
source.
RECEPTORS INVOLVED IN LIPOPROTEIN  
METABOLISM
The LDL receptor
This receptor is a transmembrane protein that can be ex-
pressed by most cell types under certain conditions. The 
LDL receptor (LDLR) binds two apolipoprotein ligands, 
apo B-100 and apo E and, for this reason, is sometimes 
referred to as the B-100/E receptor. Uptake of LDL via 
the LDLR is mediated through its interaction with apo 
B-100. Although VLDL and IDL also possess apo B-100, 
it is not accessible for binding: IDL binds to LDLR via 
apo E. Subclasses of HDL containing apo E can also bind 
to the LDLR. Indeed, lipoproteins that contain multiple 
copies of apo E bind to the LDLR with much greater af-
finity than does LDL.
The LDLR gene is located on chromosome 19. The 
LDLR protein contains 843 amino acids and comprises 
five domains (see Fig. 37.10). At the amino terminal end 
is the ligand binding domain (exons 2–6), which mediates 
binding to apo B-100 or apo E. Next, there is a domain 
(exons 7–14) homologous to the epidermal growth factor 
(EGF) precursor. This contains three EGF repeats sepa-
rated by a region of beta sheet folded in a specific orien-
tation called a ‘beta propeller’. At the acid pH found in 
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
719
endosomes, this domain undergoes a conformational 
change bringing the beta propeller adjacent to repeats 4 
and 5 in the ligand binding domain and releasing bound 
LDL. It also serves to maintain the correct orientation of 
the ligand binding domain on cell surfaces. The specific 
orientation determined by this EGF domain is required for 
the binding of LDL to the receptor but not for the bind-
ing of apo E-containing lipoproteins. The third domain 
(exon 15) consists of a peptide chain enriched in serine and 
threonine to which sugar chains are attached. The fourth 
domain (exon 16) comprises hydrophobic amino acids that 
span the membrane and thus function as an anchor. The 
carboxy terminal portion constitutes the intracellular cyto-
plasmic domain (exons 17–18) and appears to be important 
in targeting the receptor to the coated pit region.
Expression of LDLR is under feedback control: in the 
steady state, the number of LDL receptors is controlled 
to allow uptake of sufficient cholesterol for cell growth 
and to balance losses. This feedback is by membrane 
bound transcription factors known as sterol regulatory 
element binding proteins (SREBPs) (see p. 721) and their 
associated insulin signalling (Insig) and SREBP cleavage 
activating proteins (SCAPs). The function of LDLRs is 
dependent not only on their binding to lipoprotein parti-
cles but also on their clustering in clathrin-coated pits for 
the subsequent internalization of the bound lipoproteins 
by endocytosis.
Low density lipoprotein receptor-associated protein 1 
(LDLRAP1) binds the LDLR, clathrin and the clathrin-
associated adaptin protein complex 2 (AP-2), and is essential 
for the endocytosis of LDLRs into hepatocytes. Mutations 
in the LDLRAP1 gene cause the rare clinical phenotype of 
autosomal recessive familial hypercholesterolaemia.
LDL receptor-related protein
LDL receptor-related protein (LRP) is expressed by hepa-
tocytes and has multiple ligands including apo E, HL and 
lipoprotein lipase. Following synthesis, LRP becomes asso-
ciated with another protein, LDL receptor-related protein 
associated protein (LRPAP1), which acts as a chaperone to 
facilitate the passage of LRP to the cell surface. LRP is in-
volved in the apo E-mediated uptake of remnant particles by 
the liver, and is sometimes referred to as the ‘apo E receptor’.
The apo E4 polymorphism has an impact on the up-
take of cholesterol to neuronal tissue by LRP. This may 
partially explain the increased risk of Alzheimer disease in 
those with the apo ε4/ε4 genotype.
Scavenger receptor class B type 1
This is a 509-amino acid protein comprising short N- and 
C-terminal cytoplasmic and transmembrane domains and 
a large extracellular loop. Its amino acid sequence is 30% 
homologous with that of CD36 (see below). Like CD36, 
scavenger receptor class B type 1 (SRB1) can bind to a 
number of lipoproteins and modified lipoproteins (HDL, 
LDL, VLDL, oxidized LDL). It is present in a number of 
tissues but is most highly expressed in tissues that process 
HDL cholesterol and cholesteryl esters for excretion or as 
metabolic substrates, i.e. the liver and steroidogenic tissues. 
SRB1 binds HDL and mediates the selective uptake of cho-
lesteryl esters from the cores of HDL particles to the plasma 
membrane without entailing the uptake and degradation of 
the whole HDL particle. This process is dependent on apo 
A-I. These cholesteryl esters are then hydrolysed extra- 
lysosomally by tissue-specific neutral cholesteryl hydrolases; 
in the adrenals this may be by HSL.
Scavenger receptor class B type 1 is also able to medi-
ate the efflux of unesterified cholesterol from cells to lipo-
proteins. Thus, SRB1 is involved at both ends of reverse 
cholesterol transport; initially with the efflux of free cho-
lesterol from peripheral cells to HDL and at the end in the 
delivery of cholesteryl esters and unesterified cholesterol 
to the liver for secretion into bile. The membrane domain-
containing protein PDZK1 (the PDZ group of proteins 
are named from the initial letters of the first three proteins 
found to share this structural domain), controls the basal 
hepatocyte and enterocyte SRB1 content, whilst in the 
adrenals, ACTH binding to the melanocortin 2 receptor 
stimulates the expression of SRB1. This in turn promotes 
the uptake of cholesteryl esters from HDL, which provides 
a pool of free cholesterol within the adrenals for synthesis 
of glucocorticoids. In the liver, SRB1 is downregulated by 
fibric acid derivatives. Scavenger receptor class B type 1 
has been shown to mediate the binding and endocytosis of 
lipopolysaccharides, suggesting that it may have a role in 
their cellular uptake and clearance in sepsis.
There is evidence that loss of function mutations in 
the SCARB1 gene that codes for SRB1 are associated with 
increased concentrations of HDL but a paradoxical in-
crease in cardiovascular disease.
Other scavenger receptors
CD36 (which stands for Cluster of Differentiation 36) is 
a receptor found in caveolae in the cell surface plasma 
1. Ligand binding
 
domain 
 
292 amino acids 
2. EGF precursor
 
homology 
 
∼400 amino acids
3. O-linked sugars 
 
58 amino acids
4. Membrane spanning
 
22 amino acids
5. Cytoplasmic
 
50 amino acids
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
A
B
NH2
C
COOH
FIGURE 37.10  ■ The LDL receptor. EGF, epidermal growth factor.
720	
Clinical biochemistry
membrane. Like SRB1 it is a Class B scavenger recep-
tor. CD36 can bind native and oxidized LDL. Together 
with the scavenger receptors A1 and A2 (SR-AI, SR-AII) 
it mediates the avid uptake of oxidized LDL by endothe-
lial macrophages.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated  
receptor family
Nuclear receptors play a key role in glucose and lipid ho-
moeostasis and in the inflammatory response. They are 
activated by a variety of ligands, including fatty acids. 
Among these receptors is the peroxisome proliferator ac-
tivated receptor (PPAR) family. When they bind to a li-
gand, PPARs form heterodimers with the nuclear retinoid 
X receptor (RXR), which bind to response elements in the 
promoter regions of target genes, thus promoting their 
transcription. By this means, PPARs control the expres-
sion of genes that maintain lipid and glucose homoeosta-
sis. This makes them a potential therapeutic target.
The PPAR family includes PPARα, PPARγ and 
PPARβ/δ. The fibrate family of lipid-lowering drugs are 
activators of PPARα and the thiazolidinediones, which are 
insulin sensitizing agents, are ligands for PPARγ. The in-
travascular lipolysis of lipoproteins is promoted by fibrates 
through increased LPL activity and reduced expression of 
the LPL inhibitor, apo C-III. Fibrates also induce the ex-
pression of apo A-V, which impacts on plasma triglycer-
ide concentrations and of apo A-I and apo A-II, leading 
to increased production of HDL. Activation of PPARγ 
induces the expression of genes for proteins that control 
adipocyte fatty acid metabolism, including LPL and fatty 
acid transport proteins, thus facilitating the hydrolysis of 
lipoprotein triglycerides and promoting the storage of the 
released fatty acids as adipocyte triglycerides.
Other nuclear receptors
As well as PPARs, other nuclear receptors such as the 
liver X receptors (LXRs) and farnesoid X-activated re-
ceptor (FXR) have been demonstrated to exert control 
over lipid metabolism. The LXR is a sterol responsive 
nuclear receptor that is activated in response to excess of 
cholesterol within the cell. When activated, it triggers 
transcription of the inducible degrader of LDLR (IDOL); 
this causes ubiquitination of the cytoplasmic domain of 
LDLR, which promotes its destruction within the cell. 
Activated LXR also activates ABCA1 and ABCG1, which 
promotes cholesterol efflux from the cell. The net effect 
is to reduce cellular cholesterol uptake and increase efflux 
from the cell, this restoring sterol homoeostasis.
OTHER PROTEINS INVOLVED IN 
­LIPOPROTEIN ­SYNTHESIS, TRANSPORT  
AND METABOLISM
Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein
Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) is a mem-
ber of a group of proteins that are able to transfer of lipids 
between membranes. MTP is an 894 amino acid (97 kDa) 
protein that forms a heterodimer with protein disulfide 
isomerase (PDI); the two subunits are held together by 
non-covalent interactions. This protein is present in high 
concentrations in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticu-
lum and plays an important role in the maturation of the 
endoplasmic reticulum and its secreted proteins. Protein 
disulfide isomerase does not demonstrate isomerase ac-
tivity when combined with MTP, but is required for re-
tention of MTP in the endoplasmic reticulum at the site 
of apo B translocation. The promoter region of MTP is 
upregulated by cholesterol and downregulated by insu-
lin. Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein binds and 
shuttles individual lipids between membranes.
Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein activity is 
essential for the synthesis of chylomicrons and VLDL. 
After the assembly of chylomicrons and VLDL within 
the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum of enterocytes 
and hepatocytes respectively, they are transported to 
the Golgi apparatus and then secreted. Loss of func-
tion mutations in MTP cause abetalipoproteinaemia 
(see p. 724)
Microsomal transfer protein also transfers lipid to 
antigen presenting molecules on the surface of natural 
killer T cells. These mediate a number of autoimmune 
disorders, making MTP a pharmacological target, with 
inhibition having the potential to achieve both lipid low-
ering and anti-inflammatory effects. Inhibitors of MTP, 
which effectively lower plasma LDL-cholesterol concen-
trations, are in clinical trials, although it remains to be 
seen whether their use will be limited because of their 
tendency to cause an increase in hepatic steatosis.
ATP binding cassette transporter family
The ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter family com-
prises more than 50 different proteins. Within this fam-
ily, ABCG1, ABCG5, ABCG8 and ABCA1 are all sterol 
induced. ABCG5 and ABCG8 form a heterodimer, which 
mediates the excretion of absorbed plant sterols and cho-
lesterol from enterocytes into the lumen of the gut and 
from hepatocytes into the bile. ATP binding cassette 
transporters A1 and G1 facilitate the export of choles-
terol from peripheral cells, where its combination with 
apo A-I and phospholipids to produce HDL is the first 
step in reverse cholesterol transport.
Proprotein convertase subtilisin kexin 9
Proprotein convertase subtilisin kexin 9 (PCSK9) is 
one of nine members of the subtilisin protease fam-
ily. The PCSK 9 gene is mainly expressed in liver and 
is regulated by sterol regulatory element binding pro-
teins (see p. 721). The PCSK9 protein is synthesized 
as a 72 kDa protein that undergoes self-cleavage to a 
63 kDa protein, which is found in the Golgi. Proprotein 
convertase ­subtilisin kexin 9 regulates LDLR activity 
by accelerating the degradation of mature receptors. It 
is expressed on the cell surface but also circulates free 
in plasma.
Gain of function mutations in the PCSK9 gene are a 
rare cause of autosomal dominant hypercholesterolae-
mia (familial hypercholesterolaemia). Loss of function 
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
721
mutations are associated with reduced plasma LDL-
cholesterol concentration and lower than average risk of 
CVD. This makes both gene inactivation and immuno-
logical blockade of PCSK9 action attractive targets for 
lipid lowering therapy. Therapeutic agents are in clini-
cal trials, and have been shown to reduce plasma LDL-
cholesterol concentrations by >50%.
Sterol regulatory element binding proteins
Sterol regulatory element binding proteins (SREBPs) 
are membrane-bound transcription factors that ac-
tivate genes involved in cholesterol synthesis. They 
provide the means by which cellular cholesterol ex-
erts negative feedback on cholesterol synthesis. There 
are three SREBPs: SREBP-2 activates genes involved 
in cholesterol synthesis, the other two (SREBP-1a and 
SREBP-1c) have more effect on the genes involved in 
fatty acid synthesis. When cholesterol is abundant in 
a cell, the SREBPs remain in the endoplasmic reticu-
lum associated with an escort protein, SREBP cleav-
age activating protein (SCAP), and the endoplasmic 
reticulum retention protein, insulin signalling protein 
(Insig). When a cell is relatively cholesterol-depleted, 
SCAP dissociates from Insig and results in the release 
of SREBP-SCAP from the endoplasmic reticulum. To 
exert their action, SREBPs must undergo two-step pro-
teolytic cleavage in the Golgi to release their N-terminal 
fragment. These fragments travel to the nucleus where 
they bind to the steroid response elements (SREs) in 
the promoter regions of a number of the genes encod-
ing enzymes involved in cholesterol synthesis, including 
squalene synthase and HMG-CoA reductase, and the 
LDLR gene.
When intracellular cholesterol content is again ade-
quate, the proteolytic release of the N-terminal fragment 
is blocked and the N-terminal fragments in the nucleus 
are degraded.
Both SREBP genes contain intronic sequences that 
code for a micro-RNA (miR-33). Micro-RNAs (miR-
NAs) are small non-coding RNAs approximately 22 
nucleotides in length that bind to the three prime un-
translated region (3′UTR) of mRNAs, causing their 
reduced translation or destruction. Micro-RNA-33 
reduces translation of mRNA for ABCA1, ABCG1 and 
genes involved in fatty acid oxidation. This effect is 
complementary to the primary effect of SREBP on cho-
lesterol and fatty acid synthesis and serves to further in-
crease the accumulation of cholesterol and triglycerides 
within cells.
In the liver, insulin stimulates SREBP-1c production, 
and in states of hyperinsulinaemia with insulin resistance 
this may contribute to the accumulation of fat in hepa-
tocytes, and drive increased VLDL synthesis. It is also 
possible that reduced ABCA1 expression caused by miR-
33 may account in part for the low HDL seen in insulin 
resistant states.
These recent insights into control of lipid metabo-
lism by miRNAs makes them potential therapeutic tar-
gets, and initial studies have shown that HDL can be 
increased by antisense oligonucleotides designed to 
block miR-33.
Sortilins
Sortilins are receptors that regulate intracellular trans-
port by shunting proteins through secretory or endo-
cytic pathways. They share in common a 700 amino 
acid extracellular domain which forms a ten bladed beta 
propeller and acts as a ligand binding site. This is des-
ignated the vacuolar protein sorting ten protein domain 
(VPS10P).
Genome wide association studies suggest that two 
of these receptors, sortilin and sorting protein-related 
receptor with type A repeats (SORLA), have a role in 
lipid metabolism and atherosclerosis, and may account 
for variability in cardiovascular risk. Reduced quantities 
of SORLA are associated with increased smooth mus-
cle cell migration and lipid loading of macrophages in 
atheromatous plaques. This effect may be mediated by 
SORLA binding of LPL and apo A-V on the cell surface. 
Overexpression of the sortilin gene, SORT1 is associated 
with lower plasma LDL-cholesterol concentrations, ei-
ther indirectly by reducing VLDL output from the liver, 
or directly by acting as an alternative hepatic receptor 
for LDL.
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored  
HDL-binding protein 1
Glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored HDL-binding 
protein1 (GPIHBP1) is a 184 amino acid protein that is a 
member of the GPI anchored Ly6 (lymphocyte antigen 6) 
group of proteins. It was originally identified as a protein 
capable of binding HDL. It is now recognized to be es-
sential to the function of lipoprotein lipase. This protein 
binds LPL in the subendothelial space and transports it to 
the luminal surface of endothelial cells, where it anchors 
the LPL protein by means of the GPI domain. Genetic 
studies have shown that mutations in GPIHBP1, and mu-
tations in LPL that make it unable to bind GPIHBP1, 
are both associated with increased plasma triglyceride 
concentrations.
Angiopoietin-like protein 3
Angiopoietin-like protein 3 (ANGPTL3) acts in the 
liver to promote the production and secretion of apo 
B containing lipoproteins. In the circulation, it in-
hibits the activities of LPL. It may also affect the 
activity of EL and thereby modulate HDL choles-
terol concentrations. Loss of function mutations in 
the ANGPTL3 gene have been associated with a com-
bined hypolipidaemia phenotype, with low plasma 
concentrations of cholesterol, HDL-cholesterol and 
triglycerides.
CLASSIFICATION OF LIPOPROTEIN 
DISORDERS
Fredrickson originally suggested dividing the hyper-
lipidaemias into five types (I–V) based on which of the 
apo B-containing lipoprotein classes were shown to be 
increased on paper electrophoresis of a fasting sample. 
722	
Clinical biochemistry
This was subsequently modified by the World Health 
Organization, which introduced a subdivision of type II 
into two (types IIa and IIb) (Table 37.4).
The Fredrickson classification is limited in being 
only a description of the lipoprotein phenotype mani-
fested in an individual, and only covers abnormal el-
evations of the apo B containing lipoproteins. It does 
not differentiate primary from secondary causes of any 
particular phenotype, and does not include deficiencies 
of the apo B containing lipoproteins or disorders of 
HDL metabolism. It soon became clear that the type 
I phenotype can be caused by any one of three inher-
ited abnormalities, all of which result in a functional 
deficiency of lipoprotein lipase. Type III is caused by 
an inherited defect in apo E causing reduced binding 
to the LRP (apo E) receptor in the liver. The other 
types (IIa, IIb, IV and V) can each be a consequence of 
one or more inherited defects or may reflect second-
ary causes. Thus classifying an individual into one of 
these Fredrickson classes gives no indication as to the 
genetic basis of the manifested lipoprotein disorder, its 
mechanism, the need for family screening or the man-
agement required. It is now recognized that even the 
type I and type III phenotypes can have multiple other 
genetic causes due either to single gene disorders or 
the cumulative effect of multiple small genetic variants 
together with secondary environmental influences. For 
all these reasons, this classification has largely been su-
perseded by a clinical and genetic classification, which 
relates to the molecular mechanism underlying the 
clinical phenotype. The genetic basis of the primary 
dyslipidaemias and the relationship, where known, to 
the corresponding clinical and Fredrickson phenotypes 
is given in Table 37.5.
TABLE 37.4  World Health Organization classification of hyperlipidaemia
Type
Major lipid abnormality
Minor lipid abnormality
Electrophoretic mobility
Lipoprotein abnormality
I
↑ Triglycerides
↑ Cholesterol
Staining at origin
Chylomicrons present
IIa
↑ Cholesterol
↑ β band
↑ LDL
IIb
↑ Cholesterol
 
↑ β and pre-β band
↑ LDL and ↑ VLDL
↑ Triglycerides
III
↑ Cholesterol
 
Broad β band
IDL present in detectable 
amounts
↑ Triglycerides
IV
↑ Triglycerides
↑ Cholesterol
↑ Pre-β band
↑ VLDL
V
↑ Triglycerides
↑ Cholesterol
↑ Pre-β band and staining  
at origin
↑ VLDL and chylomicrons 
present
TABLE 37.5  Clinical/genetic classification of dyslipidaemias
Clinical disorder
Lipid changes
WHO 
phenotype
Lipoprotein
Protein
Gene
LDL
TG
HDL
Dysbetalipoproteinaemias
Decreased beta lipoproteins
Abetalipoproteinaemia
↓↓
↓↓
↓
N/A
Absent Apo B
MTP
MTP
Chylomicron retention 
disease
↓
→
↓
N/A
Absent B-48, 
decreased 
B-100
Srb1
SARA2
Familial 
hypobetalipoproteinaemia
↓
↓
↓
N/A
Decreased 
Apo B
Apo B
APOB
Increased beta lipoproteins
Familial combined 
hyperlipidaemia
↑
↑
→/↓
IIb/IV
VLDL
 
USF1?
Familial hypertriglyceridaemia
  LPL deficiency
↑
↑↑↑
↓
I
Chylo
LPL
LPL
  Apo C-II deficiency
↑
↑↑↑
↓
I
Chylo
Apo CII
APOC2
  LPL inhibitor
↑
↑↑↑
↓
I
Chylo
LPL inhibitor
 
  Combined lipase deficiency
↑/→
↑↑
→/↓
I
Chylo
EL/HL/LPL
LMF-I
  Not defined
↑/→
↑↑
→/↓
I/III/IV/V
Chylo, VLDL, 
IDL
 
Loss of function 
mutations in 
single genes (e.g. 
GPIHBP1, APOA5) 
or cumulative small 
effect variants in 
multiple genes (e.g. 
APOA5; LPL; GCKR; 
APOB)
Type III (remnant) 
hyperlipidaemia
↑↑
↑↑
→/↓
III
IDL
Apo E-2
APOE
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
723
Lipids may be deposited in certain extravascular sites 
in the presence of significant hyperlipidaemia. In cer-
tain instan­ces, the site and form of this lipid deposition 
may be characteristic of the underlying lipid abnormality 
(Table 37.6).
THE PRIMARY DYSLIPOPROTEINAEMIAS
A primary dyslipoproteinaemia is an inherited disor-
der of lipoprotein metabolism that may manifest as 
hyperlipidaemia, hypolipidaemia or normolipidaemia 
associated with lipoproteins of abnormal composition 
or an abnormal distribution of the normal lipopro-
tein classes.
Hypobetalipoproteinaemia
The term ‘hypobetalipoproteinaemia’ describes the situa-
tion when the total plasma cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol 
or apo B concentrations are less than the 5th centile. This 
may be secondary to an underlying disorder, for example 
fat malabsorption, or a consequence of an inherited defect 
in lipoprotein metabolism (primary hypobetalipoprotein-
aemia). Primary hypobetalipoproteinaemia encompasses 
three disorders: abetalipoproteinaemia, chylomicron re-
tention disease and familial hypobetalipoproteinaemia.
TABLE 37.6  Extravascular manifestations of hyperlipidaemia
Extravascular site of lipid deposition
Type of hyperlipidaemia
Xanthelasma (periorbital)
Any form of hypercholesterolaemia; may occur with normal lipid 
concentrations; common in hyperlipidaemias due to cholestasis
Corneal arcus (around the iris of the eye)
Arcus senilis can occur with increasing age in subjects with normal 
lipid concentrations; if present in a subject <45 years, probably 
denotes presence of significant underlying hyperlipidaemia  
(usually ↑ LDL)
Tendon xanthomas (occur in extensor tendons of 
hands, feet, Achilles tendon and patellar tendon)
Virtually pathognomonic of familial hypercholesterolaemia; also found 
in the very rare conditions, β-sitosterolaemia and cerebrotendinous 
xanthomatosis
Tuberous and tuberoeruptive xanthomas (occur over 
extensor surfaces of limbs, i.e. elbows/knees)
Remnant hyperlipoproteinaemia and familial hypercholesterolaemia
Palmar crease xanthomas
Remnant hyperlipidaemia
Eruptive xanthomas (occur in crops, particularly  
over the extensor surface of the elbows and over 
the buttocks)
Chylomicronaemia
Clinical disorder
Lipid changes
WHO 
phenotype
Lipoprotein
Protein
Gene
LDL
TG
HDL
Familial hypercholesterolaemia
  Autosomal dominant
    Classic FH
↑↑
→
→
IIa
LDL
LDLR
LDLR
    Familial defective apo B
↑
→
→
IIa
LDL
ApoB
APOB
    Gain of function PCSK9
↑↑↑
→
→
IIa
LDL
Increased 
PCSK9
PCSK9
a
  Autosomal recessive
Autosomal recessive 
hypercholesterolaemia
↑↑↑
→
→
IIa
LDL
LDLRAP1
LDLRAP1
Dysalphalipoproteinaemia
Decreased alpha lipoproteins
Tangier disease
↓
→/↑
↓↓
N/A
 
ABCA1
ABCA1
Apo A-I deficiency
→
→/↓
↓↓↓
N/A
 
Apo A-I
APOA1
Apo A-I variants
→
→
↓
N/A
 
e.g. Apo A-I 
Milano
APOA1
LCAT deficiency
↓
↑
↓
N/A
 
LCAT
LCAT
Fish eye disease (partial LCAT 
deficiency)
↓
↑
↓
N/A
 
LCAT
LCAT
Not defined
 
 
↓
N/A
 
EL
LIPG
a
Increased alpha lipoproteins
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hepatic lipase deficiency
↑
↑↑
↑
N/A
HDL
HL
LIPC
CETP deficiency
↓
→
↑↑
N/A
HDL
CETP
CETP
Not defined
 
 
↑
N/A
HDL
SRB1
SCARB1
Not defined
 
 
↑
N/A
HDL
EL
LIPG
aDenotes gain of function mutation.
TABLE 37.5  Clinical/genetic classification of dyslipidaemias (continued)
724	
Clinical biochemistry
Abetalipoproteinaemia
This is a very rare autosomal recessive condition, first 
described in 1950 by Bassen and Kornzweig. It typically 
presents in infancy with failure to thrive and chronic di-
arrhoea owing to fat malabsorption. Other features in-
clude acanthocytosis (caused by abnormal erythrocyte 
membrane lipid composition) and an atypical retinitis 
pigmentosa (as a result of vitamin A deficiency). Later 
manifestations are night blindness and neurological 
disability, particularly ataxia, caused by vitamin A and 
vitamin E deficiencies, respectively. The primary aim of 
treatment in these subjects is to ensure that fat-soluble 
vitamin intake is sufficient, which may require their par-
enteral administration.
There is a complete absence of all apo B-containing 
lipoproteins in the plasma, and no circulating apo B, 
whereas HDL and apo A-I concentrations are approxi-
mately 50% of normal. Plasma cholesterol concentration 
is low (typically 0.5–1.5 mmol/L) and plasma triglyceride 
concentration is very low (<0.2 mmol/L). On micros-
copy, lipid droplets can be seen to accumulate intracellu-
larly in hepatocytes and enterocytes, suggesting a defect 
in the assembly of the apo B containing lipoproteins. The 
cause is now known to be loss of function mutations in 
the MTP gene (see p. 720). In the presence of defective 
MTP, no apo B-containing lipoproteins are formed. The 
malabsorption of fat and the fat-soluble vitamins is a re-
sult of the failure of chylomicron formation.
Chylomicron retention disease
The inheritance of chylomicron retention disease is prob-
ably autosomal recessive. It is characterized by an absence 
of apo B-48 in plasma and lack of a postprandial lipaemic 
response. Affected individuals also have low LDL, HDL 
and fat-soluble vitamin concentrations and their LDLs are 
enriched in triglycerides. They have fat malabsorption and 
steatorrhoea and, without supplementation of fat-soluble 
vitamins, develop neurological dysfunction. Enterocytes of 
affected individuals contain fat droplets, and apo B-48 is 
demonstrable immunochemically within the enterocytes. 
Chylomicron retention disease is caused by mutations in 
the SARA2 gene. The protein product of the SARA2 gene 
is sar1b, which is involved in the transport of chylomicrons 
through the enterocyte secretory pathway (see p. 712).
Familial hypobetalipoproteinaemia
Familial hypobetalipoproteinaemia (FHBL) is an auto-
somal co-dominant disorder resulting from mutations 
in APOB generating premature stop codons and there-
fore truncation of apo B. These truncated forms have a 
reduced capacity for lipid binding and thus result in the 
secretion of smaller, denser, relatively lipid-poor lipopro-
tein particles. Lipoprotein particles containing the larger 
truncated forms (e.g. apo B-89 and apo B-75) fall into the 
VLDL fraction when secreted, whereas those containing 
the smaller forms (e.g. apo B-29) fall into the HDL frac-
tion. There is a threshold in apo B size under which the 
apo B cannot form a lipoprotein; this threshold is between 
apo B-28 and apo B-29. Mutations producing truncated 
forms of apo B greater than apo B-48 are associated with 
the production of normal chylomicrons. Apolipoprotein 
B forms smaller than B-67 are incorporated into VLDL 
in the normal way but are not able to interact with LDL 
receptors.
Individuals heterozygous for FHBL associated with 
truncated apo Bs are often asymptomatic, but a small pro-
portion have loose stools. The plasma LDL-cholesterol 
concentration in heterozygotes would be expected to be 
about 50% of that in unaffected family members, but 
concentrations of about a third of normal are actually ob-
served, possibly because of reduced hepatic secretion or 
upregulation of LDL receptors that results in increased 
clearance. A high incidence of non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease is reported in FHBL heterozygotes. Homozygous 
FHBL clinically resembles abetalipoproteinaemia.
Familial combined hyperlipidaemia
This condition is the most common lipid disorder in sub-
jects presenting with ischaemic heart disease. It is inher-
ited as an autosomal dominant trait, but usually does not 
become manifest until adulthood. The typical findings are 
a raised plasma apo B-100 concentration and an increase 
in plasma concentrations of LDL (high total cholesterol), 
VLDL (high triglycerides) or both. Different individuals 
within a kindred may have any of these phenotypes, and 
in a single individual, the phenotypic pattern may change 
over time. Plasma HDL-cholesterol concentration is 
usually low; this probably results from increased transfer 
of cholesteryl esters from HDL to the triglyceride-rich 
lipoproteins. The LDL particles in familial combined hy-
perlipidaemia (FCH) tend to be smaller and denser than 
usual; thus individuals with FCH display the ‘atherogenic 
lipid profile’ comprising high plasma triglyceride and low 
HDL-cholesterol concentrations and small, dense LDL 
particles.
Overproduction of apo B-100 occurs in FCH, so that 
affected individuals have raised plasma apo B concentra-
tions even though their lipid concentrations may be nor-
mal. The development of hyperlipidaemia is dependent 
on an increase in the availability of hepatic triglycerides; 
this explains the observation that affected subjects are fre-
quently obese, and may have other features of the meta-
bolic syndrome. The phenotype expressed is thought to 
reflect the efficiency with which the VLDL is processed 
in affected individuals. Thus individuals who have one 
abnormal LPL gene (parents of children with LPL defi-
ciency) may appear to have FCH because of the resultant 
slowed clearance of VLDL.
Genetic studies have suggested a link between FCH 
and the upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) gene. This 
is a transcription factor responsible for upregulating the 
transcription of a number of genes involved in glucose and 
lipid metabolism, including those coding for apo A-V.
Familial hypertriglyceridaemia
Some families show Mendelian inheritance of hyper-
triglyceridaemia. In most cases this reflects an increase 
in VLDL, with moderately elevated triglyceride con-
centrations (4–10 mmol/L). In some cases, there is a 
more severe hyperlipidaemia (>10 mmol/L) and fasting 
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
725
chylomicronaemia. The latter causes a Fredrickson type 
I phenotype, while less severe hypertriglyceridaemia 
generally causes a type IIb, IV or V pattern. Severe hy-
pertriglyceridaemia is typically autosomal recessive and 
in addition to defects in LPL and apo C-II, which have 
long been recognized as causes of type I hyperlipidaemia 
(chylomicronaemia syndrome), it is now recognized that 
loss of function mutations in genes including APOA5, 
LMF1 and GPIHBP1 may produce a similar ­phenotype, 
often inherited in an autosomal recessive manner. By 
contrast, the cumulative effect of multiple small effect 
polymorphisms in genes including LPL, APOA5, GCKR 
and APOB, interact with environmental factors to pro-
duce more moderate hypertriglyceridaemia, and a variety 
of lipoprotein phenotypes. These include IIb, IV, V and, 
sometimes, type III. The environmental factors interact-
ing with these genetic variants to produce moderate or 
severe fasting hypertriglyceridaemia are the same as those 
causing secondary hyperlipidaemia, e.g. diabetes, insu-
lin resistance or excessive alcohol consumption. VLDL 
­particles are larger than usual, and relatively deficient in 
apo B in familial hypertriglyceridaemia, which suggests 
that an important factor is overproduction of triglycer-
ides by the liver. Chylomicronaemia syndrome, caused by 
autosomal recessive major loss of function mutations in 
single genes, often manifests in childhood, whilst other 
causes of familial hypertriglyceridaemia rarely manifest 
before adulthood.
In patients with a fasting plasma triglyceride concen-
tration >10 mmol/L, there is a risk of acute pancreati-
tis, and reducing this risk is usually the first priority of 
treatment, before addressing residual cardiovascular risk. 
Fibrates or ω3-fatty acids, in combination with a low fat 
diet and avoidance of excessive alcohol consumption, are 
usually effective. Plasma exchange, and intravenous insu-
lin infusion (to increase lipoprotein lipase activity), have 
both been used in severe cases although the evidence for 
their long-term effectiveness is limited.
Chylomicronaemia syndrome
Chylomicronaemia syndrome manifests as eruptive 
xanthomata (see Fig. 37.11), lipaemia retinalis, hepato-
splenomegaly and recurrent bouts of abdominal pain that 
may be symptoms of acute pancreatitis. Plasma triglycer-
ide concentrations are markedly increased (>10 mmol/L), 
HDL-cholesterol concentrations are very low and chylo-
microns are present in the fasting state. Three inherited 
causes of this condition have been described: lipoprotein 
lipase deficiency, apo C-II deficiency and familial lipo-
protein lipase inhibitor. Secondary causes, including ex-
cessive alcohol consumption and newly diagnosed type 1 
diabetes, may produce a very similar phenotype in geneti-
cally predisposed individuals.
Lipoprotein lipase deficiency. This is a rare autosomal 
recessive condition with an incidence of approximately 
1 in 1 000 000. Presentation is usually in childhood with 
recurrent abdominal pain. Affected individuals may 
have low, normal or increased concentrations of im-
munoreactive LPL in post-heparin plasma but catalytic 
activity is undetectable. Gene replacement therapies for 
the most severe forms of this condition are undergoing 
clinical trials.
Obligate heterozygotes for LPL deficiency have been 
shown to have low plasma LPL activity: some may de-
velop severe hypertriglyceridaemia, and a small number, 
pancreatitis.
Apo C-II deficiency. Homozygous apo C-II deficiency 
tends to present later and be somewhat milder than LPL 
deficiency. Apo C-II is detectable in about 50% of in-
dividuals with apo C-II deficiency, but the protein pro-
duced is unable to activate LPL. It is possible that the 
concentrations of the triglyceride-rich lipoproteins may 
reach a level at which LPL can hydrolyse them even in 
the absence of apo C-II: this could account for the milder 
form of the disease as compared with that seen with pri-
mary deficiency of the enzyme.
Relatives who are obligate heterozygotes for the ab-
normal gene usually have normal lipid and lipoprotein 
concentrations. This implies that up to a 50% reduction 
in the apo C-II concentration does not compromise the 
rate of chylomicron and VLDL clearance.
Familial lipoprotein lipase inhibitor. Families have 
been described whose affected members have chylomic-
ronaemia apparently caused by an inhibitor of LPL. The 
defect appears to be inherited in an autosomal dominant 
fashion. The inhibitor has not been identified.
Remnant hyperlipoproteinaemia
The characteristic feature of remnant hyperlipoproteinaemia 
(RH) is cholesterol enrichment of the VLDL fraction, 
reflecting an accumulation of remnant particles, both chy-
lomicron remnants and intermediate density lipoprotein. 
These remnants are responsible for the abnormal electro-
phoretic pattern, which gave the condition its former name 
of broad β disease (type III in the Fredrickson classification), 
since a broad β band is seen on electrophoresis instead of 
the usual two distinct pre-β (VLDL) and β (LDL) bands. 
Remnant hyperlipidaemia is also sometimes referred to as 
dysbetalipoproteinaemia. Subjects with this disorder show 
a mixed hyperlipidaemia, often with approximately equal 
plasma concentrations of cholesterol and triglycerides.
FIGURE 37.11  ■  Eruptive xanthomata over the elbow.
726	
Clinical biochemistry
The predominant defect found in most subjects with 
the condition is the presence of apo E2, which displays a 
recessive mode of inheritance. While apo E2 homozygos-
ity is essential for the accumulation of remnant particles, 
it is not sufficient for the manifestation of the condi-
tion. A super-imposed genetic or environmental factor 
is necessary before remnant hyperlipidaemia becomes 
manifest, such as the concomitant inheritance of another 
primary hyperlipidaemia or, more frequently, a second-
ary cause such as obesity, excessive alcohol consumption, 
diabetes or hypothyroidism. The 10% of individuals with 
RH who do not show homozygosity for apo E2/2 have a 
variety of molecular defects, including point mutations 
resulting in amino acid substitutions at residues 142, 145 
or 146, or the insertional variant, apo E-Leiden; a few 
lack apo E entirely.
Remnant hyperlipoproteinaemia rarely presents be-
fore adulthood. It is associated with characteristic xan-
thomata occurring in the palmar creases (Fig.  37.12) 
which are virtually pathognomonic, and tuberous or 
tuberoeruptive xanthomata over the extensor sur-
faces of the elbows and knees (Fig. 37.13). There is an 
increased risk of premature atherosclerosis involving 
the peripheral vascular system as well as the coronary 
arteries.
Familial hypercholesterolaemia
This term encompasses a group of disorders due to mu-
tations causing reduced clearance of LDL by the LDL 
receptor resulting in marked hypercholesterolaemia and 
premature atherosclerosis. ‘Classic’ familial hypercho-
lesterolaemia (FH) is due to mutations in the LDLR 
gene. Autosomal dominant mutations are now recog-
nized in three genes causing conditions collectively re-
ferred to as autosomal dominant hypercholesterolaemia 
(ADH), which includes classic FH. A further gene locus 
has recently been associated with this clinical pheno-
type, but the causative gene has not yet been identified. 
A rare autosomal recessive condition has also been de-
scribed with a similar clinical and biochemical pheno-
type. The four clearly defined disorders that result in 
FH are as follows:
•	 classic FH – ADH 1
•	 familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 – ADH 2
•	 gain of function mutation in PCSK9 – ADH 3
•	 loss of function mutation in LDLRAP1 – autosomal 
recessive hypercholesterolaemia.
Classic familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH). This is 
the most severe of the hyperlipidaemias with respect to 
the propensity of affected, untreated individuals to de-
velop atherosclerosis. It manifests in the heterozygous 
state as marked hypercholesterolaemia, owing to high 
LDL-cholesterol concentration, and premature cardio-
vascular disease. Heterozygous FH is one of the com-
monest inherited metabolic diseases, with a frequency of 
about 1 in 500 in most populations. Tendon xanthomata 
in the extensor tendons of the digits (Fig. 37.14) and in 
the Achilles tendons (Fig. 37.15) occur in approximately 
70% of untreated heterozygotes and their presence in af-
fected individuals or first-degree relatives aids the clinical 
diagnosis, which is based on criteria defined by the Simon 
Broome Trust (Box 37.1).
Based on the frequency of the heterozygous state, ho-
mozygous FH would be expected to have an incidence 
of one in 1 000 000. Most apparently homozygous FH 
FIGURE  37.14  ■  Xanthomata in the extensor tendons of the 
fingers.
FIGURE 37.12  ■  Xanthomata in the palmar creases.
FIGURE 37.13  ■ Tuberous xanthomata.
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
727
subjects are actually compound heterozygotes. The hy-
percholesterolaemia is far more severe in subjects with 
two mutant genes; cutaneous xanthomata often occur 
in childhood and coronary artery disease may present 
during the first decade of life. LDL apheresis has now 
become standard treatment in these patients in addition 
to lipid lowering drugs and diet. This can significantly 
increase life expectancy, particularly if the condition is di-
agnosed at a young age.
Classic FH, which accounts for the defect in 80–90% 
of patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia, is due to 
mutations of the LDL receptor gene. Around 20 common 
mutations account for 50% of cases, but over 1200 muta-
tions have now been described, including a number of 
pathogenic intron mutations.
In vitro, it has been demonstrated that cells from FH 
heterozygotes have about half the number of functional 
LDL receptors than do cells from normal individuals. 
The effect of this deficiency of functional LDL recep-
tors in vivo is that plasma LDL-cholesterol concentra-
tions are increased to approximately twice the usual 
level, owing to a combination of reduced LDL uptake 
and LDL overproduction. The overproduction of 
LDL results from defective hepatic IDL uptake by the 
LDL receptor so that extracellular IDL to LDL conver-
sion is increased. Hepatic cholesterol synthesis is also 
upregulated because of reduced LDLR-mediated cho-
lesterol uptake.
Familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 (FDB). 
This is an autosomal co-dominant disorder that results 
from an abnormality in the LDLR-binding domain 
of apo B-100. Most cases are due to mutations in the 
APOB gene at the codon for amino acid 3500 where 
Arg to Gln and Arg to Trp substitutions have been de-
scribed. The arginine to glutamine substitution has been 
shown to change the conformation of the C-terminal 
tail, which results in reduced binding to the LDLR. 
Other mutations have been described that have a less 
severe effect on the ability of apo B to bind to LDL 
receptors. FDB is phenotypically very similar to clas-
sic FH; affected subjects have elevated plasma total and 
LDL cholesterol concentrations but the hypercholes-
terolaemia is usually less severe and tendon xanthomas 
are less common.
Gain of function mutation in PCSK9. This vari-
ant of FH was characterized by studying families that 
phenotypically were similar to classic FH and FDB. It 
was shown to be caused by gain of function mutations 
in the gene coding for proprotein convertase subtili-
sin kexin 9 (PCSK9). These mutations increase the 
rate at which PCSK9 degrades LDL receptors, result-
ing in reduced receptor expression on the cell surface. 
These mutations tend to be associated with a more 
severe clinical phenotype, with affected individuals 
showing higher plasma LDL-cholesterol concentra-
tions and more aggressive vascular disease than seen 
in classic FH.
Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolaemia. Patients 
with autosomal recessive hypercholesterolaemia (ARH) 
phenotypically resemble classic FH homozygotes. They 
have large xanthomas (tendon, tuberous, planar) that pres-
ent in childhood, and develop premature atherosclerosis, 
particularly of the coronary and carotid arteries. They 
also develop aortic stenosis. Plasma LDL-cholesterol 
concentrations in patients with ARH are generally higher 
than those found in classic FH but not as high as those 
seen in homozygous FH.
Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolaemia results 
from a mutation in the LDLRAP1 gene. LDLRAP1 
mediates normal LDL receptor-mediated endocytosis 
after LDL is bound to the receptor, and this process 
is defective in ARH. Obligate heterozygotes for ARH 
FIGURE 37.15  ■  Xanthomata in the Achilles tendon.
BOX 37.1	
Diagnostic criteria for familial 
­hypercholesterolaemia (FH)
A diagnosis of definite FH using the Simon Broome
a cri-
teria requires:
•	 serum cholesterol >7.5 mmol/L (>6.7 mmol/L in 
children <16 years) or LDL cholesterol >4.9 mmol/L 
(>4.0 mmol/L in children <16 years) plus
•	 tendon xanthomas in the patient or first- or second-
degree relative
or
•	 DNA-based evidence of a pathogenetic mutation in 
LDLR, APOB or PCSK9
A diagnosis of possible FH requires:
•	 serum 
cholesterol 
concentration 
>7.5 mmol/L 
(>6.7 mmol/L in children <16 years) or LDL cholesterol 
>4.9 mmol/L (>4.0 mmol/L in children <16 years) plus
•	 a family history of myocardial infarction before age 
60 years in a first-degree relative or before age 50 years 
in a second-degree relative
or
•	 serum 
cholesterol 
concentration 
>7.5 mmol/L 
(6.7 mmol/L in children <16  years) in a first- or 
­second-degree relative.
aThe Simon Broome Trust maintains a register of FH patients in the 
UK. It is named after a patient with the condition.
728	
Clinical biochemistry
BOX 37.2	
Inherited disorders affecting HDL 
cholesterol
Increased HDL cholesterol
•	 Hepatic lipase deficiency
a
•	 CETP deficiency
Reduced HDL cholesterol
•	 Apo A-I deficiency
a
•	 Apo A-I variants, e.g. apo A-I Milano
•	 LPL deficiency
•	 Apo C-II deficiency
a
•	 Tangier disease
•	 Familial LCAT deficiency
a
•	 Fish eye disease
a
aAssociated with premature atherosclerosis.
who carry a single pathogenic LDLRAP1 mutation have 
normal plasma LDL-cholesterol concentrations.
Polygenic hypercholesterolaemia
Hypercholesterolaemia is more common in Western 
societies than would be expected, given the frequency 
of the individual monogenic disorders discussed above. 
The remainder of individuals with primary hypercholes-
terolaemia are therefore referred to as having polygenic 
hypercholesterolaemia. The term ‘polygenic’ is used be-
cause the individuals’ genetic background affects the ex-
tent to which lipoprotein metabolism will be influenced 
by environmental factors.
The monogenic disorders are associated with the 
same increased risk for atherosclerosis in different popu-
lations. However, the frequency with which polygenic 
hypercholesterolaemia occurs in different populations 
varies widely, as does the incidence of coronary artery 
disease. Populations with a high mean plasma choles-
terol concentration have a high rate of coronary artery 
disease. It is believed that the difference between popula-
tions in the frequency of hypercholesterolaemia reflects 
one or more environmental factors, the most obvious 
being diet and, in particular, the saturated fat content of 
the diet.
The frequency with which polygenic hypercholes-
terolaemia is diagnosed in a population depends on the 
value taken as the upper cut-off for a ‘normal’ cholesterol. 
If 5 mmol/L is used, about 50% of most adult popula-
tions will be classified as hypercholesterolaemic, as the 
population mean cholesterol concentration is typically 
­5.5–6.0 mmol/L in many Western countries. At this 
level, CVD risk is ­already twice that of a population with 
a mean cholesterol <4.0 mmol/L, so a statistical defini-
tion of ­‘normal’ based on population values is unhelpful. 
Laboratories will ­generally refer to ‘ideal’ cholesterol tar-
gets. In the UK, these are currently total cholesterol 
<4.0 mmol/L and LDL-cholesterol <2.0 mmol/L.
Dysalphalipoproteinaemias
The dysalphalipoproteinaemias are disorders of the syn-
thesis and secretion of apo A-containing lipoproteins. 
With the exception of apo A-I Milano (see below), all 
other genetic causes of familial hypoalphalipoproteinae-
mia are associated with some degree of increased cardio-
vascular risk.
Abnormal apolipoprotein A structure
Population screening for apo A-I structural variation has 
revealed at least 11 variants. The best described is apo 
A-I Milano, which is associated with a low HDL (HDL2) 
concentration but no increased incidence of atheroscle-
rosis. Apolipoprotein A-I Milano results from substitu-
tion of cysteine for arginine at position 173, which has 
the effect of changing the physical property of one of the 
amphipathic helical regions involved in lipid binding and 
also allows disulphide bonding to other proteins. Dimers 
with apo A-II and apo E have been observed. In addition, 
LCAT activity is reduced.
Apo A-I deficiency
At least three types of apo A-I deficiency have been de-
scribed, all associated with corneal clouding and prema-
ture coronary heart disease. Heterozygotes have 50% of 
normal HDL concentrations. HDL is virtually undetect-
able in homozygotes. In one type there is deficiency only 
of apo A-I, another also has deficiency of apo C-III and 
has low plasma triglyceride concentrations. The APOC3 
gene is 3’ to the APOA1 gene but in the opposite ori-
entation. These two genes are normally convergently 
transcribed from opposite DNA strands. In patients with 
combined deficiency of apo A-I and apo C-III, an inver-
sion of approximately 5.5 kb containing portions of the 
APOA1 and APOC3 genes has been identified. In a third 
form, there is deficiency of apo A-I, apo C-II and also 
apoA-IV. These may show fat malabsorption due to the 
deficiency of apo A-IV.
Disorders of HDL metabolism (Box 37.2)
Tangier disease
Tangier disease is a rare autosomal recessive condition 
characterized by storage of cholesteryl esters in macro-
phages. This is responsible for the characteristic orange 
appearance of the tonsils. Splenomegaly also occurs, and is 
often accompanied by mild thrombocytopenia and reticu-
locytosis, but hepatomegaly and lymphadenopathy are less 
constant features. Corneal clouding may occur and most 
affected individuals have some neurological dysfunction.
Total plasma cholesterol concentrations are low 
(typically <3 mmol/L) but, unlike the apo B deficiency 
states, plasma triglyceride concentrations are normal 
or increased. Virtually no HDL-cholesterol is present 
(<0.1 mmol/L) and only pre-β1HDL particles are detect-
able in plasma. The concentrations of apo A-I and apo 
A-II are approximately 1–3% and 5%, respectively, of 
values found in normal individuals. An increase in pro-
apo A-I can be demonstrated by isoelectric focusing but 
rapid catabolism of pro-apo A-I results in reduced con-
version of pro-apo A-I to the mature form and conse-
quently low plasma concentrations of apo A-I. Although 
it appears that Tangier patients are at increased cardiac 
risk, the level of risk varies between affected families and 
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
729
is not as high as predicted from epidemiological studies 
based on their plasma HDL-cholesterol concentrations. 
This may be related to their low LDL-cholesterol con-
centrations, but thrombocytopenia and relative platelet 
hyporeactivity may also be important factors.
Tangier disease is caused by the loss of function of the 
cholesterol-efflux regulatory protein, ABCA1, resulting 
from mutations in the ABCA1 gene. Individuals homozy-
gous for ABCA1 mutations are at increased risk of coro-
nary artery disease compared with unaffected individuals 
and heterozygous individuals are at intermediate risk.
Familial lecithin–cholesterol acyltransferase 
deficiency
Familial LCAT deficiency is an autosomal recessive condi-
tion. The gene for LCAT is located on chromosome 16: 
mutations in this gene that are associated with no LCAT 
activity result in familial LCAT deficiency. The clinical 
features of this condition include corneal opacities, haemo-
lytic anaemia, proteinuria, high plasma triglyceride and low 
HDL-cholesterol concentrations. Despite the low HDL-
cholesterol concentrations, premature atherosclerosis is 
rarely seen. Heterozygous carriers lack clinical features but 
have HDL-cholesterol concentrations about 50% of normal.
Lecithin-cholesterol acyltransferase deficiency results 
in an inability to esterify free cholesterol in plasma and 
hence the accumulation of free cholesterol in all lipopro-
tein fractions. Lipoprotein particles may also be of abnor-
mal size or shape as well as composition; thus the HDL 
particles are either disc shaped or unusually small spheri-
cal particles similar to newly secreted HDL. Lipoprotein 
X is detectable on electrophoresis.
Fish eye disease
Fish eye disease is an autosomal recessive disorder re-
sulting from mutations in the LCAT gene. In contrast to 
familial LCAT deficiency, there is detectable LCAT activ-
ity. Corneal opacities that give the eyes the appearance of 
those of dead fish have been described in association with 
low HDL-cholesterol concentrations (approximately 10% 
of normal). LDL is enriched in triglyceride; the concentra-
tion of VLDL is increased but the composition is normal.
Hepatic triglyceride lipase deficiency
Several familial cases of HL deficiency have been re-
ported and inheritance appears to be autosomal recessive, 
with heterozygotes showing an intermediate phenotype. 
Homozygotes have severe hypertriglyceridaemia, hy-
percholesterolaemia, and increased IDL concentrations, 
producing a phenotype similar to type III or remnant 
hyperlipidaemia. HL deficiency is distinguished by an 
absence of post heparin HL activity. Apolipoprotein A-I 
and HDL-cholesterol concentrations are slightly raised, 
with HDL particles being abnormally triglyceride-rich 
HDL2. Premature vascular disease has been reported 
in HL deficiency, although the exact role of HL in the 
development of atherosclerosis remains uncertain, as in-
creased HL activity (e.g. secondary to anabolic steroid 
use) may also result in increased vascular disease.
Cholesterol ester transfer protein deficiency
Several mutations of the CETP gene that cause CETP 
deficiency have been described. Homozygous CETP-
deficient subjects have high plasma concentrations of 
HDL-cholesterol, apo A-I, apo A-II and apo E. Plasma 
HDL-cholesterol concentrations are usually >3 mmol/L 
in homozygous subjects who have a complete absence 
of CETP activity, values of 2–2.5 mmol/L are typically 
seen in heterozygotes. These subjects also have an ap-
proximately 40% reduction in LDL-cholesterol and 
apo B. Cholesterol ester transfer protein deficiency is 
relatively common in Japan, where it accounts for about 
half of all cases of hyperalphalipoproteinaemia, but it 
is rare in Caucasians. There is evidence that, when as-
sociated with a high plasma HDL concentration, CETP 
deficiency protects against the development of ather-
oma. On this basis, drugs that inhibit CETP have been 
developed: these produce an increase in plasma HDL-
cholesterol concentration of over 100% and fall in LDL-
cholesterol concentration of around 40%. Because of 
the complex relationship between CETP activity, HDL 
concentrations and atherosclerosis, the effect of these 
agents on cardiovascular outcomes will need to be tested 
in clinical trials before it is clear whether or not CETP 
inhibition has therapeutic value.
ACQUIRED HYPERLIPIDAEMIAS
Acquired, or secondary, hyperlipidaemia is caused by 
alterations in lipoprotein metabolism resulting from 
another disease state or from drug therapy. Treatment 
of the underlying condition or discontinuation of the 
precipitating drug may correct the hyperlipidaemia. 
However, in some cases, such as chronic kidney disease 
or diabetes, where metabolism remains disturbed despite 
treatment, hyperlipidaemia may persist. In these condi-
tions the increased vascular risk is a function of qualitative 
as well as quantitative changes in plasma lipoproteins. 
In particular, LDL exists in a small, dense form which 
is more readily oxidized and consequently more athero-
genic. Cardiovascular risk therefore remains higher than 
is predicted from cholesterol and triglyceride measure-
ments alone. The secondary hyperlipidaemias are sum-
marized in Box 37.3.
Xanthomata may occur in acquired hyperlipidaemia 
just as in the primary lipid disorders with the same pat-
tern of lipid abnormalities: thus eruptive xanthomata 
occur in the chylomicronaemia syndrome, whatever its 
aetiology. Florid cutaneous lipid deposition may occur in 
the presence of abnormal lipoproteins such as lipoprotein 
X in cholestasis (see below) or where monoclonal im-
munoglobulins bind lipoproteins or their receptors and 
interfere with lipid metabolism, as may occur in mono-
clonal gammopathy of uncertain significance (MGUS) 
and multiple myeloma.
Diabetes mellitus
Poorly controlled diabetes gives rise to hypertriglyceridae-
mia. In both types of diabetes, there is insulin deficiency, 
730	
Clinical biochemistry
either absolute in type 1 diabetes or relative in type 2 dia-
betes. Insulin activates lipoprotein lipase and thereby en-
hances clearance of triglyceride-rich lipoproteins, but has 
the opposite effect on the HSL of adipose tissue. Thus, in 
insulin deficiency there is, in addition to reduced clear-
ance, an increased influx of free fatty acids to the liver, 
leading to increased hepatic triglyceride synthesis.
In well-controlled diabetes, although plasma total 
cholesterol and triglyceride concentrations may be nor-
mal, there often remains a significant dyslipidaemia, 
sometimes referred to as an ‘atherogenic lipoprotein 
phenotype’. Plasma HDL-cholesterol concentration is 
usually low (<1.1 mmol/L) and triglyceride concentra-
tion elevated (>1.7 mmol/L). This pattern is indicative 
of the presence of small, dense LDL particles, which are 
more susceptible to oxidation and more atherogenic. It 
has been demonstrated that apolipoproteins A-I, A-II, B, 
C-I and E become glycated in patients with diabetes: it 
is possible that this glycation affects the normal uptake 
of remnant particles, resulting in their persistence in the 
circulation with atherogenic consequences.
The genetic background on which a secondary hy-
perlipidaemia is superimposed will affect its severity; for 
example, diabetic patients who manifest fasting chylo-
micronaemia are likely to have an underlying primary 
hypertriglyceridaemia.
Hypothyroidism
Various lipid abnormalities may occur in patients with 
untreated hypothyroidism, but the commonest is an in-
crease in plasma LDL-cholesterol concentration. This is 
a consequence of a reduction in LDL receptors, resulting 
in reduced clearance of LDL. Lipoprotein lipase activity 
may also be impaired in hypothyroidism, which explains 
the hypertriglyceridaemia that sometimes occurs.
Since both overt and subclinical hypothyroidism are 
relatively common, it is imperative that all subjects found 
to have hyperlipidaemia are screened for hypothyroidism. 
If they are found to be hypothyroid, treatment with thyrox-
ine should be instituted. If the subject does not have car-
diovascular disease, the lipid profile should be rechecked 
once the euthyroid state is regained before a decision on 
lipid-lowering treatment is made. If the subject already 
has cardiovascular disease when hypothyroidism is diag-
nosed, it may be unwise to delay lipid lowering therapy, 
but it should be instituted with care since hypothyroidism 
increases the risk of statin-induced adverse muscle effects.
Nephrotic syndrome
Longstanding nephrotic syndrome is associated with ac-
celerated atherosclerosis; thus lipid-lowering treatment 
will usually be required. There is evidence that, in the ne-
phrotic syndrome, the hyperlipidaemia may worsen renal 
function: oxidized LDL has been shown in vitro to affect 
mesangial cells and accelerate glomerulosclerosis. The 
hyperlipidaemia occurring in the nephrotic syndrome is 
most commonly hypercholesterolaemia, but mixed hy-
perlipidaemia also occurs. The hypercholesterolaemia is 
a result of hepatic overproduction of apo B-100 as part of 
the generally increased hepatic protein synthesis typical 
of the condition. Hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA (HMG-
CoA) reductase activity is also increased. The increase 
in triglyceride results from reduced removal of chylo-
microns and VLDL due to impaired lipoprotein lipase 
activity. HDL may be lost in the urine and, dependent 
on whether or not increased synthesis matches the rate of 
loss, the plasma HDL-cholesterol concentration may be 
low, normal or occasionally high.
Chronic kidney disease
Patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) are at very 
high risk of cardiovascular disease. The lipid abnormality 
most commonly seen is hypertriglyceridaemia; the lipo-
protein profile is characterized by a high concentration 
of intestinally derived apo B-48-containing lipoproteins 
and their remnants. The composition of the lipopro-
teins is also changed. The apo C-III concentration of the 
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins is increased and, since apo 
C-III inhibits both lipoprotein lipase and the hepatic up-
take of chylomicron and VLDL remnants, this results in 
BOX 37.3	
The more common causes of 
­secondary hyperlipidaemia
Hypercholesterolaemia (↑ LDL
a)
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Nephrotic syndrome
•	 Immunoglobulins
b
•	 Cholestasis
•	 Anorexia nervosa
•	 Drugs
•	 Ciclosporin
•	 Sirolimus
•	 Antiepileptics (↑ HDL also)
Hypertriglyceridaemia
c (↑ VLDL)
•	 Diabetes mellitus
•	 Chronic kidney disease
•	 Obesity
•	 Alcohol
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Immunoglobulins
b
•	 Drugs
•	 Oestrogens
•	 Corticosteroids
•	 Progestogens
•	 Protease inhibitors
•	 Retinoids
•	 Second generation antipsychotics
Mixed hyperlipidaemia (↑ VLDL, ↑ LDL)
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Nephrotic syndrome
•	 Immunoglobulins
b
bThe presence of abnormal immunoglobulins, as occurs in multiple 
myeloma, benign monoclonal gammopathies and systemic lupus 
erythematosus can give rise to any abnormality of the lipoprotein 
pattern due to binding to lipoproteins, enzymes or receptors and 
thereby preventing normal lipoprotein metabolism.
cOften accompanied by a low HDL.
aExcept cholestasis in which there is an increase in the abnormal 
­lipoprotein, lipoprotein X.
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
731
increased plasma triglyceride concentrations. Although 
total cholesterol may be relatively ‘normal’, much of 
the LDL is small and dense and therefore is particularly 
atherogenic. Although hypertriglyceridaemia is usually 
present, the most extensive evidence for reduction in car-
diovascular disease risk by lipid modification is through 
use of HMGCoA reductase inhibitors (statins), which 
reduce LDL, even though they have comparatively little 
effect on plasma triglycerides.
Renal transplantation
After transplantation, the hyperlipidaemia that accompa-
nies impaired renal function may be corrected, but this 
is not always the case. In addition, immunosuppressant 
therapy, including corticosteroids, may itself cause hyper-
lipidaemia. The degree of hypercholesterolaemia is often 
greater with sirolimus and ciclosporin than with tacroli-
mus. Thus, subjects post-transplant remain at high risk 
of cardiovascular disease, and since they will have been 
hyperlipidaemic prior to transplantation, therapy to im-
prove their lipids is warranted. Caution needs to be taken, 
however, because of the well-documented interactions 
between ciclosporin and both statins and fibrates.
Liver disease
The liver plays a central role in lipoprotein metabolism. In 
addition, the only physiological means the body has of ex-
creting cholesterol is by its hepatic secretion into the bile.
Cholestasis is frequently accompanied by a mixed 
hyperlipidaemia due to the accumulation of remnant li-
poproteins. Lipoprotein X is found uniquely in cholesta-
sis. This lipoprotein contains bile acids, apo C, apo D, 
albumin and cholesterol, and while it falls within the 
LDL density range, unlike all the other lipoproteins, it 
migrates towards the cathode on lipoprotein electropho-
resis. The atherogenic potential of lipoprotein X is un-
defined; when present in massive amounts (cholesterol 
>50 mmol/L), lipoprotein X has been associated with 
hyperviscosity. Plasma Lp(a) concentration is low and 
HDL-cholesterol is high in cholestasis; these abnormali-
ties may, in part, explain the fact that cholestasis is not 
generally associated with a high cardiovascular risk.
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a mani-
festation of the metabolic syndrome and, as such, is as-
sociated with an increased cardiovascular risk. The 
dyslipidaemia associated with NAFLD is either hypertri-
glyceridaemia or mixed hyperlipidaemia; it is frequently 
associated with small, dense LDL particles. Where the 
condition runs in families, it is difficult to distinguish from 
familial combined hyperlipidaemia. Subjects with NAFLD 
may have abnormal plasma liver enzyme activities (par-
ticularly increased aminotransferases) and caution there-
fore needs to be exercised when starting lipid-­lowering 
agents. However, owing to the increased cardiovascular 
risk, treatment is warranted. Statins are generally the drug 
of first choice unless severe hypertriglyceridaemia is pres-
ent creating a risk of pancreatitis. Although liver enzymes 
should be monitored, treatment is usually safe, and in 
some individuals, normalization of the lipid profile results 
in a reduction in the aminotransferase activities.
Alcohol
Alcohol causes hypertriglyceridaemia in susceptible in-
dividuals. This results from a combination of increased 
production and impaired removal of VLDL. In severe 
cases, this may result in chylomicronaemia, which may 
result in acute pancreatitis.
Epidemiological studies have suggested that moderate 
alcohol intake (no more than 1–2 units per day) is asso-
ciated with a lower mortality than either higher alcohol 
intakes or abstinence from alcohol. Such moderate intake 
is associated with an increase in plasma HDL-cholesterol 
concentration, which may be responsible for the apparent 
cardiovascular protection.
Drug-related hyperlipidaemia
Various 
drugs, 
including 
antihypertensive 
agents 
(β-blockers, thiazides), corticosteroids, sex steroids, 
immunosuppressants, second generation antipsychot-
ics and antiretroviral drugs, can affect lipoprotein 
concentrations.
The effect of antihypertensives on the lipid profile has 
been extensively studied since early hypertension trials 
demonstrated that effective lowering of blood pressure 
reduced the incidence of strokes but not that of coro-
nary heart disease. The effect of β-blockers depends on 
their selectivity: non-selective (e.g. propranolol) and 
β1-selective (e.g. atenolol) β-blockers raise plasma tri-
glycerides and lower HDL, whereas β-blockers with 
intrinsic sympathomimetic activity (e.g. pindolol) are 
lipid neutral. The hyperlipidaemia associated with di-
uretic therapy appears to be caused by the unopposed 
α-adrenergic activity elicited by these drugs; the low dos-
ages (e.g. 2.5 mg of bendroflumethiazide) now used for 
treatment of hypertension have a negligible effect on the 
lipid profile.
Glucocorticoid treatment results in an increase in 
plasma LDL, HDL and triglyceride concentrations. 
Oestrogens increase hepatic VLDL secretion and in-
crease HDL (HDL2). In postmenopausal women, they 
also tend to reduce LDL. Progestogens, on the other 
hand, tend to reduce HDL (especially HDL2) and raise 
LDL. With both oral contraceptives and hormone re-
placement therapy, the magnitude of the changes in 
the lipoproteins depends on the dose, the route of ad-
ministration, the particular oestrogen and progestogen 
involved and whether or not there is an underlying pri-
mary hyperlipoproteinaemia. The use of oral oestrogen 
results in exposure of the liver to supra-physiological 
doses of oestrogen, with stimulation of hepatic lipoprotein 
synthesis. Severe hypertriglyceridaemia may be preci­pitated 
by the use of oral oestrogen in susceptible individuals, 
who may have a normal plasma triglyceride concen-
tration or only mild hypertriglyceridaemia when not 
taking oestrogen or using topical (patch) oestrogen 
hormone replacement therapy. Of the progestogens, 
the 19-nortestosterone derivatives (e.g. norethisterone, 
levonorgestrel) are considerably more androgenic than 
the C21 progestogens (e.g. medroxyprogesterone ac-
etate, dydrogesterone) and result in greater reductions 
in plasma HDL concentrations.
732	
Clinical biochemistry
Tamoxifen, a selective oestrogen receptor modulator 
that has agonist and antagonist oestrogen effects, has a 
predominantly agonistic effect on the liver and thus can 
cause severe hypertriglyceridaemia.
Among immunosuppressant drugs, both the cal-
cineurin inhibitors (ciclosporin, tacrolimus) and the 
non-calcineurin inhibitor, sirolimus, can cause hyperlipi-
daemia, which, in most individuals, is an isolated increase 
in plasma LDL con­cen­tration.
Hypertriglyceridaemia is a common side-effect of sec-
ond generation antipsychotic drugs including clozapine, 
olanzapine and quetiapine. This may be severe, and cases 
of pancreatitis, thought to result from the hypertriglyc-
eridaemia, have been reported.
Antiretroviral drug treatment is frequently associated 
with dyslipidaemia. The combination of fat redistribu-
tion, insulin resistance and dyslipidaemia seen in subjects 
on antiretroviral treatment is referred to as ‘the lipodys-
trophy syndrome’. The fat redistribution is characterized 
by loss of subcutaneous fat and accumulation of intra- 
abdominal fat. This is associated with regimens containing 
protease inhibitors and nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors, whereas the dyslipidaemia and insulin resis-
tance are associated particularly with protease inhibitors. 
Care is required in treating dyslipidaemia in these indi-
viduals as a number of antiretroviral therapies interact 
with lipid lowering treatments.
ACQUIRED HYPOLIPIDAEMIA
Acquired or secondary hypolipidaemia is much less com-
mon than its hyperlipidaemic equivalent. It occurs with 
cachexia, malabsorption, hyperthyroidism, malnutrition, 
liver failure and some forms of malignancy. It is of no 
direct clinical consequence, being only a manifestation of 
the underlying condition.
Drug therapy can also cause hypolipidaemia. Excessive 
thyroxine will cause a reduction in total cholesterol, 
mimicking that seen with thyrotoxicosis. Drugs includ-
ing fibrates and thiazolidinediones have been reported 
occasionally to cause an unpredictable and profound par-
adoxical fall in plasma HDL-cholesterol concentration in 
susceptible individuals.
INVESTIGATION OF LIPID DISORDERS
The simple appearance of a serum or plasma sample may 
indicate a lipid disorder. Chylomicrons and VLDL are 
large enough to scatter light. Chylomicrons are less dense 
than plasma and will form a layer on the surface of a sam-
ple left standing at 4°C overnight. If present in very large 
amounts, VLDL will make the sample appear opalescent.
Total cholesterol
This is the most commonly used single measure of lipid 
status. It has been used extensively in epidemiological 
studies, and may have some use in monitoring treatment. 
However, it is inadequate on its own for the diagnosis of 
lipid disorders, or as the only measure prior to starting 
treatment. A full fasting lipid profile including triglyceride 
and HDL-cholesterol should be measured at least once to 
avoid missing significant dyslipidaemias with normal total 
cholesterol. LDL-cholesterol, non-HDL-cholesterol and 
apo B measurements may have benefits in assessing car-
diovascular risk and the adequacy of treatment.
Cholesterol is generally measured by enzymatic meth-
ods using cholesterol oxidase. Although analytical CV 
is low (typically <3%), intraindividual biological varia-
tion is around 5% so it is important to appreciate that 
the critical difference between consecutive measure-
ments in monitoring therapy may be around 0.8 mmol/L. 
Fasting or non-fasting makes little difference (± 3%) to 
measurements.
Triglycerides
Triglyceride increases up to 2–3-fold after a meal, and so 
samples should be taken after an overnight (>12 h) fast 
in order to obviate difficulties of interpretation resulting 
from the presence of chylomicrons or chylomicron rem-
nants. Most triglyceride methods involve hydrolysis of tri-
glycerides and measurement of the free glycerol released. 
Glycerol blanking is not routinely performed. In certain 
circumstances, such as patients with uncontrolled diabe-
tes mellitus, on haemodialysis, or with the rare X-linked 
recessive disorder glycerol kinase deficiency, the glycerol 
content of the sample may be significantly raised. In these 
situations, high concentrations of glycerol in the plasma 
will produce falsely high triglyceride results, and glycerol 
blanking is essential to obtain a valid result.
Plasma triglyceride concentration has a much greater 
biological variation than does that of cholesterol, at ~20% 
even in fasting samples.
High density lipoprotein cholesterol
Plasma HDL concentration is generally measured by di-
rect (homogeneous) methods that rely on antigen/anti-
body complex formation, or polyethylene glycol (PEG) 
modified enzymes that react selectively with cholesterol 
in HDL. These assays can provide reliable results in the 
presence of triglyceride concentrations up to 10 mmol/L.
Low density lipoprotein cholesterol
LDL-cholesterol (LDL-C) can be derived by substitut-
ing the results of the analysis of total cholesterol (TC), 
HDL-cholesterol (HDL-C) and triglyceride (TG) (fast-
ing) into the Friedewald formula:
(all measurements being in mmol/L).
The Friedewald formula assumes that most of the tri-
glyceride in the plasma is in VLDL and that there is a mo-
lar ratio of 5:1 of triglyceride to cholesterol in the VLDL 
fraction. For this reason, the Friedewald ­formula is not ap-
plicable in subjects with remnant hyperlipidaemia in whom 
the remnant lipoprotein fraction is ­cholesterol-enriched. 
In addition, it is not applicable to subjects with plasma 
LDL C
TC
C
-
HDL
TG
-
=
−
+




2 2.
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
733
triglyceride concentrations >4.5 mmol/L since, at these 
levels, VLDL contains a greater proportion of triglycer-
ide, and so the formula overestimates VLDL-cholesterol 
and underestimates LDL-cholesterol. Although most lab-
oratories report derived plasma LDL-cholesterol concen-
trations on samples with triglycerides up to 4.5 mmol/L 
this tendency for VLDL to contain a greater proportion 
of triglyceride is sometimes present at lower concentra-
tions of triglycerides, to a degree with may be clinically 
significant. The error in calculated LDL-cholesterol is 
>10% in more than 30% of subjects with a plasma tri-
glyceride concentration of 2.3–3.4 mmol/L and in >40% 
of subjects with triglycerides of 3.4–4.5 mmol/L.
Directly LDL-cholesterol assays are being used in-
creasingly. In general, they compare well with LDL-
cholesterol as measured using ultracentrifugation. They 
have the advantage of being able to measure LDL-
cholesterol in non-fasting samples, but because they are 
immunoseparation methods, have the disadvantage of 
higher cost compared with the simpler enzymatic mea-
surement of total and HDL-cholesterol, and triglyceride.
Plasma LDL-cholesterol concentration is increasingly 
used in epidemiological and therapeutic studies and treat-
ment goals based on LDL-cholesterol have been incor-
porated into most national guidelines.
Non-HDL-cholesterol
Non-HDL-cholesterol is derived simply using the formula 
(total cholesterol – HDL-cholesterol). The major differ-
ence from LDL-cholesterol is that it includes cholesterol 
in VLDL. In some epidemiological studies it has been 
shown to predict vascular risk almost as well as apo B and 
better than LDL-cholesterol. This may simply be because 
VLDL is atherogenic in its own right, but also because 
non-HDL-cholesterol may reflect LDL particle number 
better than measurement of LDL-cholesterol concentra-
tion alone.
Other advantages of non-HDL-cholesterol are that 
it can be measured in non-fasting samples, and that its 
measurement has better precision and accuracy than 
Friedewald derived LDL-cholesterol. It is also cheaper 
than measurement of apo B. It has been adopted in a 
number of current guidelines alongside LDL-cholesterol.
Apolipoproteins
Apolipoprotein A-I
Apolipoprotein A-I measurement has been advocated 
as an alternative to HDL-cholesterol, but it is generally 
more expensive, and clear advantage over measurement 
of HDL-cholesterol with modern homogeneous assays 
has not been demonstrated.
Apolipoprotein B
Apolipoprotein B measurement does serve a useful pur-
pose in the investigation of lipid disorders. As there is only 
one apo B molecule in each apo B containing lipoprotein 
particle, measurement of apo B provides a measure of 
particle number. There is epidemiological evidence that 
this may provide a better predictor of cardiovascular risk 
and response to treatment than measurement of LDL-
cholesterol (directly measured or derived). This is because 
small dense LDL particles will tend to result in lower con-
centrations of LDL-cholesterol, but are relatively more 
atherogenic than less dense, cholesterol-­enriched LDL.
Apolipoprotein B measurement may be helpful in 
diagnosis, particularly in patients with mixed hyperlipi-
daemia. Apo B is often elevated in familial combined hy-
perlipidaemia, and low in proportion to total cholesterol 
in remnant hyperlipidaemia.
Apolipoprotein B and non-HDL-cholesterol show 
similar ability to predict cardiac risk in population studies. 
Apolipoprotein B may, however, be superior in patients 
with a large proportion of small dense LDL including 
those with type 2 diabetes and the metabolic syndrome.
Apolipoprotein E
Although it is not essential for managing patients, 
knowledge of the apolipoprotein E phenotype (based on 
electrophoresis) or confirmation of an ε2/ε2 genotype is 
sometimes helpful in confirming a diagnosis of remnant 
hyperlipoproteinaemia. It should also be remembered 
that the finding of an ε2/ε2 genotype on its own does not 
establish the diagnosis as other factors need to be present 
before the typical clinical phenotype becomes manifest.
Lipoprotein(a)
Standardization has only become available for Lp(a) over 
the last few years. Very wide variation between methods 
made the assay of limited utility in the past. It is impor-
tant that assays are independent of the number of kringle 
4 repeats in the highly variable region of the molecule. 
Plasma Lp(a) concentration is normally <30 mg/dL but 
shows a highly positively skewed distribution. High 
concentrations are associated with an increased risk of 
cardiovascular disease, and the greatest utility of mea-
surement is in assessing risk in those with high plasma 
LDL-cholesterol concentration.
In patients with familial hypercholesterolaemia who 
have very high Lp(a) concentrations (>60 mg/dL), LDL 
apheresis, which selectively removes apo B containing li-
poprotein particles, is occasionally used, as statins have 
very little impact on Lp(a).
Post-heparin lipolytic activity
The intravenous injection of heparin leads to the release 
into the circulation of both LPL and HL. Measurement of 
LPL activity is useful in the differential diagnosis of severe 
hypertriglyceridaemia where chylomicronaemia is present 
(type I hyperlipidaemia). This may be due to a deficiency 
of lipoprotein lipase.
Lipoprotein separation techniques
Ultracentrifugation
Preparative ultracentrifugation is the reference proce-
dure for isolating lipoproteins; it involves sequential iso-
lation of lipoprotein classes from plasma after adjustment 
734	
Clinical biochemistry
of the density with sodium chloride, potassium bromide, 
sodium bromide or mixtures of these salts. This is a time-
consuming procedure and may take up to five days for 
isolation of all subclasses to be completed. Losses may 
occur at all stages and artefacts may also be introduced. It 
is generally reserved for research studies.
Lipoprotein electrophoresis
Electrophoresis on cellulose acetate, paper, agarose and 
polyacrylamide has been used as a means of separating 
the lipoprotein classes and, indeed, the separation pattern 
on paper electrophoresis was the basis of the Fredrickson 
classification of lipid disorders. For therapeutic purposes, 
the Fredrickson classification has been replaced by defin-
ing the genetic basis of the hyperlipidaemia. It may still 
be of use in the diagnosis of remnant hyperlipidaemia 
with its broad β band, and may be helpful in deficiency 
states; for example, in demonstrating the lack of pre-β 
and β bands in abetalipoproteinaemia.
Genotyping
Genetic testing is particularly used for the diagnosis of 
remnant hyperlipidaemia, and familial hypercholes-
terolaemia (FH). Homozygosity for the ε2 allele of the 
apolipoprotein E gene is seen in remnant hyperlipidae-
mia. FH is due to mutations in LDLR, APOB, PCSK9 or 
LDLRAP1 genes.
Genotyping will also be used increasingly to confirm 
the diagnosis of rare monogenic lipid disorders. In ad-
dition, genome-wide association studies are starting to 
identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in mul-
tiple genes that may have minor effects individually but 
clinically significant effects cumulatively. This is starting 
to provide insight into the genetic basis of many common 
lipid and lipoprotein phenotypes, but has not yet found 
application in routine practice.
A further application of genetic testing is in tailoring 
therapy. A SNP in SLCO1B1 has been described which is 
associated with a four-fold increased risk increased risk 
of statin toxicity in heterozygotes and 16-fold increased 
risk in homozygotes. This gene codes for an organic 
anion transporter protein (OATP1B1) that is responsi-
ble for the uptake of statins to their site of action in the 
liver. Deficiency results in reduced efficacy and increased 
plasma levels with consequent increased risk of myositis. 
Fluvastatin is not taken up via this mechanism, and may 
be more effective and better tolerated in individuals with 
this polymorphism.
TREATMENT OF HYPERLIPIDAEMIA
Management of patients with hyperlipidaemia requires a 
full history, including a personal history of cardiovascu-
lar disease and conditions that can cause dyslipidaemias, 
family history of cardiovascular disease (with age of on-
set), lifestyle factors and drugs that may produce lipid 
abnormalities. Clinical examination and a detailed family 
history may suggest a specific genetic diagnosis, which 
may be confirmed by lipid, lipoprotein or genetic testing. 
Genetic lipid disorders may require more aggressive treat-
ment, particularly if they suggest (e.g. in FH) that choles-
terol levels have been elevated since soon after birth. They 
may also indicate the need for family screening.
All patients should receive lifestyle advice (including 
advice concerning smoking cessation where relevant). 
The aim of dietary advice is both to achieve weight loss 
(where needed) and an appropriate balance of nutrients 
including control of the amount of fat, and especially sat-
urated fat, in the diet. Causes of secondary dyslipidaemia 
should be treated: correction of untreated hypothyroid-
ism or newly diagnosed diabetes may produce a marked 
fall in plasma lipid concentrations.
In patients with fasting serum triglyceride concentra-
tions of >10 mmol/L, there is a risk of acute pancreatitis, 
and treatment to lower the triglycerides should normally 
be the initial priority. Fibric acid derivatives (fibrates) and 
high doses of fish oils (e.g. Omacor®) are generally the 
first-line treatments. Some patients with type 2 diabetes 
may benefit from the introduction of insulin.
In other cases, treatment is based on serum lipid con-
centrations and an assessment of a patient’s overall car-
diovascular risk. Reduction in cardiovascular risk is the 
main aim, and statins are generally the first-line treat-
ment. They have the most extensive evidence base and 
are generally used even if triglyceride concentrations are 
slightly or moderately raised, so long as this is not high 
enough to cause pancreatitis.
The highest priority is to treat those with clinical evi-
dence of vascular disease (including cerebrovascular and 
peripheral vascular as well as coronary disease, i.e. second-
ary prevention). Primary prevention (i.e. in the absence 
of vascular disease) is targeted to those at the highest 
risk. This includes those with genetic hyperlipidaemias 
(e.g. FH), those with conditions known to cause qualitative 
lipoprotein changes that increase risk (e.g. diabetes, when 
treatment is generally recommended above the age of 40), 
and those estimated to be at high risk of cardiovascular dis-
ease based on lipid results and cardiovascular risk factors. 
Various risk calculation tools are available for calculation 
of ten-year or lifetime risk, based on epidemiological data 
(see Chapter 38 for a more detailed discussion).
The aim of treatment is ideally to reduce serum to-
tal cholesterol concentration to <4 mmol/L and LDL-
cholesterol concentration to <2 mmol/L. Targets for 
non-HDL-cholesterol of <2.5 mmol/L and apo B of 
<0.8 g/L are also recommended. These targets rec-
ognize that residual risk of cardiovascular event after 
LDL-cholesterol reduction with statins depends on LDL 
particle number, which may better be reflected by mea-
suring plasma apo B concentration.
If targets are not achieved, then fibrates, ezetimibe or 
bile acid sequestrants are all options, usually in addition 
to a statin, although none have such a robust evidence 
base as statins for reducing cardiovascular events. Use 
of lipid lowering drugs in combination is usually safe al-
though care must be taken to identify patients who are at 
increased risk of skeletal myopathy.
In patients with FH, drug treatment is generally con-
sidered by the age of ten, with the aim of reducing serum 
LDL-cholesterol concentration by >50%. In those with 
a more severe phenotype or with homozygous FH, LDL 
	
37  Lipids and disorders of lipoprotein metabolism	
735
TABLE 37.7  Drugs used in the treatment of dyslipoproteinaemias
Drug group
Mode of action
Indications/advantages
Adverse effects
Bile acid sequestrants (e.g. 
cholestyramine, colestipol, 
colesevelam)
Interrupt the enterohepatic 
circulation by binding 
bile salts. This results 
in increased hepatic 
LDL uptake but also 
increased cholesterol 
synthesis
Raised LDL-C. Safe in 
pregnancy. Used in LRCCT
a 
and shown to reduce 
morbidity and mortality 
from coronary artery 
disease
Increase triglyceride 
concentration. 
Constipation, diarrhoea, 
nausea, abdominal 
bloating or discomfort. 
May interfere with 
absorption of other drugs
Fibric acid derivatives (e.g. 
fenofibrate, bezafibrate, 
gemfibrozil)
PPARα agonist activity 
has multiple effects 
including increased 
LPL activity, increased 
ABCA1 transcription, 
reduced hepatic VLDL 
production, increased 
LDLR mediated uptake 
and increased biliary 
cholesterol secretion
Hypertriglyceridaemia 
(↑ VLDL) Mixed 
hyperlipidaemia (↑ VLDL 
and ↑ LDL) and remnant 
hyperlipoproteinaemia. 
Tendency for HDL-C to 
increase
Increased creatine kinase and 
myopathy – care necessary 
if using in combination 
with a statin (avoid 
gemfibrozil). Indigestion. 
Cholelithiasis. Potentiation 
of oral anticoagulants. 
Abnormal liver enzymes
Hydroxymethoxyglutaryl-
coenzyme A reductase 
inhibitors (e.g. simvastatin, 
pravastatin, fluvastatin, 
atorvastatin and 
rosuvastatin)
Inhibit the rate-limiting 
enzyme of cholesterol 
synthesis thus increasing 
LDL receptor-mediated 
uptake from plasma
Raised LDL-C. Well tolerated. 
Clinical endpoint studies 
showing benefits in 
reducing cardiovascular 
events and total mortality 
(CTT
b). ASTEROID
c 
(rosuvastatin) showed 
regression of coronary 
atherosclerosis
Occasional patients 
develop myopathy and 
rhabdomyolysis, especially 
with concomitant use 
of drugs including 
ciclosporin, gemfibrozil 
and erythromycin. 
Abnormal liver enzymes
ω-3 Fish oil rich in the 
polyunsaturated fatty 
acids: eicosapentaenoic 
and docosahexanoic acids, 
e.g. Omacor®, Maxepa®
Reduces VLDL triglyceride 
synthesis
High triglyceride 
concentrations due to 
increased VLDL, whether 
alone or in combination 
with chylomicronaemia. 
At pharmacological 
dosage also possesses 
antithrombotic and  
anti-inflammatory properties
Nausea, flatulence
Ezetimibe
Specific inhibitor of 
intestinal cholesterol 
absorption. Blocks 
enterohepatic 
recirculation of biliary 
cholesterol, as well as 
reducing absorption of 
dietary cholesterol
As an adjunct to a statin 
for the treatment of 
elevated LDL-C or alone 
if a statin is not tolerated 
or inappropriate. Can 
also be used to treat 
β-sitosterolaemia 
(phytosterolaemia)
Gastrointestinal disturbance. 
Raised creatine kinase or 
myalgia
Drugs in clinical trials
CETP inhibitors (anacetrapib; 
evacetrapib)
Inhibit cholesterol ester 
transfer protein
As adjunct to statins to 
raise HDL-C and reduce 
cardiovascular risk
Effect of increasing HDL-C on 
cardiovascular outcome 
still uncertain.
MTP inhibitors (lomitapide)
Inhibit microsomal 
triglyceride transfer 
protein
Clinical trials ongoing 
in homozygous 
FH and in familial 
hypertriglyceridaemia
Hepatic steatosis
LDL antisense 
oligonucleotides, e.g. 
mipomersen (KYNAMRO®)
Reduce LDL synthesis 
by inhibiting APOB 
transcription
Hypercholesterolaemia
 
PCSK9 inhibitors
Increase LDL receptor 
activity by genetic 
inhibition or 
immunological blockade 
of PCSK9
Hypercholesterolaemia
Reduce HDL-C as well 
as LDL-C cholesterol. 
Injectable. Effect on 
outcome unclear
Drugs under development
Apo A-I based therapies
Apo A-I mimetics and 
synthetic HDL particle 
infusion
 
 
LPL gene replacement
ABCA1 agonists
LCAT activators
Lp-PLA2 inhibitors
 
LPL deficiency
 
aLRCCT, Lipid Research Clinics Coronary Primary Prevention Trial
bCTT, Cholesterol Treatment Trialists collaboration (a meta-analysis of the major statin trials)
cASTEROID, A study to evaluate the effect of rosuvastatin on intravascular ultrasound derived coronary atherosclerosis burden.
736	
Clinical biochemistry
apheresis is a treatment option. New agents such as MTP 
and PCSK9 inhibitors, and apo B mRNA antisense oligo-
nucleotides are in development or clinical trials.
A summary of drugs used to treat hyperlipidaemia, 
and of those currently in development or clinical trials, is 
given in  Table 37.7.
Side-effects of statins and other lipid lowering treat-
ments include elevation of transaminases and muscle 
effects ranging from an asymptomatic slight rise in cre-
atine kinase (CK), through myalgia or myositis, with or 
without a rise in CK, to, rarely, rhabdomyolysis. Patients 
should be warned of possible effects and liver enzymes 
should be monitored. Drug interactions (e.g. with im-
munosuppressant drugs) increase the risk of myositis. 
Genetic variants may also increase the risk of muscle 
side-effects (see p. 734).
While targeting those at highest risk, and treating 
them aggressively with lipid lowering drug treatment, is 
highly effective in individuals, it is important to recog-
nize that the greatest impact on population rates of CVD 
would still to be made by changing the diet and lifestyle 
habits of the population as a whole.
CONCLUSION
The principal lipids present in the blood are cholesterol, 
triglycerides and phospholipids. They are transported, 
in association with various apolipoproteins, in lipopro-
tein particles. Lipids have essential functions in cellu-
lar structure and metabolism but, at present, the major 
clinical interest in them derives from the relationship 
between the plasma cholesterol concentration (spe-
cifically LDL-cholesterol) and the risk of developing 
atherosclerosis.
Lipid metabolism is complex; there is a continuous 
flux of lipoprotein particles between the blood and tis-
sues, and of the lipid and protein components between li-
poprotein particles. Abnormalities of plasma lipids and of 
lipoprotein composition occur frequently. They can arise 
as a result of a disease that secondarily affects lipid me-
tabolism (e.g. diabetes, hypothyroidism) or be primary, 
that is, genetically determined.
In the genetic hyperlipidaemias, appropriate investi-
gation will define the nature and severity of the disorder 
and provide a rational basis for treatment. Greater un-
derstanding of the details of lipoprotein metabolism will 
continue to identify new therapeutic targets and bring 
the potential for effective new therapies. In the majority 
of cases, the aim is to reduce the risk of cardiovascular 
disease, and therefore specific therapy for the hyperlipi-
daemia needs to be accompanied by action against all the 
other pertinent risk factors.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
The author wishes to acknowledge Dr Christine 
Marenah, who was the author of this chapter in previous 
editions of the book.
Further reading
Cholesterol Treatment Trialists Collaboration. Efficacy and safety 
of more intensive lowering of LDL cholesterol: a meta analysis of 
data from 170,000 participants in 26 randomised trials. Lancet 
2010;376:1670–81.
This meta analysis reviews the major trials of statin therapy and their 
effect on cardiovascular outcomes.
Dennis EA, Witztum JL, editors-in-chief. Journal of Lipid Research.
This monthly publication includes reviews on a wide range of lipid-related 
topics.
Grundy SM, editor-in-chief. Current Opinion in Lipidiology.
This two-monthly journal includes articles and reviews of recent literature.
Rifai N, Warnick GR, Dominiczak MH, editors. Handbook of 
lipoprotein testing. 2nd ed Washington: AACC Press; 2000. 
A comprehensive textbook of analytical procedures in relation to lipid 
metabolism.
Scriver CR, Beaudet AL, Sly WS et  al. editors. The metabolic and 
molecular bases of inherited disease. 8th ed New York: McGraw-Hill; 
2001. p. 2705–960, Part 12 (Lipids). 
This is the most recent hard copy version of this textbook. Updated sections 
are available online at www.ommbid.com; 
737
INTRODUCTION
The cardiovascular or circulatory system consists of the 
heart and blood vessels (arteries, arterioles, capillaries, 
venules and veins). When it functions normally, effective 
circulation of blood maintains perfusion of the tissues, so 
that substrates for cellular metabolism are provided and 
excretory products removed. Among other vital func-
tions, it also allows hormones to be transported from 
their organs of origin to their target tissues, defends 
against infection through facilitation of the movement 
of white cells and cytokines, and promotes haemostasis 
through delivery of platelets and clotting factors to trau-
matized tissue.
Circulation of blood is maintained by the pump-
ing action of the heart, a muscular organ consisting of 
two atria and two ventricles. The atria receive blood 
(the left atrium from the lungs and the right atrium 
from the rest of the body) and pass it to the ventricles. 
The right ventricle pumps deoxygenated venous blood 
to the lungs for oxygenation while the left ventricle 
supplies oxygenated blood to the rest of the body (in-
cluding itself) via the aorta, arteries, arterioles and 
capillaries.
Cardiovascular disease
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) collectively comprises dis-
ease of the heart and of blood vessels (almost invariably 
arteries) supplying any organ. The organs most com-
monly affected by arterial disease are the heart (coronary 
artery disease), the brain (cerebrovascular disease) and 
the limbs (peripheral arterial disease). Renovascular dis-
ease is an important cause of chronic kidney disease and 
of hypertension.
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death in 
England and Wales, currently responsible for one in three 
deaths. For every death due to CVD, there are at least 
two major non-fatal CVD events. It is also the leading 
cause of death globally: the World Health Organization 
(WHO) estimated that 17.3 million people died from 
CVD in 2008, representing 30% of all deaths. Of these, 
an estimated 7.3 million deaths were due to coronary 
heart disease and 6.2 million were due to stroke (cerebro-
vascular disease). Although approximately 80% of CVD 
is due to modifiable factors and is potentially preventable, 
CVD deaths continue to rise, largely because preventa-
tive measures are insufficient or ineffective. Low- and 
middle-income countries are disproportionately affected, 
C H A P T E R  3 8
Clinical biochemistry  
of the cardiovascular system
Clodagh M. Loughrey  •  Ian S. Young
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  737
Cardiovascular disease  737
Role of the laboratory  739
CARDIAC MUSCLE STRUCTURE AND 
BIOCHEMISTRY  740
ARTERIAL STRUCTURE AND  
FUNCTION  741
ATHEROSCLEROSIS  741
ACUTE MYOCARDIAL DAMAGE  744
Biomarkers of acute myocardial 
damage  744
HEART FAILURE  749
Natriuretic peptides  749
CARDIOVASCULAR RISK FACTORS  750
Cardiovascular risk assessment  750
Unmodifiable risk factors  751
Potentially modifiable risk factors  752
Dietary factors  756
HYPERTENSION  757
Definition   757
Cause  758
Laboratory assessment of  
hypertension  759
Renovascular hypertension  759
Primary aldosteronism 
(hyperaldosteronism)  760
Phaeochromocytoma  763
Malignant hypertension  764
Hypertension in pregnancy  764
Management of hypertension  764
CONCLUSION  765
APPENDIX  765
738	
Clinical biochemistry
with less than 20% of global deaths from CVD occur-
ring in high-income countries (Fig. 38.1). Mortality due 
to all main communicable diseases, including HIV/AIDS, 
tuberculosis and malaria, is expected to decline globally be-
tween now and 2030. By 2030, it is anticipated that CVD 
alone will be responsible for more deaths in low-income 
countries than infectious diseases, maternal and perinatal 
conditions, and nutritional disorders combined, driven in 
particular by the increased global prevalence of obesity. 
Worldwide, it is estimated that in 2030, non-communicable 
diseases will account for more than three-quarters of all 
deaths, and almost 23.6 million people will die from CVD. 
Thus, CVD is today the largest single contributor to 
global mortality and is set to continue to dominate mor-
tality trends on the world stage well into the future.
Atherosclerosis is by far the most common cause of car-
diovascular disease in developed countries: thus the term 
‘cardiovascular disease’ is generally used and perceived to 
mean ‘atherosclerotic disease’, the term ‘coronary artery 
disease’ or ‘coronary heart disease’ to mean atherosclerosis 
of the coronary arteries, and ‘cerebrovascular disease’ to 
mean atherosclerosis of the cerebral vasculature. Coronary 
artery atherosclerosis leads to diminished blood supply 
to, or ischaemia of, the myocardium. When this becomes 
critical the heart muscles die, leading to a ‘myocardial in-
farction’ (MI), often, but not invariably, accompanied by 
diagnostic changes on the electrocardiogram (ECG). Acute 
coronary syndrome (ACS) is a blanket term for patients 
presenting acutely with clinical features of myocardial 
ischaemia, and encompasses ST elevation MI (STEMI), 
non-ST elevation MI (NSTEMI) and unstable angina 
(UA) (Fig. 38.2). Death from ischaemic heart disease lead-
ing to failure of the heart to maintain circulation may oc-
cur acutely in the setting of a myocardial infarction (either 
due to a large area of infarction or to cardiac dysrhythmia, 
which interferes with effective ventricular contraction) or 
in the setting of chronic heart failure. Treatment of MI 
with thrombolytic drugs or percutaneous coronary inter-
vention (PCI) with or without stenting can be life-saving 
but depends on prompt and accurate diagnosis.
Suicide, homicide, and war
35
30
25
20
Deaths (millions)
15
10
5
0
2004
2015
High income
Middle income
Year
Low income
2030
2004
2015
2030
2004
2015
2030
Other unintentional injuries
Other non-communicable
diseases
Cancers
Maternal, perinatal, and
nutritional conditions
Other infectious diseases
HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis,
and malaria
Cardiovascular diseases (CVD)
Road traffic accidents
CVD
CVD
CVD
CVD
CVD
CVD
CVD
CVD
CVD
FIGURE 38.1  ■  Projected deaths by cause in 2004, 2015 and 2030, in low-, middle- and high-income countries. Countries are catego-
rized by the World Bank according to 2004 gross national income per person: low income < US$826; middle income US$826–$10 065; 
high income > US$10 066. Adapted from Figure 2 in Beaglehole R, Bonita R 2008 Global health: a scorecard. Lancet 372: 1988–1996, with 
permission.
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
739
BOX 38.1	
Definition of myocardial infarction
Criteria for acute myocardial infarction
The term acute myocardial infarction (MI) should be used 
when there is evidence of myocardial necrosis in a clinical 
setting consistent with acute myocardial ischaemia.
Under these conditions any one of the following criteria 
meets the diagnosis for MI.
•	 Detection of a rise and/or fall of cardiac biomarker 
values (preferably cardiac troponin, cTn) with at least 
one value above the 99th percentile upper reference 
limit (URL) and with at least one of the following:
•	 symptoms of ischaemia
•	 new or presumed new significant ST-segment–T 
wave (ST–T) changes or new left bundle branch 
block (LBBB)
•	 development of pathological Q waves in the ECG
•	 imaging evidence of new loss of viable myocardium 
or new regional wall motion abnormality
•	 identification of an intracoronary thrombus by 
angiography or autopsy.
•	 Cardiac death with symptoms suggestive of myocardial 
ischaemia and presumed new ischaemic ECG changes 
or new LBBB, but death occurred before cardiac bio-
markers were obtained or before cardiac biomarker 
values would be increased.
•	 Percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) related 
MI is arbitrarily defined by elevation of cTn values 
(>5 × 99th centile URL) in patients with normal 
baseline values (≤99th centile URL) or a rise of cTn 
values >20% if the baseline values are elevated and 
are stable or falling. In addition, either: (i) symptoms 
suggestive of myocardial ischaemia or (ii) new isch-
aemic ECG changes or (iii) angiographic findings 
consistent with a procedural complication or (iv) im-
aging demonstration of new loss of viable myocar-
dium or new regional wall motion abnormality are 
required.
•	 Stent thrombosis associated with MI when detected 
by coronary angiography or autopsy in the setting of 
myocardial ischaemia and with a rise and/or fall of car-
diac biomarker values with at least one value above the 
99th percentile URL.
•	 Coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG)-related MI 
is arbitrarily defined by elevation of cardiac biomarker 
values (>10 × 99th centile URL) in patients with nor-
mal baseline cTn values (≤99th centile URL). In addi-
tion, either (i) new pathological Q waves or new LBBB 
or (ii) angiographic documented new graft or new na-
tive coronary artery occlusion or (iii) imaging evidence 
of new loss of viable myocardium or new regional wall 
motion abnormality.
Criteria for prior myocardial infarction
Any one of the following criteria meets the diagnosis for 
prior MI.
•	 Pathological Q waves with or without symptoms in 
the absence of non-ischaemic causes.
•	 Imaging evidence of a region of loss of viable myocar-
dium that is thinned and fails to contract, in the ab-
sence of a non-ischaemic cause.
•	 Pathological findings of a prior MI.
From Thygson K et al. the Writing Group on behalf of the Joint 
ESC/ACCF/AHA/WHF Task Force for the Universal Definition 
of Myocardial Infarction, 2012 Third universal definition of 
myocardial infarction. European Heart Journal 33: 2551–2567, with 
permission.
Role of the laboratory
The clinical biochemistry laboratory plays a critical role 
in the management of acute myocardial ischaemia, where 
delay in diagnosis and treatment directly increases mor-
bidity and mortality. For many years, the diagnosis of 
acute MI relied on criteria that had been established by 
the World Health Organization (WHO) in 1979: rise in a 
biomarker of cardiac myocyte injury was one of the crite-
ria but was not a prerequisite. The development of more 
specific and sensitive cardiac biomarkers has facilitated 
earlier and more accurate diagnosis, which permits more 
timely and appropriate intervention. In 2000, recogni-
tion of the fact that the newer cardiac biomarkers could 
identify myocardial micronecrosis, even when conven-
tional diagnostic criteria excluded MI, led to a new joint 
European Society of Cardiology and American College of 
Cardiology (ESC/ACC) committee universal definition 
of ‘myocardial infarction’, in which biomarker measure-
ment played a fundamental role. The definition was fur-
ther revised in 2007 and again in 2012 by the Joint Task 
Force of the European Society of Cardiology, American 
College of Cardiology Foundation, the American Heart 
Association and the World Health Federation (ESC/
ACCF/AHA/WHF). The current universal definition 
of acute MI has a rise and/or fall in cardiac biomarkers 
(preferably troponin) as the central feature of the defini-
tion (Box 38.1).
Identification of those at high risk of developing 
coronary atherosclerosis allows earlier intervention to 
prevent related clinical events, and there has also been 
sustained focus on developing biomarkers to aid predic-
tion of cardiovascular risk. The laboratory also plays im-
portant roles in the diagnosis of heart failure and in the 
investigation of hypertension.
After sections describing the structure of heart mus-
cle and arteries, and the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, 
these roles will be explored in turn.
Acute Coronary Syndrome (ACS)
STEMI (ST elevation)
STEMI
(raised biomarkers)
NSTEACS (no ST elevation)
NSTEACS
(raised biomarkers) 
UA
(normal biomarkers)
Electrocardiogram
Biomarker of 
myocyte necrosis
FIGURE 38.2  ■  Categories of acute coronary syndromes, and the 
investigations used to discriminate between them. NSTEACS, 
non-ST elevation ACS; STEMI, ST elevation myocardial infarc-
tion; UA, unstable angina.
740	
Clinical biochemistry
CARDIAC MUSCLE STRUCTURE AND 
BIOCHEMISTRY
Cardiac muscle is found only in the heart; it has much 
in common with skeletal muscle but is anatomically 
distinguishable from both skeletal muscle and smooth 
muscle. Like skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle consists 
of densely packed bundles of cylindrical muscle cells, 
multinucleated fibres (∼ 50 μm in diameter and up to 
several cm in length) which microscopically show char-
acteristic cross-banding or striations. Unlike skeletal 
muscle cells, cardiac muscle cells are branched and in-
terconnected; they do not have a nerve end plate but 
are myogenic, initiating contraction without neural 
control.
All striated muscle (i.e. both skeletal and cardiac, but 
not smooth muscle) fibres contain many myofibrils, cy-
lindrical bundles composed of two types of contractile 
protein filaments: thick filaments of myosin (∼ 15 nm in 
diameter) and thin filaments of actin (∼ 7 nm in diameter). 
Muscle contraction involves the ATPase-dependent 
sliding of the thick myosin filaments across thin actin 
filaments. Each myofibril consists of a chain of contrac-
tile units called sarcomeres, each approximately 2.3 μm in 
length. Electron microscopy reveals that each sarcomere 
consists of several distinct regions consisting of dark bands 
alternating with light bands, giving rise to the striated 
­appearance of skeletal and cardiac muscle. The light bands 
contain only thin actin filaments, whereas the dark 
bands contain thick myosin filaments overlapping with 
the actin filaments.
The cyclical interactions between actin and myosin 
that result in striated muscle contraction are regulated 
by intracellular calcium concentration, and are initiated 
by the release of calcium ions from the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum. The principal proteins which regulate these 
interactions, tropomyosin and troponin, are located on 
the actin filament (Fig. 38.3). Tropomyosin is an actin-
binding protein which forms a continuous strand lying 
along the length of the actin filament. Troponin is a 
tadpole-shaped flexible complex of proteins that lies 
against the tropomyosin strand. It comprises three 
subunits:
•	 troponin T (TnT, 37 kDa), responsible for binding 
of the complex to the Tropomyosin strand of the 
thin filament, to form the troponin-tropomyosin 
(T-TM) complex
•	 troponin I (TnI, 22.5 kDa), holds T-TM complex 
in place by Inhibiting the activity of actin-myosin 
ATPase in the presence of low calcium, thus inhibit-
ing contraction
•	 troponin C (TnC, 18 kDa), which senses and binds 
to Calcium and regulates contraction.
The structure of the ternary troponin complex im-
plies that calcium binding to TnC removes the carboxy 
terminal of TnI from the actin filament. This alters the 
flexibility and mobility of the troponin complex, forc-
ing tropomyosin away from the actin filaments and ex-
posing the myosin binding site. Myosin cross-bridges 
then attach on to the actin filament resulting in muscle 
contraction.
Troponin C has only one form, which is distributed 
throughout all muscles, whereas TnT and TnI each have 
skeletal muscle and cardiac isoforms, the latter denoted 
by cTnT and cTnI respectively. Although most intracel-
lular troponin is bound to the thin filament of the myo-
fibril, a small amount of cTnT (6–8%) and cTnI (2–4%) 
exists free in the cytoplasm.
Effective ventricular pumping depends on effective 
contraction of the myocardium, the thick muscle that com-
prises most of the ventricular wall. Immediate energy for 
muscle contraction is supplied by the hydrolysis of ATP 
by actin-myosin ATPase, largely generated by the 
β-oxidation of fatty acids, with oxidative metabolism of 
ketone bodies and pyruvate generating a lesser amount 
of ATP. The ATP hydrolysis sites are on the cross-bridges 
formed between the interacting myosin and actin filaments, 
and the ATPase is highly active only when they interact 
in muscle contraction. Depleted ATP concentrations are 
maintained by the donation of phosphate groups to ADP 
by phosphocreatine in a rapid transphosphorylation reac-
tion catalyzed by creatine kinase (see Chapter 33). The 
Actin
Cardiomyocyte
membrane
Bound troponin
complex
Free cTnl (2–4%)
Cytoplasm
Tropomyosin
Free cTnT
(6–8%)
FIGURE 38.3  ■ The thin filament of the cardiomyocyte, consisting 
of actin with the tropomyosin strand lying along its length and 
the troponin complex lying against the tropomyosin strand. The 
three proteins, which constitute the troponin complex (tropo-
nin T (TnT), troponin I (TnI) and troponin C (TnC)) are mostly 
bound to the myofibril, with small amounts of free TnT and TnI 
in the cytoplasm. From: Gaze D C, Collinson P O 2008 Multiple 
molecular forms of circulating cardiac troponin: analytical and clini-
cal significance. Annals of Clinical Biochemistry 45(4): 349–355, with 
permission.
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
741
BOX 38.2	
Potential causes of endothelial 
dysfunction
•	 Elevated/modified LDL
•	 Cigarette smoking
•	 Hypertension
•	 Diabetes mellitus
•	 Genetic
•	 Infectious microorganisms
•	 Elevated plasma homocysteine
myocardium has a rich blood supply and normally extracts 
approximately 75% of the oxygen from blood passing 
through the left ventricle. This is facilitated by myoglobin, 
a cytoplasmic haem-containing protein, which is found in 
striated muscle and has a high affinity for oxygen. Cardiac 
muscle cells generate most ATP from the β-oxidation of 
fatty acids. They are highly dependent on aerobic respira-
tion and do not function well when oxygen supply from 
coronary arteries is critical.
ARTERIAL STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
The walls of medium-sized arteries, such as the coro-
nary vessels consist of three cellular compartments sepa-
rated by two layers of condensed elastic connective tissue 
(Fig.  38.4). The innermost tunica intima is separated 
from the media by a thin layer of elastic tissue called the 
internal elastic lamina. The media is composed of spirally 
arranged smooth muscle cells which maintain arterial 
tone and determine the luminal diameter. The tunica me-
dia is separated from the tunica adventitia by the external 
elastic lamina, which is a loose assembly of connective tis-
sue and fibroblasts surrounding the artery. The intima is 
lined by a single-celled layer of endothelium, which sepa-
rates the constituents of blood from the arterial wall. The 
endothelium appears to play a critical role in the regula-
tion of vascular tone, as well as inhibition of leukocyte 
adhesion and platelet aggregation, through the release 
of mediators such as nitric oxide (NO) and prostacyclin. 
Endothelial cells also express tissue plasminogen activa-
tor (tPA) and plasminogen activation inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), 
thus controlling the relative balance between prothrom-
botic and fibrinolytic activity.
ATHEROSCLEROSIS
Atherosclerosis is a chronic, degenerative, inflammatory 
condition affecting medium-sized and large arteries. 
(Atherosclerosis does not normally affect veins, although, 
when they are used as arterial conduits, e.g. as coronary 
artery bypass grafts, atherosclerosis may develop very 
rapidly.) It involves the slowly progressive deposition of 
lipid and matrix proteins in the arterial wall, which even-
tually causes narrowing of the lumen. Clinical features 
of atherosclerosis are absent until an advanced stage (af-
ter several decades) when there is a critical reduction in 
blood supply to the affected tissues, causing ischaemia 
or infarction. The acute clinical events associated with 
atherosclerosis are in most cases due to lesions that are 
unstable and liable to rupture, leading to haemorrhage 
into the atherosclerotic plaque. The resultant thrombo-
sis, the formation of an occluding clot within an artery, is 
the usual cause of myocardial infarction.
Theories of early atherogenesis
Athere is the Greek word for ‘gruel’, and describes the 
appearance of the contents of the advanced plaque. 
Understanding of the cellular events that lead to coro-
nary atherosclerosis has grown substantially over the last 
2–3 decades due to: (1) application of cell-specific mono-
clonal antibodies for immunocytochemical analysis of 
human lesions; (2) the cloning and characterization of the 
genes of several cytokines, growth factors and cell surface 
receptors that may be involved in atherogenesis and that 
have allowed studies of gene expression, and (3) the use of 
experimental models including the development of gene 
knock-out animals.
The response-to-injury hypothesis
Ross first proposed his response-to-injury hypothesis 
in the early 1970s, focusing on the role of platelets as a 
possible source of growth factors, and their interaction 
with the damaged artery wall. With the subsequent re-
alization that the endothelial layer remains intact until 
the stage of a very advanced ulcerated plaque, the the-
ory was refined to emphasize the importance of more 
subtle forms of injury to the endothelium, without 
gross anatomical defects. It was proposed that a num-
ber of different agents could contribute to endothelial 
injury, including smoking, hypertension, hyperlipidae-
mia and viral infection (Box 38.2). This view has been 
supported by studies using measures of endothelial 
dysfunction.
The lipid oxidation hypothesis
The lipid oxidation hypothesis of Steinberg and col-
leagues provided a further mechanism of endothelial 
injury, as well as an explanation for the formation of 
macrophage-derived foam cells that are characteristic of 
the early lesions of atherosclerosis (Fig. 38.5).
Endothelial
cells
Sub-endothelial
space
Vascular smooth
muscle cells
Adventitial fibroblasts
Endothelium
Tunica intima
Internal elastic lamina
Tunica media
External elastic lamina
Tunica adventitia
Lumen
FIGURE 38.4  ■  Structure of a normal medium-sized artery.
742	
Clinical biochemistry
Monocytes adhere to the endothelium and accumulate 
within the subendothelial space at an early stage of the 
process. Together with smooth muscle cells in the arterial 
wall, they take up cholesterol in an unregulated manner 
and are converted to lipid-laden foam cells within the ar-
terial wall, giving rise to the first macroscopically evident 
lesion, the fatty streak. However, such excessive cellular 
uptake of cholesterol cannot occur via the low density li-
poprotein (LDL) receptor pathway because of the tight 
regulation of LDL receptor expression by intracellular 
cholesterol. Goldstein and Brown proposed the existence 
of the ‘scavenger receptor’, which allows the unregu-
lated uptake of cholesterol in the form of modified LDL. 
Several scavenger receptors have now been identified by 
molecular cloning, the most important of which appears 
to be CD36 (also called scavenger receptor B). Uptake 
by these receptors requires chemical modification of the 
LDL particle by enzymatic, non-oxidative alteration; oxi-
dation, which accelerates the accumulation of chole­sterol; 
glycosylation, or glycoxidation. The oxidation process 
modifies a lysine amino acid on the apolipoprotein B. 
Oxidation of LDL can occur in any of the cells within 
the artery, including the endothelial cells, macrophages, 
smooth muscle cells and T lymphocytes.
The oxidation of LDL results in the formation of 
isoprostanes which are chemically stable, free radical-
catalysed products of arachidonic acid that are structural 
isomers of conventional prostaglandins. They reflect 
lipid peroxidation and are markers of oxidant stress in 
hypercholesterolemia and atherosclerosis. Levels of iso-
prostanes are increased in atherosclerotic lesions and 
localize to foam cells and the extracellular matrix.
Oxidized LDL particles promote atherosclerosis via 
one or more of the following effects:
•	 chemoattractant for monocytes
•	 promotion of inflammatory and immune changes 
via cytokine release from macrophages and antibody 
production
•	 unregulated uptake via the scavenger pathway leading 
to foam cell formation (foam cells can rupture, releas-
ing oxidized LDL, intracellular enzymes, and oxygen 
free radicals that can further damage the vessel wall)
•	 induction of apoptosis of vascular smooth mus-
cle and human endothelial cells, which suggests a 
mechanism for the response to injury hypothesis of 
atherosclerosis
•	 disruption of the endothelial cell surface which impairs 
endothelial function, reducing the release of nitric 
oxide (NO), which is a major mediator of endothe-
lium-dependent vasodilation; damage to the endo-
thelium also promotes platelet adherence and the 
release of cytokines that stimulate smooth muscle 
proliferation
•	 causes an increase in platelet aggregation and 
thromboxane release, which contributes to vasocon-
striction and intravascular thrombus.
LDL
EC
Endothelin
Prostacyclin
LDL
LDL
OxLDL
EDRF
Ca2+
SMC
MCP-1
15-LO
OxLDL
IL-1
MCSF
MFC
TNF
PDGF
IL-1
IL-2R
TF
Platelets
Monocytes
T cells
VCAM-1
VCAM-1
LDL — low density lipoprotein
VCAM-1 — vascular cell adhesion molecule-1
SMC — smooth muscle cell
EDRF — endothelium-derived relaxing factor (nitric oxide)
MCP-1 — monocyte chemoattractant protein-1
15-LO — 15-lipoxygenase
TNF — tumour necrosis factor
PDGF — platelet-derived growth factor
IL-1 — interleukin-1
IL-2R — interleukin-2R
MFC — monocyte-derived foam cell
TF — tissue factor
EC — endothelial cell
FIGURE 38.5  ■  Steps in the lipid oxidation hypothesis of atherogenesis proposed by Steinberg and colleagues. Adapted from Steinberg, D, 
Parthasarathy S, Carew T E, Khoo J C, Witzum J L 1989 Beyond cholesterol. Modification of low density lipoprotein that increases its 
­atherogenicity. N Engl J Med 1989; 320: 915–924.
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
743
There is persuasive evidence supporting the notion that 
LDL oxidation occurs in vivo. Lines of argument include: 
(a) epitopes of oxidized LDL have been demonstrated in 
atherosclerotic lesions; (b) LDL isolated from lesions has 
similar properties to oxidized LDL, cross-reacts with an-
tisera raised against malondialdehyde- and 4-hydroxynon-
enal-modified LDL, and is recognized by the scavenger 
receptor; (c) LDL modification also appears to lead to the 
expression of neo-­antigens that elicit an autoimmune re-
sponse – autoantibodies to oxidized LDL have been found 
in human plasma, and within human atherosclerotic lesions.
Inhibiting LDL oxidation in vivo by treatment with 
antioxidants such as vitamin E inhibits experimentally 
induced atherogenesis; vitamin E can also reduce the up-
take of oxidized LDL in vivo by reducing expression of 
the CD36 receptor. Severity of atherosclerosis in several 
different animal models (rabbit, monkey, hamster, mouse) 
can be significantly ameliorated by treatment with a 
variety of antioxidant compounds. Large clinical trials 
of antioxidants (vitamin E or β-carotene) in the general 
population have, however, been singularly disappointing, 
with no effect on cardiovascular outcomes demonstrated 
by meta-analyses. Rather than the lipid oxidation theory 
not being relevant to human atherogenesis, this finding 
may be due to the wrong antioxidant being chosen, the 
wrong dose, the wrong subjects or the wrong stage of 
atherogenesis being targeted: foam cell formation is the 
earliest stage of the atheromatous plaque, and cardiovas-
cular outcomes are noted with advanced plaque forma-
tion, generally several decades later.
The fibrofatty lesion
The mature plaque is characterized by a fibrous cap, 
composed of smooth muscle cells and extracellular ma-
trix, overlying a pool of lipid, cholesterol crystals and 
inflammatory cells. The conversion of the fatty streak 
(Fig. 38.6A) into a fibrofatty plaque (Fig. 38.6B) necessi-
tates the recruitment and proliferation of vascular smooth 
muscle cells. This process is driven by the synergistic in-
terplay of several growth factors, such as platelet-derived 
growth factor, insulin-like growth factor and basic fibro-
blast growth factor. These factors are smooth muscle cell 
mitogens and/or chemotactic factors and are likely to be 
important contributors to the process.
The complicated plaque/plaque rupture
Unstable plaques, prone to fissuring and rupture, are 
characterized by a large lipid pool, thin fibrous cap, fewer 
smooth muscle cells and larger numbers of inflammatory 
cells (Fig. 38.6C). Activated macrophages within the plaque 
are a rich source of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs). 
These are a family of proteases which, together with other 
proteases such as cathepsins and elastases, play a key role 
in tissue remodelling. Under normal physiological circum-
stances, there is a balance between MMPs, which degrade 
cardiac extracellular matrix, and tissue inhibitors of metal-
loproteinases (TIMPs). However, increased MMP activa-
tion has been implicated in a wide variety of cardiovascular 
pathologies, including atherosclerosis. This has the poten-
tial to cause localized regions of de-endothelialization that 
may destabilize the plaque and lead to focal thrombosis 
and plaque rupture. The shoulder region of the plaque ap-
pears to be particularly vulnerable. In most cases of fatal 
myocardial infarction, at least one major coronary artery is 
narrowed by more than 75%, and this is usually associated 
with plaque fissuring and thrombosis.
Lipid-laden macrophage
Smooth muscle cell
T-lymphocyte
Adventitia
Media
Lumen
Fibrous cap
Lipid core
Large necrotic lipid core
Thin fibrous cap (<65µm)
Neovascularization
A
B
C
FIGURE  38.6  ■  Features of an atherosclerotic plaque. (A) Fatty 
streak. Subendothelial collection of lipid-laden macrophages. 
Plaque grows in an outward direction so that the lumen is con-
served. (B) Mature plaque/fibrofatty plaque, characterized by a 
fibrous cap consisting of smooth muscle cells and extracellu-
lar matrix, e.g. collagen. (C) Unstable plaque, characterized by 
more inflammatory cells and fewer muscle cells, particularly in 
the shoulder region. Large necrotic lipid core, thin fibrous cap 
and proliferation of adventitial vasa vasorum.
744	
Clinical biochemistry
ACUTE MYOCARDIAL DAMAGE
Chest pain is responsible for a large proportion of at-
tendances at Accident and Emergency Departments; the 
spectrum of differential diagnoses is broad and, in ad-
dition to ACS, includes muscular pain, which is of little 
consequence, as well as other potentially fatal diagnoses 
such as pulmonary embolism. These diagnoses can often 
be distinguished clinically at the bedside on the basis of 
the history, examination and ECG findings.
Myocardial ischaemia due to obstructive but stable 
coronary artery atherosclerosis classically causes pain, dis-
comfort or a feeling of tightness or heaviness in the central 
chest, left arm or jaw, usually precipitated by exertion and 
relieved by rest or anti-anginal drugs (e.g. sublingual glyc-
eryl trinitrate). Stable angina results from ischaemia which 
is of insufficient severity to cause myocardial necrosis; 
transient ischaemic changes may be apparent on the ECG. 
Acute coronary syndrome results from erosion or rupture 
of atherosclerotic plaques in the coronary arteries, with 
release of the prothrombotic contents of the plaque and 
superimposed platelet aggregation and thrombosis. The 
pain is more severe, lasts longer than that of stable angina 
and does not improve with rest. Ischaemic changes on the 
ECG may be seen. Complete occlusion of a coronary ves-
sel results in MI with classical ST elevation, i.e. STEMI.
However, history and ECG are not always helpful 
in differentiating causes of chest pain. A significant 
proportion of ACS patients do not describe clas-
sical pain, and many patients with non-cardiac pain 
describe features which may suggest cardiac pain. 
Typically ischaemic ECG abnormalities may not be 
present in ACS. Most patients with ACS have a partial 
or transient coronary artery occlusion causing myo-
cardial ischaemia without persistent ST elevation, i.e. 
unstable angina (UA) or NSTEMI. The term ‘non-ST 
elevation ACS’ (NSTEACS) encompasses both UA 
and NSTEMI; it reflects the fact that both conditions 
are considered to be on the same spectrum of myocar-
dial injury, sharing a common pathogenesis but differ-
ing in severity and prognosis. The principal feature 
distinguishing NSTEMI from UA is biochemical evi-
dence of myocyte necrosis.
The importance of accurately and rapidly distin-
guishing ACS from non-cardiac chest pain is that early 
treatment of ACS significantly influences mortality and 
morbidity. Early exclusion of ACS will also help reduce 
costs of unnecessary hospital admission and investiga-
tions, as well as reducing the patient burden.
The relative frequency of the diagnoses in patients ad-
mitted with an ACS is approximately: STEMI 30–33%, 
NSTEMI 25% and UA 38–42%. In STEMI patients, im-
mediate thrombolysis (either with drugs or PCI) is indicated 
as soon as possible after diagnostic ECG is performed, with-
out waiting for confirmatory elevated serum biomarkers. 
Patients with NSTEACS benefit from potent antithrom-
botic treatment (e.g. low molecular weight heparin/platelet 
inhibition). The TACTICS-TIMI 18 trial (Fig. 38.7) has 
indicated that the NSTEMI subgroup may benefit from 
early coronary angiography and revascularization, whereas 
those with UA do not, although other studies have not con-
firmed this benefit and more work needs to be done.
Nonetheless, it is clear that rapid and accurate diagno-
sis of ACS is key to improved outcomes. In both STEMI 
and NSTEMI, damaged myocytes release structural pro-
teins into the circulation, which can be measured and 
used as biomarkers of acute myocardial injury. The pre-
cise definition of myocardial infarction, developed by the 
2007 ECC/ACC/AHA/WHF Global Task Force, bases 
its first criterion on elevations of cardiac biomarkers (see 
Box 38.1). The current definition gives a preference for 
use of cardiac troponin, although there is an acknowl-
edgement that the definition is likely to evolve with fur-
ther scientific advances.
Biomarkers of acute myocardial damage
Within seconds of the onset of myocardial ischaemia, 
aerobic metabolism ceases within the myocyte, anaero-
bic glycolysis is initiated and potassium begins to leak out 
of the cell. This is followed within minutes by leakage 
of metabolites, a fall in pH and increase in intracellular 
calcium. Within hours, with sustained depletion of ATP, 
myocyte necrosis results in irreversible ultrastructural 
changes. These changes include disruption of the sarco-
lemma and leakage of macromolecules such as cTnT and 
TnI, CK-MB and myoglobin.
Since the development of thrombolytic therapies 
for acute myocardial injury, which must be adminis-
tered early to be effective, it has become critical to be 
able to detect myocyte necrosis promptly and accurately. 
Throughout the 1980s and 1990s, the gold standard for 
diagnosis of MI was the cardiac-specific isoform of cre-
atine kinase (CK-MB). However, it became apparent that 
serum CK-MB was not elevated in all cases of myocardial 
injury: biopsy of myocardium taken during coronary ar-
tery bypass surgery for unstable angina showed areas of 
myocardial micronecrosis, which had not been accompa-
nied by a CK-MB rise. Thus, there has been a drive to 
develop more specific and sensitive biomarkers of cardiac 
necrosis, and there is a range of markers currently avail-
able, with varying tissue specificity, sensitivity and pattern 
of release into the circulation (Fig. 38.8).
cTnl Neg
CONS
INV
Risk of death or MI (%)
p = NS
372
532
362
555
1.9
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
n=
3.0
10.7
5.0
OR = 0.44
(0.28, 0.71)
*p<0.001
Interaction
p = 0.02
cTnl Pos
FIGURE 38.7  ■ TACTICS-TIMI 18 trial, indicating improved outcome 
when patients with NSTEAC and elevated troponin (cTnI Pos) 
were treated with early invasive intervention (INV) compared to 
conservative management. The same benefit was not observed in 
NSTEAC patients without a raised troponin (cTnI Neg). Data from 
Morrow D A et al. 2007 National Academy of Clinical Biochemistry 
Laboratory Medicine Practice Guidelines, Clinical Characteristics and 
Utilization of Biochemical Markers in Acute Coronary Syndromes. 
Clinical Chemistry 53: 552–574, with permission.
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
745
The pattern of release of biomarkers is influenced by:
•	 subcellular location: soluble cytosolic molecules are 
released more rapidly than molecules bound to the 
myofibrils
•	 molecular mass: smaller molecules can enter the cir-
culation directly via the microvascular endothelium 
but are also cleared through the glomerulus
•	 cytosolic enzymes: increased intracellular calcium 
activates cytosolic enzymes, including caspase, 
which promotes dissociation of structurally bound 
proteins such as cTnT and cTnI.
The ideal biomarker of myocardial injury has a de-
tectable increase in the circulation early, is specific for 
myocyte necrosis and is not elevated in non-cardiac con-
ditions. None of the currently available cardiac biomark-
ers meet these criteria, but awareness of their limitations 
considerably improves clinical utility. The current marker 
of choice is cTn, with little to choose between cTnI and 
cTnT.
Troponins
Over the past 20  years, cardiac troponin (cTn) mea-
surement has revolutionized diagnosis of patients with 
suspected acute coronary syndromes. Monoclonal 
­antibody-based assays specific for the cardiac isoforms 
of TnT and TnI have been developed that reliably iden-
tify myocardial micronecrosis even when CK-MB is not 
elevated. Recognition of their superior clinical value led 
in 2000 to the new universal definition of MI based on 
the elevation of cardiac troponins, updated in 2007 and 
2012 to include evidence-based clinical and analytical 
guidance on use of biomarkers in management of ACS. 
Cardiac troponins now play a pivotal role in the diagno-
sis of AMI as well as an important role in the risk strati-
fication of ACS. The current definition of AMI requires 
detection of a rise and/or fall of cTn (ideally), with at 
least one measurement >99th centile of a reference 
population, together with clinical or ECG evidence of 
ischaemia.
Although most usually found in the myofibril, a small 
proportion of total cTn also exists in a cytosolic pool 
(approximately 6% of cTnT and 3% of cTnI) (see 
Fig. 38.3). The biphasic release of cTnT from damaged 
heart muscle probably reflects this distribution: the initial 
release into the circulation following membrane damage 
during severe ischaemia becomes detectable at 3 h with a 
peak at 14 h. This is followed by slow dissociation from 
and degradation of myofilaments, leading to continuous 
release over 3–5 days. Elevations persist for up to ten days, 
permitting late diagnosis of MI. There is some debate 
over whether cTn is released before cell death occurs, i.e. 
at a reversible stage of injury. In support of this is the 
finding of transient minor elevations in circulating cTn in 
some triathletes following extreme exercise. However, in 
practical terms this is not a critical issue, since, in the ma-
jority of situations apart from extreme exercise, increased 
cTn is associated with a poorer outcome regardless of 
whether the injury is perceived to be reversible. As well 
as being the basis for diagnosis of MI, cTn is also helpful 
for risk assessment and management of suspected ACS 
patients. Patients previously classified as UA on the basis 
of normal CK-MB, may be reclassified as NSTEMI, with 
increased serum concentrations of troponins associated 
with higher risk of recurrent cardiac events.
In some cases, cardiac TnT antibodies also cross-react 
0.5–2.0% with skeletal muscle TnT, thus skeletal muscle 
may be a source of raised plasma levels. TnI is thought not 
to be expressed at all in skeletal muscle and may therefore 
be more specific for myocyte necrosis. However, in the 
majority of clinical situations, the specificity of cTnT is 
comparable to cTnI.
There is only one commercially available cTnT assay, 
but a range of immunoassays for cTnI, which exhibit dif-
ferent analytical sensitivities and specificities. Potential 
causative factors include a lack of standardization, the 
occurrence of post-translational modifications of both 
cTnI and cTnT, and variation in cross-reactivities of the 
antibody to the various detectable forms of cTnI resulting 
from its degradation.
        
           
           
             
             
          
                                                                       
       
      
      
    
  
   
   
  

  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  
  
  
   
 
    
     
   
       
           
           
          
           
                             
       
     
       
        
          
      
      
   
    
   
 
   
   
   
 
   
   
   
  
    
    
2 h 6 h
12 h
24 h
4 days
Time from onset of symptoms
FABP
Myoglobin
cTnI
CKMB
cTnT
Multiples of upper limits of normal
14 days
50
20
10
5
2
1
0
   X         X      X   
  
  X
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
    X
    X      X   X         X   X
         
 X      X
FIGURE 38.8  ■  Pattern of release of some biomarkers into the circulation after acute myocardial infarction.
746	
Clinical biochemistry
The ESC/ACC consensus document on the defini-
tion of myocardial infarction recommends that individual 
laboratories use a cut-off value equal to the 99th percen-
tile of the reference population. At present, cTnT and 
cTnI are normally undetectable in healthy subjects us-
ing conventional assays; therefore, the 99th centile is 
very low and most assays do not have good precision at 
this low concentration. This limits the capacity to detect 
change with serial samples but does not significantly in-
crease the number of false positive results. Thus, in an 
appropriate clinical scenario, any elevation of cardiac 
troponin T or I concentration above the 99th centile for 
a reference population indicates myocardial infarction. 
The absolute cut-off varies with the assay used, although 
for cTnT (for which assay there is currently only one 
manufacturer), this value is often taken to be 0.1 μg/L. 
It is important that clinicians are familiar with the 99th 
centile value of the assay used in their own laboratory and 
are aware that decision limits will vary with different as-
says. A regularly updated table showing the characteris-
tics of commercially available cTn assays is maintained by 
the International Federation of Clinical Chemistry and 
Laboratory Medicine and can be found at: http://www.
ifcc.org/ifcc-scientific-division/documents-of-the-sd/.
As data have accumulated, it has become evident that 
even small elevations of troponin are associated with 
poorer outcomes. In patients with ACS whose troponin 
concentration is less than the 99th centile, there is still an 
association between troponin value and clinical outcome. 
It is thus also useful to define the lower limit of detec-
tion. This may be taken to be the lowest concentration 
at which a between-batch CV of 10% is achievable, and 
for cTnT this is around 0.03 μg/L. However, most cTn 
assays in current routine clinical use have poor precision 
below the 99th centile. The recognition that the assay has 
clinical utility in this range has led to a continued drive to 
develop tests which reliably detect lower concentrations, 
resulting in several generations of troponin assays.
Although terminology for naming generations of cTn 
assays has been inconsistent, contemporary assays are 
generally referred to as ‘sensitive’ assays. The next gener-
ation of assays should be able to measure cardiac troponin 
with a total CV of <10% at concentrations significantly 
lower than the 99th centile of the normal reference popu-
lation. Thus they are likely to be termed ‘high sensitiv-
ity’ cTn (hs-cTn) assays. They should reliably measure 
troponin in most normal individuals and be able to detect 
changes in serial measurements in the range below the 
99th centile, potentially resulting in earlier diagnosis and 
better management of ACS.
High-sensitivity troponins
The newest generation of Tn assays have a limit of detec-
tion that is of the order of 10–100-fold lower than the 
‘sensitive’ assays currently available. By definition, these 
hs-cTn assays measure cTn in the majority of normal 
healthy subjects with acceptable precision. They have the 
potential to increase the promptness and accuracy of di-
agnosis of ACS. There are a number of different hs-cTn 
assays in various stages of development; in the case of hs-
cTn, a value >14 ng/L is considered abnormal. Separate 
decision limits are required for different hs-cTnI assays 
in the absence of standardization.
Because small differences can be very significant when 
dealing with such low values, hs-cTn assays are more 
subject to analytical factors than sensitive assays. Even 
mild haemolysis reduces hs-cTn values, and sample type 
(heparin vs EDTA vs serum) can also influence the result. 
There is greater potential for increase originating from 
skeletal muscle with hs-cTn compared with the sensitive 
assay. Some assays show gender-based differences in the 
99th centile value.
Since hs-cTn assays can detect cTn in individuals 
without apparent myocardial damage, it is possible to 
establish a reference interval for healthy subjects. Values 
above the 99th centile (a considerably reduced diagnos-
tic threshold compared to 99th centile of the sensitive 
assays) are associated with a poorer prognosis, and em-
phasis on detection of a rise and/or fall is likely to be 
important. Early studies indicate that hs-cTn is likely 
to facilitate the early diagnosis of AMI as it is presently 
defined. However, the trade-off for increased diagnostic 
sensitivity is a reduction in diagnostic specificity. The 
proportion of patients falsely diagnosed with an MI in-
creases if the diagnosis is based on hs-cTn, particularly 
if clinical symptoms or ECG changes are uncertain. 
Even within the reference interval, it is apparent that 
the higher the value, the greater the risk to the indi-
vidual, and hs-cTn thus appears to be a better marker 
for stratifying long-term risk in ACS compared with 
sensitive assays.
There remain many unanswered questions relating to 
the use of hs-cTn assays in ACS, including what degree of 
change can be called an increase, exactly what an increase 
means, what are its prognostic implications and whether 
it can be used to influence management to improve out-
comes. Until these questions can be answered, the role 
of hs-cTn in the acute setting will continue to evolve, 
and must be interpreted in conjunction with the clinical 
picture. There may be particular problems if the assay is 
used unselectively in patients with low likelihood of ACS.
Utilization of hs-cTn measurements may be more use-
ful for risk stratifying patients in settings other than acute 
coronary syndromes including renal insufficiency, heart 
failure, cardiac amyloid and the elderly.
Other causes of elevated cTn
cTnT and TnI are sensitive and specific markers of myo-
cardial injury when used as recommended by the cur-
rent universal definition of myocardial infarction, with 
a cut-off point of the 99th centile. However, lowering the 
cut-off point may lead to interpretation of an elevated 
cTn as due to ischaemia, when the elevation is due to 
myocardial damage due to other causes. To avoid misdi-
agnosis, it is important to recognize the wide spectrum 
of disease states other than ACS that can cause raised 
cTn. These include disorders that would be in the dif-
ferential diagnosis of MI such as pulmonary embolism, 
heart failure and myocarditis. The differential diagnosis 
is given in Box 38.3. Although increased cTn that is not 
due to ACS may be perceived to be a confounder of clini-
cal interpretation, careful consideration of the source of 
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
747
the elevation will help the clinician determine its clinical 
significance. There have been occasional descriptions of 
falsely elevated cTn as a result of analytical interference, 
but this is a rare occurrence and most frequently elevated 
cTn in the absence of ischaemia reflects myocardial dam-
age from another cause. Abnormal results may also occur 
as a result of microparticle interference in anticoagulated 
samples.
Creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB)
Creatine kinase (CK) is present in large amounts in 
both skeletal muscle as well as heart muscle, and is also 
found in brain. Its lack of specificity limits its effective-
ness as a cardiac marker, false positives in trauma or 
post-surgery patients being a particular problem. The 
enzyme is formed from two dimers, M and B (each with 
a molecular weight of 40 kDa), and thus three different 
isoenzymes are possible: CK-MM, CK-BB and CK-MB. 
The MB isoenzyme is predominantly found in the heart, 
comprising about 40% of the CK activity in cardiac mus-
cle, and 2% or less of the activity in most skeletal muscle 
groups and other tissues.
CK-MB isoenzyme is quickly and easily measured 
and is widely available; it was the gold standard cardiac 
biomarker until the discovery of the more specific and 
sensitive cardiac troponin. Measurement of MB isoen-
zyme can be undertaken by either measurement of the 
catalytic activity of the MB fraction after antibody in-
activation of MM (‘activity’ measurement) or by direct 
measurement of CK-MB by immunological detection 
using antibodies (‘mass’ measurement). Most current 
assays measure CK-MB mass, which is more sensitive 
than activity. Mass assays also largely avoid detection of 
macro-CKs (CK linked to IgG and dimers of mitochon-
drial CK), which can confound diagnosis using assays of 
CK activity. The presence of macro-CK should be con-
sidered when CK-MB is a very high percentage (>20%) 
of total CK.
Even though CK-MB is largely confined to the heart, 
there are measurable amounts in skeletal muscle, ac-
counting for up to 20% in some muscle groups, although 
the overall figure is about 1%. Thus, coexisting skeletal 
muscle injury (including exercise and rhabdomyolysis) 
can reduce the specificity of CK-MB. Following MI, 
plasma CK-MB achieves a peak slightly before total 
CK and also returns to normal more quickly. CK-MB 
BOX 38.3	
Differential diagnosis of increased plasma troponin which is not due to acute coronary 
syndrome or heart failure
Acute disease
•	 Cardiac or vascular
•	 Endocarditis
•	 Myocarditis
•	 Pericarditis
•	 Coronary artery spasm
•	 Acute aortic dissection
•	 Cerebrovascular accident
•	 Apical ballooning syndrome
•	 Gastrointestinal bleeding
•	 Medical ICU stay
•	 Respiratory
•	 Pulmonary embolism
•	 Adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
•	 Infection
•	 Sepsis
•	 Viral infection
•	 Miscellaneous
•	 Rhabdomyolysis
•	 Kawasaki disease
•	 Thrombotic thrombocytopaenic purpura
•	 Neonates: pre-term or very low birth weight
•	 Acute complications of some inherited ­disorders 
including Duchenne muscular dystrophy and neuro­
fibromatosis
•	 Acute environmental exposure to carbon monoxide 
or hydrogen sulphide
•	 Cocaine
Chronic disease
•	 Cardiac infiltrative disorders
•	 Amyloidosis
•	 Sarcoidosis
•	 Haemochromatosis
•	 Scleroderma
•	 Hypertension
•	 Endocrine
•	 Diabetes
•	 Hypothyroidism
•	 Renal impairment
Iatrogenic disease
•	 Invasive procedure
•	 Coronary artery bypass grafting
•	 Percutaneous coronary intervention
•	 Radiofrequency catheter ablation
•	 Repair of congenital defect
•	 Heart transplant
•	 Lung resection
•	 Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography 
(ERCP)
•	 Non-invasive procedure
•	 Cardioversion
•	 Lithotripsy
•	 Drugs, esp. chemotherapy
•	 Adriamycin
•	 5-Fluorouracil
Myocardial injury
•	 Blunt trauma
•	 Extreme endurance exercise
•	 Venom
•	 Snake
•	 Jellyfish
•	 Spider
•	 Centipede
•	 Scorpion
748	
Clinical biochemistry
rises at about 3–4 h after myocardial necrosis, peaks in 
10–24 h, and returns to normal within 72 h. Although 
potentially helpful in the diagnosis of MI at an early 
stage, it is less useful for the confirmation of diagnosis 
of late-presenting MI, since the concentration of en-
zyme generally returns to within the reference limit by 
three days. The same property makes CK-MB useful 
for detection of reinfarction, as cTn does not normal-
ize so quickly; however, further increase of cTn from a 
high baseline also indicates re-infarction.
CK-MB is outperformed in specificity by contempo-
rary cTn assays, and the newer more sensitive cTn assays 
are likely to take over any remaining clinical utility for 
CK-MB.
Myoglobin
Myoglobin is a relatively small (17.8 kDa) haem-containing 
protein found in abundance in the cytoplasm of striated 
muscle cells, where its main function is oxygen transport. 
Myoglobin accounts for about 2% of total muscle pro-
tein. Its high tissue:plasma ratio, in combination with its 
small size, means that it rapidly increases in the circula-
tion after myocyte necrosis. Indeed, it is the earliest indi-
cator routinely available for the detection of both skeletal 
and cardiac muscle damage, appearing in the circulation 
within 1–3 h of myocardial necrosis, peaking at 6–9 h, be-
fore returning to normal by 24–36 h. Its small molecular 
size also results in a relatively short time frame for its de-
tection as it is also cleared rapidly by the kidneys.
Myoglobin has long been used as an indicator of mus-
cle damage and has received much attention as a cardiac 
biomarker because of the rapidity of its release. However, 
its generalized distribution in all striated muscle limits 
its specificity as a marker of myocardial damage and its 
usefulness has declined with the increasing availability of 
cardiac-specific biomarkers. Its relatively high negative 
predictive value implies that it may be most useful in the 
early ruling out of acute MI.
Myoglobin can be measured by radioimmunoassay 
in serum. However, biomarkers of ACS require a short 
analytical turnaround time if measurements are to be 
clinically useful. More rapid measurement is provided by 
latex agglutination immunoassay or fluoroimmunoassay. 
Clinical utility of point-of-care measurement of myoglo-
bin in combination with cTn with or without CK-MB 
mass in excluding ACS is currently being evaluated.
Heart-type fatty acid binding protein (H-FABP)
These are also relatively small (15 kDa) proteins found in 
large amounts in organs associated with significant fatty 
acid metabolism, which includes the liver and intestine 
as well as the heart. There are nine distinct types. The 
H-FABP isoform is present at high concentration within 
cardiac myocytes, although it is also found at lower 
­concentration in other tissues such as skeletal muscle, 
distant tubules of the kidneys, the brain, lactating 
­mammary glands and placenta. Under aerobic conditions, 
long-chain free fatty acid (FFA) metabolism represents 
the major source of ATP generated in the myocardium. 
Free fatty acids are poorly soluble in the aqueous phase 
and circulate in plasma mainly bound to albumin. In 
the myocyte cytoplasm, long-chain FFAs are reversibly 
bound to H-FABP, which is thought to facilitate their 
transport to the mitochondrial outer membrane where 
the process of beta-­oxidation is initiated.
The potential of H-FABP as a biochemical marker 
of myocardial injury has been recognized since it was 
demonstrated to be released from injured myocardium 
in 1988. Several studies reported its clinical useful-
ness as an early marker of acute MI (using the World 
Health Organization criteria as was standard clinical 
practice at that time). In general it has been shown to 
perform at least as well or better than myoglobin: this 
is probably due to its higher relative concentration 
in cardiac muscle, myoglobin being found in similar 
amounts in cardiac and skeletal muscle. After acute 
MI a rise is detectable in plasma as early as 1.5 h after 
symptom onset, a peak concentration is reached after 
4–6 h and, due to rapid renal clearance, the concentra-
tion returns to baseline within 20 h.
The normal basal concentration of H-FABP detectable 
in plasma is likely to be due to continuous release from 
damaged skeletal muscle. Although its small size makes 
it useful as an early marker, it also means that it is nor-
mally cleared rapidly by the kidney. In renal impairment 
the plasma level of H-FABP is markedly raised, render-
ing interpretation difficult. With normal renal function, 
sustained high concentrations might be indicative of re-
infarction, which may be missed by markers such as cTn, 
which returns to baseline more slowly.
Modern H-FABP assays rely on monoclonal antibod-
ies that have no cross-reactivity (unlike the earlier assays). 
Point-of-care testing has recently become available. As 
a standalone test, current H-FABP assays have not been 
yet shown to have the requisite specificity or sensitivity to 
safely diagnose early MI. Further work needs to be done to 
examine its potential role, which may be as part of a panel 
with a marker which has a complementary timeframe.
Other
Copeptin, a peptide of 39 amino acids, is the C-terminal 
part of pro-arginine vasopressin (AVP) and is released 
together with AVP during processing of the precur-
sor peptide. It is thus a surrogate marker for vasopres-
sin, which is significantly involved in the regulation of 
the endogenous stress response and is present at elevated 
concentrations in MI, heart failure and different states of 
shock. Copeptin concentrations are elevated 0–4 h after 
the onset of symptoms of acute MI, and may be of value 
in combination with troponin.
Other potential biomarkers of acute myocardial injury 
that have been evaluated but where insufficient evidence 
exists to support routine use include ­ischaemia-modified 
albumin (IMA), glycogen phosphorylase isoenzyme 
(GP-BB) and soluble CD40 ligand, among others.
Tests for other causes of chest pain
Measurement of D-dimer may be of some use in the di-
agnosis of pulmonary embolism. D-dimer is a degrada-
tion product released into the circulation when fibrin 
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
749
(involved in thrombus formation) undergoes endog-
enous fibrinolysis. A low plasma concentration in the 
setting of a low clinical risk of pulmonary embolism ex-
cludes the diagnosis of pulmonary embolism. However, 
if the clinical risk is high then the patient needs further 
investigation (e.g. ventilation-perfusion scanning, CT 
pulmonary angiography) even if the D-dimer concentra-
tion is low. Elevated concentrations of D-dimer occur 
non-­specifically in other conditions, for example MI, 
pneumonia and other forms of sepsis.
HEART FAILURE
Heart failure (HF) is a failure of the heart to fill with (dia-
stolic HF) or to eject (systolic HF) blood, or both. The 
term ‘congestive heart failure’ implies congestion in the 
lungs due to back pressure caused by failure of the left 
ventricle to pump blood around the body. By far, the 
commonest cause is ischaemic heart disease, but it may 
also result from any structural or functional cardiac pa-
thology, including valvular heart disease, hypertension 
or viral cardiomyopathy. Dyspnoea is the predominant 
symptom, although chronic condition heart failure may 
be relatively asymptomatic in the early stages. It may also 
present as a medical emergency (acute life-threatening 
pulmonary oedema). There is a broad spectrum of sever-
ity between these extremes and symptomatic heart failure 
is a relatively common cause of attendance to emergency 
departments.
Heart failure has an overall prevalence of approxi-
mately 2%, although this is markedly higher in the el-
derly, affecting up to 15% of those aged over 85 years. 
It is likely to increase in prevalence with ‘ageing of the 
population’. It is more common in men than women at 
all ages. The condition is progressive, and patients with 
heart failure have a shortened life expectancy and im-
paired quality of life. In the UK, over 40% of patients do 
not survive 18 months from the time of diagnosis.
Both mortality and morbidity can be improved with 
appropriate treatment (e.g. ACE inhibitors and certain 
β-blockers), which relies on accurate diagnosis. Clinical 
uncertainty is known to contribute to poorer outcome in 
patients presenting with dyspnea. However, diagnostic 
certainty is not always straightforward. Two-dimensional 
and Doppler echocardiography are widely used and in ad-
dition to demonstrating left or right systolic or diastolic 
ventricular impairment may also provide information on 
aetiology. However, in many healthcare systems, access 
to such tests may be limited and there has therefore been 
considerable interest in biochemical tests for screening, 
diagnosis, prognosis and monitoring of treatment.
Natriuretic peptides
There has been much interest in the natriuretic pep-
tides (NPs) that are secreted by the myocardium, as 
potential markers for HF. B-type natriuretic peptide 
(BNP) was originally identified in the brain but is now 
known to be released primarily by the heart, particu-
larly the ventricles. It is synthesized as a prohormone, 
the C-terminal of which is cleaved on release from the 
myocardium to produce BNP (a 32-amino acid biologi-
cally active peptide) and an N-terminal fragment of the 
prohormone called NT-proBNP (76-amino acid and 
biologically inert). Both can be measured in plasma, 
and in normal subjects, the plasma concentrations of 
BNP and NT-proBNP are similar (approximately 
10 pmol/L). However in both systolic and diastolic 
heart failure, plasma concentrations of both rise, plasma 
NT-proBNP proportionately more than BNP, with NT-
proBNP concentrations approximately four-fold higher 
than BNP concentrations.
Critical values
Measurement of either BNP or NT-proBNP helps to 
discriminate between HF and other causes of dyspnoea. 
A normal value of either (BNP <100 ng/L [29 pmol/L] or 
NT-proBNP <400 ng/L [47 pmol/L]) makes decompen-
sated heart failure highly unlikely (‘rule-out’ values) and 
suggests a respiratory or other cause of dyspnoea. High 
plasma concentrations (BNP >400 ng/L or NT-proBNP 
>2000 ng/L) strongly support a diagnosis of abnormal 
ventricular function (‘rule-in values’). Intermediate values 
(BNP 100–400 ng/L [29–116 pmol/L] or NT-proBNP 
400–2000 ng/L [47–236 pmol/L]) should prompt a search 
for a non-cardiac cause of dyspnoea: for example, COPD. 
Approximately 75% of patients in this grey zone will have 
HF, which is relatively mild and has a good prognosis.
Non-HF factors influencing NPs
Measurements vary with the assay used and with age, 
gender, and body mass index: normal values tend to in-
crease with age and to be higher in women than men 
and, for BNP, lower in obese individuals. Plasma con-
centrations of both tend to be less elevated in heart 
failure with preserved ejection fraction (EF) than in 
heart failure with low EF. A raised concentration may 
occur in other conditions such as hypoxia (e.g. pulmo-
nary embolism, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease), 
myocardial ischaemia, tachycardia, atrial fibrillation, 
left ventricular hypertrophy, right ventricular overload, 
renal impairment (particularly NT-proBNP), liver cir-
rhosis, diabetes and sepsis. It is not necessary to adjust 
rule-out values for age or gender, but it has been sug-
gested that obese (BMI > 30 kg/m
2) individuals should 
have their BNP doubled to use the cut-off points above. 
To date, no correction has been suggested for NT-
proBNP in obesity. Plasma concentrations of both, but 
particularly NT-proBNP, should be interpreted in con-
junction with an estimate of renal function.
Clinical utility
When raised concentrations are due to heart failure they 
are a useful prognostic indicator. Trials with either of 
these diagnostic biomarkers suggest that their use may 
reduce both the length of hospital stay and the overall 
cost of treatment. Both markers provide prognostic in-
formation in patients with acute and chronic HF, and 
plasma BNP also has prognostic value in patients with as-
ymptomatic or minimally symptomatic LV dysfunction. 
750	
Clinical biochemistry
Guidance from the UK National Institute for Health and 
Care Excellence (NICE) (2010) suggests measurement 
of BNP or NT-proBNP as first line investigation in pa-
tients clinically suspected of having HF, where there has 
not been a previous MI (Fig. 38.9). It also suggests that 
patients with high concentrations (BNP >400 ng/L or 
NT-proBNP >2000 ng/L) should be referred within two 
weeks for echocardiography and specialist advice, because 
of the implications for poor prognosis. A raised BNP or 
NT-proBNP is also an independent prognostic indicator 
of mortality in patients at high risk of CHD and in those 
with established CHD. The value of serial measurements 
to guide management of acute HF has not yet been con-
clusively demonstrated, possibly due to the considerable 
intra-individual biological and analytical variability.
Work is also currently underway to assess diagnostic 
and prognostic benefits of mid-regional pro-atrial natri-
uretic peptide (MR-proANP) in HF.
CARDIOVASCULAR RISK FACTORS
Cardiovascular risk assessment
Assessment of cardiovascular risk is important to allow 
targeting of preventative measures to those who will 
achieve the greatest benefit. The most widely used car-
diovascular risk prediction equation was developed from 
data collected in the Framingham Heart Study which 
was initiated in 1948 in the town of Framingham, near 
Boston, USA. It set out to identify the factors contribut-
ing to coronary disease using a cohort design in patients 
initially without coronary disease. The Framingham Risk 
Score has proved remarkably useful in diverse populations 
considering that it was derived from data on a predomi-
nantly middle-class, middle-aged, Caucasian population, 
and therefore underestimates overall lifetime risk and 
risk in the elderly. It is reasonably accurate at predicting 
Diagnosing heart failure
Take a detailed history and perform a clinical examination
Previous MI
Within
2 weeks
Within
2 weeks
Within six weeks
High
concentrations
Raised
concentrations
Raised concentrations
Investigate other
diagnoses
No clear
abnormality
Other
cardiac
abnormality
Heart failure due to
left ventricular
systolic dysfunction
Heart failure
unlikely, other
diagnosis
Heart failure with
preserved ejection
fraction
High concentrations – BNP > 400 pg/ml (116 pmol/litre) or NTproBNP > 2000 pg/ml (236 pmol/litre) 
Serum natriuretic peptides
Raised concentrations – BNP 100–400 pg/ml (29–116 pmol/litre) or NTproBNP 400–2000 pg/ml (47–236 pmol/litre)
Normal concentrations – BNP < 100 pg/ml (29 pmol/litre) or NTproBNP < 400 pg/ml (47 pmol/litre)
Abnormality
consistent with
heart failure
Assess severity, aetiology, precipitating
factors, type of cardiac dysfunction,
correctable causes
Normal
concentrations
Consider
measuring serum
natriuretic peptides
if concentrations not known
Measure serum
natriuretic peptides
Specialist assessment
and Doppler
echocardiography
 No previous MI
FIGURE 38.9  ■  Diagnosis of heart failure algorithm. From NICE 2010 Clinical Guideline 108 Chronic Heart Failure: management of chronic 
heart failure in adults in primary and secondary care, with permission.
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
751
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
False positives (%)
True positives (%)
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100
False positives (%)
True positives (%)
Men
Women
FIGURE 38.10  ■  Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves for 
the Framingham algorithm in men (upper graph) and women 
(lower graph) using National Health and Nutritional Examination 
Survey (NHANES) follow-up data. Adapted from Liao Y, McGee D L, 
Cooper R S, Sutkowski M B 1999 How generalizable are coronary risk 
prevention models? Comparison of Framingham and two national 
cohorts. American Heart Journal 137: 837–845, with permission.
100
80
60
40
20
0
25%
50%
70%
<25
25–40
>40
Donor age (years)
Prevalence of atherosclerosis (%)
FIGURE 38.11  ■  Prevalence of atherosclerosis identified by intra-
vascular ultrasound in the coronary arteries of heart donors by 
age. From: Tuzcu E M et al. 2001 High prevalence of coronary athero-
sclerosis in asymptomatic teenagers and young adults. Circulation 
103: 2705–2710, with permission.
40
30
20
10
0
Aorta
Coronary
Aorta
Coronary
Fatty streaks
Fibrous plaques
*p<0.01
Intima affected (%)
Number of
risk factors
BMI, SBP, Tg, LDL
0
1
2
3 or 4
*
*
*
BMI – body mass index
LDL – low density lipoprotein
SBP – systolic blood pressure
Tg – hypertriglyceridaemia
FIGURE 38.12  ■  Effects of cumulative risk factors on coronary and 
aortic lesion development in children and young adults. Data 
from Berenson G S et al. 1998 Association between cardiovascular 
multiple risk factors and atherosclerosis in children and young adults. 
The Bogalusa Heart Study. New England Journal of Medicine 338: 
1650–1656, with permission.
coronary events, with an area under the receiver operat-
ing characteristic (ROC) curve of 0.71–0.76 in males and 
0.76–0.81 in females (Fig. 38.10).
The Framingham risk score continues to be used in 
the UK, although it somewhat overestimates cardio-
vascular risk in most subjects. In recent years, it has 
been surpassed in terms of accuracy by the QRISK and 
QRISK2 scores, which are derived from the UK general 
practice database and it is likely that QRISK2 or its future 
iterations will become the generally used cardiovascular 
risk prediction equation in the UK. QRISK2 employs the 
same core set of risk factors as Framingham but assigns 
different weightings to some and incorporates additional 
risk factors (notably postcode as a marker of social class), 
which impact significantly on cardiovascular risk in the 
UK. Alternative risk scores have been developed for use 
in other populations, notably EUROSCORE, which is 
widely used across Europe and the Reynolds risk score, 
which incorporates CRP as an additional risk factor. The 
major risk factors for cardiovascular disease are similar 
across all populations, although their relative importance 
may differ.
Unmodifiable risk factors
Age
Although post-mortem studies have demonstrated 
that fatty streaks and more advanced lesions are pres-
ent in the second decade of life, these do not usually 
become clinically evident until the fifth or sixth decades. 
Experimental models of atherosclerosis suggest that 
some of these early lesions are, to some extent, reversible. 
Atherosclerosis becomes increasingly prevalent after the 
age of 20 years. This may be partly associated with the 
increase in plasma cholesterol concentration and other 
coronary risk factors with age. The extent of coronary 
and aortic atherosclerosis increases with age (Fig. 38.11) 
and risk factor burden (Fig. 38.12). Although the absolute 
risk of CHD rises with age, the relative risk with increas-
ing cholesterol is steeper in the younger age groups.
Gender
The risk of CHD in premenopausal women is ap-
proximately 30% of that in men at any particular age, 
irrespective of smoking status and the presence of 
752	
Clinical biochemistry
hypertension. In women, a greater proportion of cho-
lesterol is present as high density lipoprotein (HDL) 
cholesterol and this may be protective. Furthermore, 
it is possible that oestrogens have a direct protective 
effect on the vasculature. After the menopause, plasma 
LDL-cholesterol concentrations rise, HDL-cholesterol 
(HDL-C) falls, there is an increase in visceral adiposity 
and the risk of CHD rises considerably.
Race
The incidence of CHD and stroke varies with race. In the 
USA, black people have a higher risk of CHD than white 
people, while Hispanic groups have lower rates than ei-
ther group. In the UK, men and women of South Asian 
descent have a particularly high incidence of CHD (ap-
proximately 50% higher rates of premature CHD death 
compared with the Caucasian population). The differ-
ence is widening, as rates do not appear to be falling as 
fast among this subgroup as for the UK as a whole. This 
may relate, in part, to a higher prevalence of diabetes 
in this group. Other factors contributing to this excess 
mortality may be socioeconomic status, a proathero-
genic diet, lack of exercise, enhanced inflammatory sta-
tus and high plasma concentrations of homocysteine and 
Lp(a). QRISK2 performs significantly better than the 
Framingham risk equation for estimating cardiovascular 
risk in South Asian subjects providing ethnicity is appro-
priately coded.
Family history
A family history of premature CVD is an important risk 
factor. In some cases this may be attributable to a single 
gene effect such as is observed in familial hypercholes-
terolaemia (see below), although, in most cases, the basis 
of the underlying genetic predisposition remains un-
known and is likely to be polygenic. Family history is a 
particularly important contributor to risk in men in the 
lowest quintiles for calculated CHD risk. In women, age- 
adjusted risk is increased almost three-fold if either 
parent has CHD before 60 years of age.
Genetic factors
There are a number of inherited traits that are associated 
with increased CHD susceptibility. Familial hypercholes-
terolaemia (incidence ∼ 1 in 500 in the UK) and familial 
combined hyperlipidaemia (1 in 100) account for a large 
proportion of cases. More common genetic variants have 
a more subtle effect on coronary risk. For example, the 
apolipoprotein E gene polymorphism is associated with 
a modest effect on serum cholesterol concentrations, and 
compared with individuals with the E-3/E-3 genotype, 
carriers of the E-4 allele have a 42% higher risk of CHD, 
whereas the apo E-2 allele appears not to confer signifi-
cantly increased risk. The apolipoprotein (a) (apo(a)) gene 
polymorphism, due to tandem repeat within the kringle 
4 region, affects the concentration and molecular weight 
of plasma Lp(a), and high plasma concentrations of Lp(a) 
are found more commonly among patients with coronary 
disease.
Low birth weight
Barker and colleagues have demonstrated that a low birth 
weight is associated with an increased risk of CVD and 
type 2 diabetes mellitus. This may reflect a permanent 
metabolic change resulting from undernutrition during 
critical stages of early development, which may become 
manifest as impaired endothelial function later in life. 
Low birth weight and high body mass in adulthood ap-
pear to interact to predict CHD.
Potentially modifiable risk factors
Smoking
The seminal studies of Doll and colleagues were the first 
to identify the dangers of cigarette smoking with regards 
to CHD risk and death: approximately 20% of cardiovas-
cular deaths can be attributed to smoking. The injurious 
agents in cigarette smoke probably include tar, carbon 
monoxide and free radicals. The assessment of the risk 
of cigarette smoking is confounded by a number of other 
variables including social class, ethnicity and gender, but 
it remains important even when allowance is made for 
them. The relative risk of CHD in smokers is particu-
larly high in young adults, especially women. Smoking 
rates differ regionally and, to some degree, contribute to 
the geographical, racial and socioeconomic differences 
in CHD rates. Furthermore, smoking also has affects on 
other risk factors such as plasma lipid concentrations, 
particularly HDL-C, clotting factors and fasting glu-
cose concentrations. Cross-cultural studies indicate that 
smoking by itself is insufficient to cause CHD, but in-
creases susceptibility to other risk factors. Passive smok-
ing is also associated with an increased risk of coronary 
disease (∼15–50%). The prevalence of cigarette smoking 
in the UK has fallen over the past three decades, as has 
overall tobacco consumption. Smoking cessation is asso-
ciated with a substantial fall in coronary risk. The benefit 
of smoking cessation is particularly marked in patients 
who have already suffered an MI and is associated with a 
substantial reduction (36%) in mortality in patients with 
established CHD.
Lipids and lipoproteins
Numerous studies have demonstrated a positive associa-
tion between CHD and plasma total cholesterol concen-
tration. The association is continuous, exponential and 
shows no threshold, even at very low concentrations. 
However, the distributions of plasma total cholesterol 
concentrations among patients with and without CHD 
overlap to a considerable degree. Plasma apolipoprotein 
B (apo B) concentrations appear to be more discriminat-
ing: however, they are of less practical utility, as few clini-
cal studies have used apo B concentrations as a basis for 
treatment (see also Chapter 37).
An inverse relationship between plasma HDL-C con-
centrations and CHD risk has also been demonstrated 
in various studies. HDL-C therefore forms an impor-
tant component of risk prediction equations. However, 
the results of recent clinical trials using drugs to modify 
HDL-C levels have generally been disappointing, so 
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
753
HDL-C is not currently a therapeutic target. Just as 
apoB may be more discriminating than total or LDL-C, 
so there is some evidence that apoA1 may be more 
­discriminating than HDL-C.­
Over recent years, the importance of triglycerides as a 
CHD risk factor has received increasing attention. There 
is a very strong inverse relationship between plasma 
HDL-C (particularly the HDL2 fraction) and triglyc-
erides, and, consequently, it has been difficult to dem-
onstrate an independent relationship. However, recent 
data do support a role for triglycerides as an indepen-
dent risk factor. Concentrations of plasma triglycerides 
above approximately 1.7 mmol/L are associated with the 
formation of the more atherogenic, small, dense LDL. 
However, triglycerides themselves also have proathero-
genic effects by promoting a procoagulant state, being 
associated with enhanced factor VII activity.
Most primary (genetic) dyslipidaemias predispose 
to premature CHD, although hyperchylomicronaemia 
is associated with acute pancreatitis rather than CHD. 
However, while in the general population approximately 
50% of the variability in plasma cholesterol is genetically 
determined, these monogenic disorders account for only 
a small proportion of it, and the basis of the greater part 
remains unknown.
Thrombogenesis, rheology and clotting factors
Thrombosis is the usual terminal event in coronary ath-
erosclerosis. Several studies have revealed the importance 
of plasma clotting factor concentrations as risk factors for 
CVD. Fibrinogen forms the substrate for thrombin and 
represents the final step in the coagulation cascade. It is 
essential for platelet aggregation, modulates endothelial 
function and promotes smooth muscle proliferation. A 
recent systematic review has shown that plasma fibrin-
ogen concentration is moderately strongly associated 
with CHD, stroke and vascular mortality in middle-aged 
adults. Fibrinogen concentrations are also related to risk 
of ischaemic stroke and CHD events in patients who have 
had a previous stroke. The relationship between plasma 
fibrinogen and coronary risk may underlie the positive as-
sociation between plasma viscosity and CHD. However, 
it is unclear whether these associations are direct, or re-
lated to other risk factors such as smoking, so lowering 
fibrinogen may not itself reduce risk.
Endothelial injury causes the release of tissue fac-
tor that, in turn, activates the intrinsic clotting cascade. 
Platelet activation and aggregation are crucial processes 
in atherothrombogenesis, and platelet reactivity has been 
reported to be elevated in subjects with unstable angina 
and diabetes. The clinical benefit of antiplatelet drugs 
such as aspirin in patients at coronary risk is now well 
established.
There is a balance between the formation of clot and 
its inhibition and dissolution by factors such as proteins C 
and S and plasmin. The effectiveness of the fibrinolytic sys-
tem depends on the balance between tissue plasminogen 
activator (tPA) and inhibitors of plasminogen activation 
including PAI-1. Tissue plasminogen activator converts 
plasminogen to plasmin, which acts on fibrin, causing 
clot dissolution. This process is inhibited by PAI-1, high 
concentrations of which are associated with a high risk of 
reinfarction. Evidence from the Framingham study indi-
cates that plasma PAI-1 concentrations rise with increas-
ing systolic and diastolic blood pressure. Atherosclerotic 
lesions from diabetic subjects have been shown to con-
tain high concentrations of PAI-1, and plasma PAI-1 is 
strongly associated with several CHD risk factors includ-
ing body mass index (BMI), lipids and alcohol intake, and 
these effects appear to be cumulative.
Apolipoprotein(a) is a glycoprotein that has structural 
homologies with plasminogen. It is attached to apo B by 
a disulphide bond and, in some individuals, comprises the 
major cholesterol rich lipoprotein. High concentrations 
of Lp(a) have been shown to be associated with an in-
creased risk of CHD, particularly when associated with 
raised concentrations of LDL-C or homocysteine. The 
structural similarities between apo(a) and plasminogen 
have led to the proposition that Lp(a) inhibits plasmin 
activity, leading to a prothrombotic state. Plasma con-
centrations of Lp(a) are largely genetically determined, 
but can be modified, to a limited degree, by dietary fatty 
acids, oestrogen, the lipid-lowering agent, nicotinic acid 
and alcohol.
Hypertension
Coronary heart disease risk increases both with increas-
ing systolic and diastolic blood pressure (BP). Blood pres-
sure, like plasma cholesterol, is a continuous variable and 
there is no clear cut-off value, but hypertension doubles 
the risk of CHD at any given concentration of choles-
terol. Because intra-subject blood pressure measurements 
can vary so much over time, the diagnosis of hypertension 
relies on the measurement of blood pressure on several 
occasions. Blood pressure increases with age and its prev-
alence varies with ethnicity. Hypertension is also associ-
ated with obesity and dyslipidaemia, often as part of the 
metabolic syndrome.
Obesity
Obesity is an independent risk factor for CHD and is ris-
ing in prevalence throughout the developed and develop-
ing world (see Chapter 11). Body mass is positively related 
to fasting triglyceride concentrations, plasma cholesterol 
and blood pressure, and inversely related to HDL-C. The 
distribution of body fat appears to be particularly impor-
tant. It is central or visceral obesity, measured as waist 
circumference, that is most strongly related to insulin 
resistance and CHD risk. Waist circumference is a signifi-
cantly better index of insulin resistance than either waist/
hip ratio or BMI. A cut-off value for waist circumference 
of <100 cm excludes insulin resistance in both sexes with 
optimal sensitivity and specificity. It has been proposed 
that hyperinsulinaemia stimulates 11β-hydroxysteroid de-
hydrogenase in omental adipose tissue, generating corti-
sol and promoting a cushingoid fat distribution. Adipose 
tissue is now recognized to be a source of a number of in-
flammatory cytokines (interleukin-6, tumour necrosis fac-
tor α), growth factors (heparin binding epidermal growth 
factor) and hormone-like substances (leptin, adiponectin, 
resistin).
754	
Clinical biochemistry
Weight loss is associated with an improvement in a 
number of coronary risk factors including LDL, HDL, 
triglycerides, systolic BP and fasting blood glucose. Rapid 
weight gain in childhood (between 2 and 11 years) ap-
pears to predict coronary disease in adulthood.
Impaired glucose tolerance and diabetes
Both diabetes mellitus and impaired glucose tolerance are 
important risk factors for CVD (Fig. 38.13) and epidemio-
logical data have led to the notion that diabetes confers a 
similar risk of a cardiovascular event to a prior myocardial 
infarction (Fig. 38.14). In patients with diabetes, a high hae-
moglobin A1c (HbA1c) (>10mmol/mol) is associated with 
an increased risk of CHD; relative risk increases by 1.2-
fold for each percentage point increase of HbA1c. However, 
the value of tight glucose control in preventing macrovascu-
lar disease is less clear than its benefits in the prevention of 
microvascular complications. This may be in part because the 
atherogenic lipid profile typically associated with type 2 dia-
betes tends to persist even with excellent glycaemic control.
Although the absolute CHD mortality is higher for 
diabetic men than for diabetic women, the gender-related 
protection in women is lost if they have diabetes.
Metabolic syndrome
The clustering of several coronary risk factors (high tri-
glycerides, low HDL, obesity, hyperuricaemia, hyperin-
sulinaemia and hypertension) has been known for several 
decades, and led Reaven and others to propose the exis-
tence of a syndrome with a common underlying metabolic 
defect. The genetic basis for this, if one exists, has yet to 
be identified. This is further complicated by the many 
synonyms and definitions in common use. These include 
definitions developed by the World Health Organization 
(WHO), International Diabetes Federation (IDF), 
American Diabetic Association, American Association 
of Clinical Endocrinologists (AACE), American Heart 
Association and the National Cholesterol Education 
Programme Adult Treatment Panel III (NCEP-ATPIII) 
(Table 38.1). Insulin resistance and hyperinsulinaemia ap-
pear to be characteristic features of the syndrome. The 
latter has also been shown to be associated with coronary 
events (Fig.  38.15). No matter how defined, there is a 
high prevalence of metabolic syndrome in westernized 
populations, with particularly high rates in some ethnic 
groups. Recent definitions have included ethnic-specific 
criteria. The prevalence of metabolic syndrome is ap-
proximately 22–39%, dependent on the definition. At 
any particular level of coronary risk, patients with meta-
bolic syndrome appear to have higher event rates than 
predicted. Furthermore, the metabolic syndrome also 
predicts the future development of diabetes mellitus, and 
is associated with a raised concentration of inflammatory 
markers, such as C-reactive protein (CRP).
Physical activity
A high level of physical activity protects against CHD 
and probably does so by a number of different mecha-
nisms. For example, it is associated with a reduction in 
blood pressure and improved lipid profile. Recent data 
indicate that approximately 30 min/day of moderate ex-
ercise is required to have a significant impact on coro-
nary risk. Exercise-based rehabilitation for patients with 
CHD is effective in reducing total mortality and lipid 
concentrations. High levels of physical activity also de-
crease the risk of stroke in a dose-dependent manner. 
Reduction in fitness predicts cardiovascular death in 
middle-aged men.
Psychological factors
Data from the mid-1970s indicated that a type A personal-
ity, characterized by high achievement and drive, was asso-
ciated with increased risk of CHD. However, more recent 
data do not support these findings. Stress adversely affects 
blood pressure, sleeping patterns and plasma lipid concen-
trations and there is clearly a plausible interaction between 
stress and personality. Some studies have demonstrated an 
increased risk of CHD in patients with depressive illness, 
though the basis of the association is unclear.
5
4
3
2
1
0
Normal
glucose
tolerance
Impaired
glucose
tolerance
Type 2
diabetes
CHD mortality rate/1000
FIGURE  38.13  ■ The effects of glucose tolerance on CHD mor-
tality rates. From: Hsueh W A, Law R E 1998 Cardiovascular risk 
continuum: implication of insulin resistance and diabetes. American 
Journal of Medicine 105: 4 s–14 s, with permission.
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
*Fatal/non-fatal
MI
*Fatal/non-fatal
stroke
*CV death
*p < 0.001 for diabetes vs no diabetes
No diabetes/prior MI
No diabetes/no prior MI
Diabetes/prior MI
Diabetes/no prior MI
7-year incidence (%)
FIGURE 38.14  ■  Diabetes mellitus confers a similar risk for a car-
diovascular event as a prior myocardial infarction (MI). Data 
from Haffner S M et al. 1998 Mortality from coronary heart disease 
in subjects with type 2 diabetes mellitus and in non diabetic sub-
jects without prior myocardial infarction. New England Journal of 
Medicine 339: 229–234, with permission.
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
755
Inflammation and infection
Atherosclerosis bears many hallmarks of a chronic in-
flammatory disease, and at every stage of its evolution 
is characterized by macrophage and T lymphocyte in-
filtration. The possible stimuli for this inflammatory 
process include oxidized LDL, homocysteine, free 
radicals generated from cigarette smoking and infec-
tious microorganisms. If the original insult were not 
adequately neutralized, the inflammation might per-
sist, causing the local and systemic release of growth 
factors and cytokines. These can cause intimal thick-
ening by stimulating smooth muscle cell migration, 
proliferation and extracellular matrix elaboration. 
The release of IL-1β and IL-6 from activated leuko-
cytes may also lead to an induction of hepatic CRP 
synthesis.
Over the past few years, there has been an increasing 
interest in the use of inflammatory markers to estimate 
the risks of acute events in patients with established 
coronary disease. In part, the predictive value of these 
markers may be related to their ability to identify pa-
tients with vulnerable plaques, which are rich in acti-
vated leukocytes. The risk associated with a high plasma 
CRP concentration is stronger than that associated with 
raised von Willebrand factor or erythrocyte sedimenta-
tion rate (ESR) but is estimated to be weaker than an in-
creased cholesterol or positive smoking habit. It has also 
been reported that plasma concentrations of CRP are 
positively associated with subclinical carotid and femo-
ral atherosclerosis, and a number of established coro-
nary risk factors in healthy, middle-aged men. Among 
these factors were smoking habit, indices of adiposity, 
blood pressure, triglycerides and HDL. Of these, smok-
ing habit showed the strongest association with plasma 
CRP. C-reactive protein is deposited in lipid rich regions 
of human coronary arteries, and its accumulation may 
precede monocyte recruitment. It is chemotactic for 
monocytes, and may also be involved in the activation 
of complement. A relationship between plasma concen-
trations of CRP and basal endothelial cell nitric oxide 
(NO) synthesis has also been reported, suggesting that 
CRP may indeed be involved early in the pathogenesis 
of atherosclerosis.
It remains unclear whether CRP is a risk marker 
or risk factor for atherosclerotic cardiovascular dis-
ease. Mendelian randomization studies suggest that 
genetic variation associated with increased CRP lev-
els is not associated with increased cardiovascular risk, 
suggesting that CRP is a risk marker. However, it is 
now recognized that a range of conditions associated 
with chronic inflammation and elevated CRP, such as 
rheumatoid arthritis and psoriasis, are associated with 
a significant increased risk of atherosclerotic vascular 
disease.
Relative importance of coronary risk factors
Although many risk factors for CHD have been de-
scribed, and others no doubt will become recognized in 
the future, the contribution of many of them is relatively 
TABLE 38.1  Definitions of the metabolic syndrome/insulin resistance syndrome
 
NCEP-ATPIII
WHO
AACE
IDF
Waist circumference (cm)
  Men
>102
–
–
≥94 (≥90
a)
  Women
>88
–
–
≥80 (≥80
a)
Body mass index (kg/m
2)
–
≥30
≥25
–
Triglycerides (mmol/L)
≥1.7
≥1.7
≥1.69
≥1.7
HDL cholesterol (mmol/L)
  Men
<1.0
<0.9
<1.04
<1.04
  Women
<1.2
<1.0
<1.29
<1.29
Blood pressure (mmHg)
≥130/85
≥140/90
≥130/85
≥130/85
Fasting blood glucose (mmol/L)
≥6.1
≥6.1
≥6.1
≥5.6
Blood glucose 2-h post challenge
–
–
≥7.8
Diabetes or impaired 
glucose tolerance
Urinary albumin:creatinine ratio (mg/g)
–
>30
–
–
Other factors
 
 
Polycystic ovary syndrome; 
family history of type 2 
diabetes, hypertension or CVD
 
aFor South Asians and Chinese.
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
00
5
10
15
20
25
Years
Proportion without major CHD event
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q5
Log rank:
Overall p = 0.001
Q5 vs Q1 p < 0.001 
FIGURE  38.15  ■  High plasma insulin concentrations predict in-
creased CHD events in non-diabetic subjects (Q1-Q5 are quintiles 
of insulin concentration: subjects with the highest concentra-
tions are in Q1, those with the lowest in Q5). From: Pyöräala M 
et al. 1998. Hyperinsulinaemia predicts coronary heart disease risk in 
healthy middle-aged men. Circulation 98: 398–404, with permission.
756	
Clinical biochemistry
minor, certainly in comparison with diabetes, cigarette 
smoking, hypertension and hypercholesterolaemia. It 
is to these risk factors that the greatest effort should be 
directed in seeking to ameliorate an individual’s risk of 
CHD.
Dietary factors
Diet is known to modulate several established coronary 
risk factors, and dietary change is an important element 
of coronary risk management as outlined by various di-
etary guidelines. These are targeted at optimizing the 
lipid profile, attaining ideal body weight and reducing 
blood pressure.
Salt
In experimental models, an increased dietary intake of 
sodium chloride raises blood pressure. This appears to be 
confirmed by clinical studies such as the INTERSALT 
study. Sodium excretion has been found to be related to 
median systolic and diastolic BP. A 5.9 g difference in in-
take of salt was associated with a 3–6 mmHg difference in 
blood pressure. A reduction of dietary salt causes a sig-
nificant reduction in blood pressure, although sensitivity 
to salt intake varies between individuals. Up to 50% of 
hypertensive subjects are sensitive to salt loading, an ef-
fect that varies with ethnicity. The intake of other miner-
als also appears to modify blood pressure; these include 
potassium, calcium and magnesium, the intakes of which 
are inversely related to blood pressure.
Simple sugars
Dietary simple sugars (sucrose, lactose, glucose and 
fructose) comprise approximately 25% of total energy 
intake. An association between sucrose intake and CHD 
risk was first proposed in the 1960s, but this has not 
been supported by recent studies. Carbohydrates differ 
in their effects on blood sugar and insulin concentra-
tions. Low glycaemic index (GI) foods have less effect 
on postprandial blood glucose and insulin. The Nurses’ 
Health study has shown that a high glycaemic load is 
associated with an increased risk of CHD. This may be 
related to adverse effects on HDL and triglycerides, and 
increased risk of diabetes. However, low-GI diets appear 
to have only a modest impact on CHD risk. Low-GI 
diets also appear to have little effect on lipid concen-
trations or HbA1c, although most studies to date have 
been short term. Diets rich in protein or unsaturated 
fat have been found to reduce blood pressure more than 
diets high in carbohydrate in obese subjects with mild 
hypertension.
Ethanol
Several population studies have reported that the rela-
tionship between ethanol consumption and CHD risk 
is J-shaped, with a nadir for risk at approximately three 
units (30 mL) of ethanol per day. However, confound-
ing factors make it difficult to interpret the relative 
benefits of moderate drinking. People who never drink 
alcohol appear to have a higher prevalence of several 
other cardiovascular risk factors. Although systolic 
blood pressure rises with increasing alcohol intake (>3 
units/day is associated with a significant increase in sys-
tolic blood pressure and other adverse events), alcohol 
intake is positively associated with HDL-cholesterol, 
particularly the HDL2 subfraction. Plasma triglycer-
ides also increase with alcohol consumption, but this 
is associated with an increase in VLDL and the large, 
buoyant LDL subfraction, rather than small, dense 
LDL. The relative benefits of various alcoholic bever-
ages have been debated, and related to their antioxi-
dant content. However, the form of alcohol consumed 
is likely to be confounded by lifestyle, diet and cultural 
factors. For example, the prevalence of wine drinking 
varies with age, race, smoking, ethnicity and educa-
tional background.
Fish and fish oils
A relationship between fish consumption and protec-
tion against CVD was first mooted in the 1960s be-
cause of the low rates of coronary disease observed in 
the Inuit people. Subsequent epidemiological studies 
have shown that consuming more than 35 g of fish per 
day is associated with a substantial reduction in CHD 
risk. This effect is dose dependent, each 20 g increase 
in fish intake being associated with a 7% lower risk for 
CHD mortality. The Nurses’ Health Study population 
revealed similar findings with up to 34% lower CHD 
mortality when fish was eaten more than five times 
per week.
It has been proposed that the protection conferred by 
increasing fish consumption may relate to the original 
risk status of the population concerned, and the kind of 
fish consumed.
Soy protein
Soy is an edible protein component of soya bean. A meta-
analysis of 38 clinical studies has shown that consumption 
of soy protein can lower plasma LDL-cholesterol by as 
much as 13% and triglycerides by 10%, but only in sub-
jects with higher starting concentrations. Several mecha-
nisms for this have been proposed but both soy proteins 
and isoflavones appear to be required. It is noteworthy 
that the per capita consumption in Japan (where the in-
cidence of CHD is low) is as much as 55 g/day, whereas 
in the USA (where it is much higher), it is <5 g/day. An 
intake of >25 g/day is required to significantly improve 
the lipid profile.
Fatty acids
Changing the fatty acid composition of the diet can have 
a substantial effect on plasma cholesterol concentra-
tions and on coronary risk. Dietary fatty acids can have 
a profound effect on the inflammatory process and con-
sequently may also affect plaque composition and stabil-
ity. A high intake of α-linolenic acid is associated with 
reduced risk of fatal CHD, but in men, an increased risk 
of prostate cancer has also been reported.
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
757
Plant sterols
Sterols are alcohol derivatives of cyclopentanoper-
hydrophenanthrene, and are essential constituents of 
all cell membranes. Cholesterol is a mammalian ste-
rol, containing 27 carbon atoms, whereas sitosterol, 
campesterol and stigmasterol are plant sterols with 28 
and 29 carbon atoms, due to the presence of an addi-
tional methyl or ethyl side chain, respectively. Dietary 
cholesterol has a modest effect on plasma cholesterol 
concentrations, and an intake of <300 mg/day is rec-
ommended for the general population (<200 mg/day in 
patients with CVD). Plant sterols are normally poorly 
absorbed by the human intestine and inhibit choles-
terol absorption. Five g/day of sitostanol ester reduces 
plasma cholesterol concentration by approximately 
10–20%.
Fibre
Dietary fibre intake is inversely related to CHD risk. 
A 10 g/day increase in fibre has been shown to be associ-
ated with a 14% decrease in coronary events and a 27% 
decrease in coronary deaths. Intake of whole grain wheat is 
associated with a 26% reduction in coronary disease, which 
may be related to a reduction in LDL and triglycerides. 
High dietary fibre intake is also associated with a reduced 
prevalence of diabetes, hypertension and obesity. It has 
been proposed that the fibre content of soy may account 
for some of its cholesterol-lowering properties. However, 
the effect of fibre on cholesterol is a modest one: there is 
approximately a 0.045 mmol/L fall in plasma cholesterol 
per gram of dietary fibre. The mechanisms of action are 
thought to include: bile salt binding, in much the same way 
that resins work; altered gut motility; an effect on satiety, 
and increased insulin sensitivity. Overall, high dietary fibre 
intake is associated with a substantially lower relative risk 
of fatal and non-fatal CVD. It should also be noted that soy 
contains phyto-oestrogens, and whole grain wheat is rich 
in selenium, so that the beneficial effects of these foods 
may not be entirely attributable to their fibre content.
Fruit and vegetables, tea and coffee
Higher rates of coronary disease have been found in re-
gions with low fruit and vegetable consumption, and a diet 
rich in fruit and vegetables is associated with a 5% reduc-
tion in stroke risk per portion of fruit and vegetables per 
day. Vegetarians have been reported to have a lower rate 
of CHD, although these data are confounded by other 
associated patterns of lifestyle, including a lower fat and 
tobacco consumption and higher socioeconomic class. 
The Dietary Approaches to Stop Hypertension (DASH) 
trial found that a diet high in fruit and vegetables and low 
in fat reduced systolic blood pressure by 5.5 and diastolic 
blood pressure by 3 mmHg. Fruit and vegetables are also 
a rich source of antioxidants, such as vitamins C and E, 
carotene and polyphenols.
Green and black teas contain a complex mixture of 
polyphenolic compounds that include tannins. This spec-
trum of components and their relative content depends 
on the conditions of brewing and their bioavailability de-
pends on whether the tea is taken with milk. However, 
drinking tea more than three times per day is associated 
with reduced stroke and CHD. Drinking boiled coffee is 
associated with an increase in plasma cholesterol. Plasma 
homocysteine concentrations are also increased in sub-
jects with a high coffee consumption. However, there is 
little evidence that coffee intake is related to overall car-
diovascular risk.
Dietary pattern
While individual dietary constituents may ameliorate car-
diovascular risk as outlined above, increasing emphasis is 
placed on having a healthy dietary pattern rather than in-
dividual dietary components. Healthy diet is one which, 
first, maintains BMI in the normal range and minimizes 
the risk of overweight or obesity. A number of scores of 
been developed to identify a healthy or prudent dietary 
pattern. However, one dietary pattern that has consider-
able evidence to support benefits for cardiovascular health 
and that is currently recommended in NICE cardiovas-
cular disease prevention guidelines is the Mediterranean 
diet. The Lyon Heart Study examined the effects of a 
Mediterranean diet (30% of calories from fat, of which 
8% were saturated) compared with a prudent Western diet 
(34% of calories from fat of which 12% was saturated fat) 
on coronary events in patients with established coronary 
disease. The Mediterranean diet contained more bread, 
fruit, root and green vegetables, poultry and fish, and 
less red meat; dairy products were replaced with a high 
α-linolenic acid margarine. After a 46-month follow-up 
period, there was a 50–70% lower risk of cardiovascular 
events in the Mediterranean diet group.
HYPERTENSION
Hypertension, or raised blood pressure, is one of the sin-
gle most common and preventable causes of premature 
morbidity and mortality. It is a major risk factor for myo-
cardial infarction; heart failure; left ventricular hypertro-
phy; stroke (both ischaemic and haemorrhagic); chronic 
kidney disease; peripheral vascular disease; cognitive de-
cline, and premature death. It can also (rarely) present as 
malignant hypertension, an acute, life-threatening emer-
gency (see below).
The laboratory is involved in:
•	 assessment of end-organ damage in all hypertensive 
patients
•	 monitoring for complications of some commonly 
used antihypertensive drugs
•	 investigation for causes of secondary hypertension, 
particularly screening for renal disease (all) and inves-
tigation of endocrine causes (a selected sub-group).
Definition
Blood pressure is measured as diastolic and systolic pres-
sures, measured in millimetres of mercury (mmHg). 
Systolic pressure represents the peak blood pressure 
during ventricular contraction (systole); diastolic pres-
sure represents the pressure during ventricular relaxation 
(diastole).
758	
Clinical biochemistry
The blood pressure of individuals within a population 
is continuously distributed in a Gaussian (normal) man-
ner. Although it would be possible to define a reference 
interval or range that comprised 95% of an apparently 
healthy population, this range (as with that for plasma 
cholesterol concentration) would include significant 
numbers of people whose blood pressure would cause in-
creased risk of the long-term complications. There is no 
cut-off value above which hypertension definitively ex-
ists; thus any definition of hypertension is to some extent 
arbitrary.
Epidemiological studies demonstrate increased risk of 
adverse effects above blood pressures of 115/70 mmHg in 
all age groups. The relationship is continuous and pro-
gressive: for every 2 mmHg rise in blood pressure, the 
risk of death due to IHD increases by 7% and the risk 
of death from stroke by 10%. However, this observed as-
sociation does not prove causality, which would require 
randomized trials demonstrating risk reduction with 
blood pressure reduction. Thus, the level of blood pres-
sure determining the presence of hypertension is defined 
as the level of blood pressure above which treatment has 
been shown to reduce the development or progression 
of disease. This is currently generally accepted by most 
bodies internationally to be 140/90 mmHg.
Blood pressure measurement outside a clinic environ-
ment has been shown to correlate more strongly with 
hypertension-related morbidity and mortality than that 
measured in the clinic setting, and the latest (2011) NICE 
guidance recommends that home ambulatory blood 
pressure monitoring be used to confirm hypertension de-
tected in the clinic.
Hypertension is usually asymptomatic, and diag-
nosed incidentally, either as part of routine assessment in 
primary care, as part of a general medical examination 
when a patient presents with an unrelated condition or 
as a result of one of its complications (e.g. angina due 
to coronary atherosclerosis, breathlessness due to cardiac 
failure). Presenting features in malignant hypertension 
(see below) include headache, visual disturbances and fits.
Cause
In at least 90% of individuals with sustained hyperten-
sion, no primary cause is identifiable, and the condition is 
termed ‘primary hypertension’ (previously ‘essential hy-
pertension’). Up to 10% have ‘secondary hypertension’, 
for which it is possible to identify a specific cause, such as 
renovascular disease, phaeochromocytoma or hyperaldo-
steronism. The clinical picture can help target investiga-
tion appropriately (Table 38.2).
Primary hypertension
Primary hypertension is very common in Western popu-
lations and its prevalence is strongly influenced by age as 
well as lifestyle factors. Blood pressure tends to rise with 
age (to a greater extent in men than in women), although, 
over the age of 70 years, diastolic blood pressure may 
decline. It is estimated that at least 25% of the UK adult 
TABLE 38.2  Clinical pointers to secondary hypertension
Clinical feature
Condition
Drug-resistant hypertension
Acute hypertension with previously stable values
Diagnosis before age 30 in non-obese
Severe hypertension with evidence of end-organ damage
Any
Raised creatinine/reduced eGFR
Renal impairment
Acute rise in serum creatinine (>30%) with ACE inhibitor or angiotensin 
II receptor blockade
Moderate to severe hypertension with known vascular disease, 
asymmetry on renal ultrasound, flash pulmonary oedema
Abdominal bruit (low sensitivity)
Renovascular hypertension
Hypokalaemia (mild or easily-induced)
Primary aldosteronism (serum potassium more 
often normal)
Mild hypernatraemia
Primary aldosteronism
Cushingoid facies, truncal obesity, proximal myopathy, bruising
Cushing syndrome
Adrenal ‘incidentaloma’
Primary aldosteronism
Cushing disease
Oral contraceptives
Glucocorticoids
Ciclosporin
Erythropoietin
Illicit drug use (esp. cocaine, ecstasy)
Excessive alcohol consumption
Drug-induced
Paroxysmal hypertension, esp. with headaches, sweating, palpitations
Phaeochromocytoma (rarely asymptomatic)
Obesity (particularly men)
Heavy snoring
Daytime drowsiness / headache
Sleep apnoea syndrome
Delayed or reduced femoral pulse
Aortic ‘machinery’ murmur
Coarctation of aorta
Symptoms of hypothyroidism
Raised TSH
Primary hypothyroidism
Hypercalcaemia
Primary hyperparathyroidism
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
759
population have hypertension, as well as more than 50% 
of those aged more than 60  years. Systolic pressure is 
more commonly elevated in patients in older patients, 
while raised diastolic pressure is a more prevalent feature 
of hypertension in those aged less than 50 years.
The aetiology of primary hypertension is poorly 
understood but is likely to be complex and multifacto-
rial, including genetic, intrauterine and lifestyle factors. 
Increased sympathetic neural activity and increased an-
giotensin II activity have both been implicated, although 
no abnormalities have consistently been identified.
Blood pressure tends to exhibit a familial concordance, 
to an extent that cannot be explained by a shared envi-
ronment: having one or more hypertensive parent ap-
proximately doubles an individual’s risk of hypertension. 
An influence of intrauterine environment is indicated by 
the fact that babies born at term with lower birth weights 
tend to have higher blood pressure as adults, possibly as a 
result of reduced nephron mass.
Important lifestyle factors include obesity, high so-
dium intake and a high alcohol intake (though individu-
als who consume moderate alcohol tend to have slightly 
lower blood pressures than abstainers). A meta-analysis of 
18 studies has recently indicated an association between 
hypertension and vitamin D deficiency.
The ‘metabolic syndrome’ comprises hyperinsu-
linaemia, glucose intolerance, central obesity and dys-
lipidaemia (all secondary to insulin resistance) and 
hypertension; insulin resistance and hypertension also 
frequently co-exist in patients with polycystic ovary 
syndrome, but in neither case is the mechanism linking 
insulin resistance and hypertension fully understood. 
Dyslipidaemia also shows an association with higher 
blood pressure, which is independent of body mass. 
Blood pressure also varies between populations, tending 
to be higher in black Africans than in white Europids.
The prevalence of primary hypertension will con-
tinue to rise with increasing longevity, particularly with 
the concurrently rising prevalence of obesity. Lifestyle 
modification is an important aspect of the management 
of hypertension.
Secondary hypertension
Kidney disease. Hypertension is an important compli-
cation of both acute and chronic kidney disease, most 
commonly glomerular or vascular. It is detected by blood 
testing (elevated serum creatinine and urea) and/or dip-
stick urinalysis which may show proteinuria or haema-
turia. Disease is usually bilateral. Both activation of the 
renin–angiotensin–aldosterone axis and retention of 
sodium and water may contribute, the latter becoming 
more important with deteriorating renal function, and 
peripheral oedema may be observed. Less frequently, 
unilateral renovascular disease is responsible.
Endocrine disease. Phaeochromocytoma, hyperaldo-
steronism and Cushing syndrome are all well-recognized 
(though individually relatively uncommon) causes of 
hypertension. Patients with thyrotoxicosis and hypothy-
roid patients may both have hypertension. There is also 
an association between primary hyperparathyroidism and 
hypertension. Hypertension is present in some 40% of 
patients with acromegaly, although some of this is likely 
to be essential hypertension. In addition, there are sev-
eral rare, inherited endocrine conditions whose manifes-
tations include hypertension: these are summarized in 
Table 38.3.
Laboratory assessment of hypertension
All patients should have formal cardiovascular risk predic-
tion using one of the risk prediction equations discussed 
above. Electrolytes and creatinine (with estimation of glo-
merular filtration rate) should be measured as baseline be-
fore treatment is started with drugs which are potentially 
nephrotoxic or associated with deranged ­electrolytes. 
Renal damage can also both cause hypertension and be 
affected by target organ damage, and all newly diagnosed 
hypertensive patients should also be tested for haematuria 
using a reagent strip at the clinic, and for microalbumin-
uria with a urinary albumin:creatinine ratio.
Investigation for secondary causes
Comprehensive investigation of every patient with newly 
diagnosed hypertension is not an efficient use of health-
care resources, since approximately 90% of patients will 
have primary hypertension and by definition no cause 
will be found. It is important to bear in mind and tar-
get patients with signs and symptoms suggesting a sec-
ondary cause of hypertension for specialist endocrine or 
radiological investigations. Specific clinical features that 
may suggest specific diagnoses are given in Table 38.2. 
General features which should prompt comprehensive 
investigation include:
•	 severe or resistant hypertension. (Resistant hyper-
tension is the persistence of hypertension despite 
concurrent use of adequate doses of three antihy-
pertensive agents from different classes, including a 
diuretic. It is important to try to ascertain compli-
ance, which is a common cause of apparently resist-
ant hypertension.)
•	 an acute rise in blood pressure in a patient with pre-
viously well-controlled measurements
•	 aged less than 40 years in a Caucasian patient with-
out a family history of hypertension or other risk 
factor such as obesity
•	 prepubertal onset
•	 malignant or accelerated hypertension (e.g. severe 
hypertension plus signs of end-organ damage such 
as retinal hemorrhages or papilloedema, heart fail-
ure or acute kidney injury).
Renovascular hypertension
A proportion of the 10% of all hypertensive patients who 
have secondary hypertension present with chronic kidney 
disease which, if not clinically apparent, will be obvious on 
initial laboratory screening. Renovascular hypertension is 
the most common remediable cause of secondary hyper-
tension. It may occur in the setting of a patient with other 
known vascular disease such as CHD or peripheral vas-
cular disease. Particularly suggestive clinical clues include:
760	
Clinical biochemistry
•	 the development of an acute sustained rise in 
serum creatinine (>50%) within a week of starting 
treatment with an angiotensin-converting-enzyme 
inhibitor or angiotensin II receptor blocker
•	 severe hypertension in a patient with asymmetric 
kidneys or an unexplained atrophic kidney seen on 
renal ultrasound
•	 severe hypertension in a patient with recurrent 
acute pulmonary oedema, or severe heart failure 
with impaired renal function
•	 severe hypertension in conjunction with a sys-
tolic–diastolic abdominal bruit that lateralizes to 
one side.
Any of these features should trigger prompt discussion 
with the local nephrology service and imaging of the re-
nal arteries.
Primary aldosteronism (hyperaldosteronism)
Primary aldosteronism (PA) is the commonest identifi-
able, specifically treatable and potentially curable form 
of hypertension. The triad of hypertension, unexplained 
hypokalemia, and an aldosterone-producing adenoma 
(APA) of the adrenal gland, was first described in 1955 by 
Jerome Conn, in a 34-year-old female who had a seven-
year history of intermittent muscle weakness, muscle 
TABLE 38.3  Inherited disorders causing hypertension
Condition
Inheritance
Plasma 
renin
Plasma 
aldosterone
Cause
Other features
Treatment
Glucocorticoid 
suppressible 
hyperaldo­
steronism
Autosomal 
dominant
Normal/↓
↓
Mutation causes 
fusing of regulatory 
sequence of steroid 
11β-hydroxylase with 
aldosterone synthase: 
aldosterone synthesis 
is controlled by 
ACTH rather than 
angiotensin II
Variable 
hypokalaemic 
alkalosis; ↑ plasma 
18-hydroxycortisol
Dexamethasone
Liddle 
syndrome
Autosomal 
dominant
↓
↓
Activating mutation in 
distal renal tubular 
sodium transporter 
leads to sodium 
retention and ↑ ECF 
volume
Variable 
hypokalaemic 
alkalosis
Amiloride, 
triamterene
Gordon 
syndrome 
(pseudohypo-
aldosteronism 
type II)
Autosomal 
recessive
↓
↓
Mutation leading to 
increased distal renal 
tubular chloride 
reabsorption; hence 
increased sodium 
reabsorption and ↑ 
extracellular fluid 
volume
Hyperkalaemia, renal 
tubular acidosis
Thiazide 
diuretics; 
dietary salt 
restriction
Syndrome of 
apparent 
mineralo­
corticoid 
excess
Autosomal 
recessive
↓
↓
11β-Hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase
a 
deficiency, causing 
decreased metabolism 
of cortisol to cortisone; 
allows cortisol 
to act as a major 
mineralocorticoid, 
causing sodium 
retention
Hypokalaemic 
acidosis
Dexamethasone 
or high-dose 
spironolactone
Steroid 11β-
hydroxylase 
deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive
↓
↓
Enzyme deficiency 
leads to ↑ plasma 
11-deoxycortisol and 11 
-deoxycorticosterone; 
the latter has 
mineralocorticoid 
activity
Hypokalaemic 
alkalosis; 
masculinization 
in females; 
premature 
virilization in 
males
Cortisol
Steroid 17α-
hydroxylase 
deficiency
Autosomal 
recessive
↓
↓
Enzyme deficiency 
leads to ↑ plasma 
11-deoxycorticosterone 
and corticosterone; 
the former has 
mineralocorticoid 
activity
Hypokalaemic 
alkalosis; 
feminization in 
males; lack of 
normal sexual 
maturation in 
females
Cortisol
a  This enzyme converts cortisol to cortisone (inactive) but does not metabolize aldosterone; its activity normally limits the mineralocorticoid 
activity of cortisol. Carbenoxolone (glycyrrhetinic acid) and liquorice (which contains glycyrrhizic acid) are inhibitors of this enzyme and 
can cause hypertension and hypokalaemia.
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
761
spasms and cramping of her hands. This clinical picture 
is not specific for Conn adenoma but is associated with 
any cause of mineralocorticoid excess. Metabolic alkalosis 
is also a common feature.
Primary aldosteronism comprises a group of disorders 
characterized by inappropriately high secretion of aldoste-
rone, which is autonomous and is not suppressed by saline. 
A growing body of research has implicated aldosterone 
in the pathogenesis of vascular disease independently of 
blood pressure, possibly via promotion of systemic inflam-
mation and oxidative stress, which contribute to insulin re-
sistance and vascular abnormalities. The recognition that 
most patients with PA (>75%) are actually normokalaemic 
has led to an appreciation that it is much more common 
than previously recognized. As many as 5–13% of patients 
with hypertension are currently thought to have PA.
Forms of PA
Around 30% have a unilateral APA, which is potentially 
resectable by laparoscopic adrenalectomy (hypokalaemia is 
more common in this group). Most of the remainder have 
bilateral idiopathic hyperaldosteronism (IHA), which re-
sponds best to aldosterone-antagonist drugs. A rare cause 
is glucocorticoid-suppressible aldosteronism (GRA). Very 
rarely, an adrenal carcinoma is responsible, and it is oc-
casionally a component of multiple endocrine neoplasia 
(MEN) type 1. In general, hypertension and hypokalaemia 
are more severe in patients with APA than bilateral forms.
The diagnosis of PA should be considered in:
•	 hypertensive patients with spontaneous or diuretic-
induced hypokalaemia (see Table 38.4 for differen-
tial diagnoses)
TABLE 38.4  Differential diagnosis of primary aldosteronism (PA)
Hypertensive condition
Differentiating clinical features
Differentiating tests
Primary hypertension
None
Aldosterone/renin ratio normal off interferent 
drugs × 2–4 weeks. Normal ratio on drugs that 
can potentially cause false positives makes PA 
highly unlikely
Hypokalaemia not a feature of primary HT (only 
infrequently seen in PA)
Diuretic-induced 
hypokalaemia in patient 
with primary hypertension
Drug history
Aldosterone/renin ratio normal after correction 
of hypokalaemia and diuretic withdrawal for at 
least six weeks
Secondary hypertension
Known vascular disease or risk factors; 
known renal artery stenosis
Aldosterone/renin ratio normal or low
Imaging studies(to demonstrate renal artery 
stenosis or reninoma)
Ectopic ACTH syndrome
Features of underlying malignancy 
(usually bronchial small cell tumour; 
rarely thymus pancreas or bronchial 
carcinoid)
Rarely Cushingoid features (may be 
present if slow-growing tumour)
Aldosterone/renin ratio usually normal 
despite hypokalaemia and suppressed renin 
(aldosterone also low)
Evidence of malignancy on imaging studies
Cortisol and ACTH levels elevated and non-
suppressible with high-dose dexamethasone
Liddle syndrome
Childhood presentation. Family history 
(autosomal dominant)
Aldosterone/renin ratio usually normal 
despite hypokalaemia and suppressed renin 
(aldosterone also low)
Syndrome of apparent 
mineralocorticoid excess
Childhood presentation of primary form. 
Family history (autosomal recessive)
May be acquired due to excessive 
liquorice consumption
Aldosterone/renin ratio usually normal 
despite hypokalaemia and suppressed renin 
(aldosterone also low)
Raised urinary free cortisol/cortisone ratio
Hypertensive forms of 
congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia
Childhood presentation. History of 
either virilization (in 11β-hydroxylase 
deficiency) or feminization (in 17α-
hydroxylase deficiency)
Family history of congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia due to 11β-hydroxylase 
or 17α-hydroxylase deficiency 
(autosomal recessive)
Aldosterone/renin ratio usually normal 
despite hypokalaemia and suppressed renin 
(aldosterone also low)
11β-hydroxylase deficiency: low plasma cortisol 
and corticosterone; raised basal or ACTH-
stimulated levels of deoxycorticosterone and 
11-deoxycortisol
17α-hydroxylase deficiency: low plasma 17α-
hydroxyprogesterone, 11-deoxycortisol, and 
cortisol; increased gonadotrophins (LH and 
FSH)
Primary glucocorticoid 
resistance
Family history (although may be 
acquired)
May be associated with androgenization
Aldosterone/renin ratio normal despite 
hypokalaemia and suppressed renin 
(aldosterone also low)
Raised ACTH and cortisol; resistance of cortisol 
to dexamethasone suppression in absence of 
clinical features of Cushing syndrome
Activating mutations of the 
mineralocorticoid receptor
Family history
Pregnancy-induced worsening of HT and 
development of hypokalaemia
Aldosterone/renin ratio usually normal 
despite hypokalaemia and suppressed renin 
(aldosterone also low)
Pseudohypoaldosteronism 
type II (Gordon syndrome)
Family history (autosomal dominant)
Hyperkalaemia; mild normal anion gap 
metabolic acidosis
Increased distal tubular Cl
− reabsorption
Low renin, normal aldosterone; often raised 
aldosterone/renin ratio
762	
Clinical biochemistry
•	 patients with moderate, severe or resistant hyper-
tension (less common in mild hypertension)
•	 patients 
with 
adrenal 
incidentaloma 
and 
hyper­tension
•	 patients with the onset of hypertension under the 
age of 20
•	 patients with hypertension and a family history 
of young-onset hypertension or CVA at young 
age (<40 years), who may have the rare, inherited 
glucocorticoid-remediable form of PA.
Biochemical investigation
Determination of the ratio of plasma aldosterone concen-
tration to plasma renin activity is widely accepted as the 
optimal test for screening, after controlling for factors 
(including medicines) that may confound results. (See 
Appendix 1 for detailed protocol.)
Confounding factors
Posture. Assuming upright posture effects a rise in 
plasma aldosterone via increased renin, released from the 
juxtaglomerular apparatus in response to a slight fall in 
renal perfusion. All APA, and most with IHA, retain nor-
mal responsiveness to upright posture, and measurement 
in a sample taken when upright may be the most sensi-
tive in detecting raised aldosterone. In practice, a mid-
morning upright sample, taken after sitting for 5–15 min 
appears to be sensitive as well as pragmatic.
Time of day. In PA patients, suppression of renin 
makes aldosterone more strongly influenced by ACTH, 
which has a circadian rhythm, being highest in the morn-
ing, then falling rapidly. Thus, morning samples are most 
likely to show elevated aldosterone.
Drugs. See Box 38.4.
Relevant drugs should be withdrawn at least two weeks 
before testing, or for diuretics, at least four weeks. Where 
antihypertensive drugs cannot be safely withheld, vera-
pamil slow-release, hydralazine and/or prazosin have 
lesser effects on the aldosterone–renin system.
Dietary sodium. Salt restriction stimulates renin pro-
duction, which may lower the aldosterone:renin ratio, 
thus patients are advised to maintain a liberal salt intake 
before testing.
Plasma potassium. Hypokalaemia suppresses aldoste-
rone secretion and may cause a false negative result, thus 
any hypokalaemia should be corrected as far as possible 
with oral potassium supplements for several days prior 
to testing.
Phase of menstrual cycle. Higher aldosterone concentra-
tions seem to be measured in the luteal phase relative to the 
­follicular phase, almost certainly mediated by sex hormones, 
and it may thus be preferable to screen premenopausal women 
early in the menstrual cycle. More research is required in this 
area before firm recommendations can be given.
Renal impairment/elderly patients. Renin levels are 
lower in renal impairment due to reduced nephron mass 
as well as sodium and water retention. Similarly elderly 
patients secrete less renin and false positive ratios may 
result in both circumstances.
Other conditions. Co-existing conditions, which may 
give rise to false negatives, include pregnancy, renal ar-
tery stenosis and malignant hypertension.
Differences between laboratories in assays used and 
units reported give rise to variability in cut-off values 
used by different groups; this makes standardization of 
diagnostic criteria difficult. Renin measurement can be 
in terms of its enzymatic activity (plasma renin activ-
ity, PRA) or its mass (direct active renin concentration, 
DAR). Automated immunometric assays for measuring 
DAR have been widely adopted as they are faster and 
more convenient than PRA. However, considerable 
work is required to validate these methods, and in the 
meantime, PRA remains the preferred measurement.
Because of inherent variability in both renin and aldo-
sterone, measurements should be repeated at least once 
for confirmation. In patients with repeatedly elevated al-
dosterone/renin ratios, definitive confirmation or exclu-
sion of diagnosis involves careful suppression testing with 
measurement of aldosterone response to fludrocortisone 
or to salt loading.
Genetic testing for the hybrid gene causing familial 
hyperaldosteronism type I (glucocorticoid-­remediable 
aldosteronism (GRA)) allows subtype differentiation, 
which allows treatment to be tailored. However this is 
rare, and the majority of genetic tests will be negative.
Localization
The next step should be to differentiate unilateral APA 
amenable to surgery from bilateral forms of PA which 
respond to drugs. Computerized tomography (CT) and 
MRI scanning are both used. Adrenal CT on its own 
is unreliable, as it may miss small secreting APAs, and 
misdiagnose larger non-functional adrenal tumours (‘in-
cidentalomas’) as APA, leading to unnecessary surgery. 
The most sensitive technique for the localization of an 
isolated adenoma is selective adrenal vein blood sam-
pling with measurement of the aldosterone/cortisol ra-
tio, although this is a technically demanding technique.
The investigation of Cushing syndrome is discussed 
in Chapter 18.
BOX 38.4	
Drugs known to potentially 
interfere with aldosterone:renin 
ratio
Drugs potentially causing false positive 
aldosterone:renin ratio
•	 β-Adrenergic receptor blockers
•	 Methyldopa
•	 Clonidine
•	 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
•	 Renin inhibitors (if plasma renin activity measured)
•	 Oestrogen-containing drugs (if direct active renin 
measured)
Drugs potentially causing false negative aldosterone 
renin ratio
•	 Diuretics (all classes)
•	 Dihydropyridine Ca-channel antagonists
•	 Angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) inhibitors
•	 AII receptor blockers (ARBs)
•	 Renin inhibitors (if direct active renin measured)
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
763
Phaeochromocytoma
Phaeochromocytoma and functional paraganglioma 
(PGL) are catecholamine-secreting tumours of the adre-
nal medulla and extra-adrenal sympathetic nervous tissue 
(e.g. sympathetic ganglia), respectively. Because of their 
similarity in presentation and management principles, 
the term phaeochromocytoma is often used to referred to 
both, and this convention is also used here. Approximately 
10% of phaeochromocytomas are extra-adrenal.
A patient identified with phaeochromocytoma is usu-
ally symptomatic. The classical triad of paroxysmal head-
ache, sweating and palpitations is due to excess tumoral 
secretion of noradrenaline, adrenalin, and dopamine, 
and is said to have high predictive value. Pallor, lethargy, 
tremor, nausea, flushing and orthostatic hypotension can 
also occur. Episodes last from minutes up to an hour and 
are self-limiting. Symptoms are characteristically made 
worse by β-blockade because their use permits unop-
posed α-adrenergic stimulation.
Prevalence in the general population is uncertain, but 
it accounts for fewer than 0.2% of patients with hyperten-
sion. Its importance lies in its being malignant in about 
10% of patients (more frequently in the context of mul-
tiple endocrine neoplasia, MEN, type 2) and being po-
tentially curable. Malignant tumours biochemically and 
histologically resemble benign tumours, and can only be 
diagnosed for certain by the presence of local or distant 
spread which may occur many years after the primary tu-
mour is resected.
Approximately 90% of phaeochromocytomas are spo-
radic: these are usually single adenomas. Approximately 
10% are inherited: these are often bilateral and mul-
tiple. Inherited phaeochromocytomas may be isolated 
(inherited as an autosomal dominant trait) or be a com-
ponent of multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN 2A and 
2B, in which they have a combined prevalence of 40%). 
They also occur as the sole manifestation of MEN 2A 
in approximately 25% of heterozygotes for this condi-
tion. (See Chapter  41 for further details of inherited 
phaeochromocytomas.)
Patients with phaeochromocytomas may come to med-
ical attention because of their hypertension (paroxysmal 
in about one-third of patients, but more often sustained 
though variable) or because of the clinical features of 
increased secretion of catecholamines.
The diagnosis should be suspected in individuals with 
one or more of the following:
•	 paroxysmal self-limiting episodes of typical adren-
ergic symptoms (see above)
•	 resistant or labile hypertension (although 5–15% 
are normotensive at diagnosis)
•	 familial syndrome predisposing to catecholamine-
secreting tumours (e.g. MEN2)
•	 family history of phaeochromocytoma
•	 incidentally discovered adrenal mass (25% of 
diagnoses)
•	 onset of hypertension at a young age (e.g. <20 years)
•	 hypertension with new onset or atypical diabetes 
mellitus
•	 hypertensive response during anesthesia, surgery or 
angiography
•	 idiopathic dilated cardiomyopathy
•	 history of gastric stromal tumour or pulmonary 
chondromas (Carney triad).
Biochemical investigation
Diagnosis of phaemochromocytoma involves first, dem-
onstrating excessive secretion of catecholamines, followed 
by radiological localization of the causative tumour(s). 
Consideration of the diagnosis and a low threshold for 
investigation are key initial factors in successful diagnosis. 
Because the symptoms are so non-specific, diagnosis is 
rarely confirmed biochemically in patients with sugges-
tive symptoms. The investigation strategy in a particular 
patient will be dictated by the availability of biochemical 
tests in any centre. However, as it is so important not to 
miss the diagnosis, testing with a high diagnostic sensitiv-
ity is critical, particularly when screening asymptomatic 
patients with an inherited risk of phaeochromocytoma.
Traditional measurement of urinary catecholamines 
is gradually being superseded by HPLC measurement 
of fractionated metanephrines (metabolites of catechol-
amines), either in a 24 h urine collection or in plasma, 
both of which offer better diagnostic sensitivity and spec-
ificity (Table 38.5). The improved sensitivity is a result of 
continuous production of metanephrines by the tumour, 
which contains a high concentration of catechol-­O-­
methyltransferase. Even when the tumour release of cate-
cholamines by the tumour is sporadic, this enzyme ensures 
continued metabolism of catecholamines to metaneph-
rines. The sensitivity of metanephrine measurement to 
detect phaeochromocytoma is 99% for plasma and 97% 
for urine, which compare ­favourably with 86% for uri-
nary catecholamines, among symptomatic patients, those 
with a previous phaeochromocytoma or a family history, 
and those with an incidental adrenal mass. The diagnos-
tic specificities for plasma and urinary metanephrines are 
89% and 93%, respectively, compared with 88% for uri-
nary catecholamines. False positive results are common 
owing to the presence of other medical conditions (such 
as obstructive sleep apnoea) and medications (Table 38.6) 
that can cause ­elevation of metanephrines. The relative 
infrequency of phaeochromocytoma in those tested also 
contributes to the high rate of false positives. In addition, 
TABLE 38.5  Sensitivities and specificities of 
biochemical tests for phaeochromocytoma in 
214 patients
 
Sensitivity (%)
Specificity (%)
P free metadrenalines
99
89
U fractionated 
metadrenalines 
(HPLC)
97
64
P catecholamines
81
81
U catecholamines
85
86
U total metadrenalines 
(spectrophotometry)
74
93
U vanillylmandelic  
acid (VMA)
62
93
Data from Lenders et al. JAMA 2002; 287:1427–1434. P, plasma;  
U, urine.
764	
Clinical biochemistry
physical and psychological stress (e.g. surgery, severe pain 
or anxiety) can potentially increase catecholamine secre-
tion, leading to false positive results.
Concentrations of metanephrines that are over four 
times normal are associated with a very high prob-
ability of phaeochromocytoma; however, intermediate 
raised levels will require further biochemical investiga-
tion, which may include repeat testing after withdrawal 
of implicated medication. By contrast with the, now in-
frequently used, measurement of urine vanillylmandelic 
acid, dietary restrictions are not needed when performing 
these investigations.
Localization
The purpose of localization is to guide surgical inter-
vention after biochemical confirmation, as well as to 
look for possible metastatic disease. Direct anatomical 
imaging methods by computed (CT) tomography or 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) should be used as 
first-line to locate the primary tumours and is particu-
larly helpful in the relatively large, sporadic, symptom-
atic tumours. Both techniques have high sensitivity but 
lower specificity, due to the high prevalence of the be-
nign adrenal cortical adenoma (‘adrenal incidentaloma’). 
Meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy is par-
ticularly helpful for detecting smaller, presymptomatic 
tumours, extra-adrenal tumours, including metastases 
and recurrent tumours. However, false positive results 
may occur in patients with carcinoid tumours and, be-
cause the isotopes are excreted in the urine, false neg-
atives can occur with tumours in the bladder or head 
of the pancreas (which is closely related to the right 
kidney). Overall, MIBG scanning has higher specific-
ity than anatomical imaging. Newer functional imag-
ing techniques include 
18 F-fluorodopamine positron 
emission tomography (PET) and 
111In-octreotide sin-
gle photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) 
scanning.
Management
It is beyond the scope of this book to discuss the man-
agement of phaeochromocytoma in any detail. Even fol-
lowing apparently successful surgical resection, patients 
should be followed-up long term, both clinically (blood 
pressure measurements) and biochemically. Hypertension 
may persist and tumours may recur.
Malignant hypertension
Malignant hypertension is defined as markedly elevated 
blood pressure (diastolic BP often >140 mmHg) with 
retinal haemorrhages, exudates or papilloedema with or 
without evidence of target organ damage, typically acute 
and progressive kidney injury with proteinuria and hae-
maturia (‘malignant nephrosclerosis’). Its management is 
a medical emergency and should take precedence over in-
vestigations to determine whether there is an underlying 
cause. Neurological signs in malignant hypertension may 
be due to intracerebral or subarachnoid haemorrhage 
or lacunar infarct, or to hypertensive encephalopathy. 
The latter is associated with insidious onset and non-
lateralizing symptoms, such as headache, vomiting, rest-
lessness, confusion. It may be confirmed radiologically 
on the basis of MRI, which shows oedema of the white 
matter in the occipito-parietal regions, termed ‘revers-
ible posterior leucoencephalopathy’. (The distinction 
is important as hypertensive encephalopathy mandates 
aggressive reduction of blood pressure, not usually indi-
cated for haemorrhage or infarct.)
Hypertension in pregnancy
Hypertension developing in pregnancy constitutes a sig-
nificant risk to the mother and the fetus. Pre-eclampsia is 
the development of new hypertension and proteinuria in 
the second half of pregnancy. It is a multisystem disorder 
and if untreated, the condition can progress to severe hy-
pertension, acute kidney injury and seizures (eclampsia) 
and with high fetal and maternal morbidity and mortal-
ity. An increase in plasma urate concentration can be a 
sensitive indicator of deteriorating renal function in this 
condition. Low platelet count, microangiopathic hae-
molysis seen on blood film examination, rising creatinine 
and liver transaminases appear to be particularly predic-
tive of adverse outcome. Pre-eclampsia may sometimes 
be a feature of the haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and 
low platelet (HELLP) syndrome, which is discussed in 
Chapter 22.
Management of hypertension
Except in malignant hypertension, or in secondary causes 
of hypertension for which there are specific treatments, 
management should always begin with efforts to bring 
about appropriate lifestyle changes, for example attain-
ment of ideal body weight, reduction in any excessive 
TABLE 38.6  Some drug interferents with 
measurement of catecholamines and 
metadrenalines
Interferent
Effect
Tricyclic 
antidepressants
↑ catecholamines and 
metadrenalines in U and P
Phenoxybenzamine
↑ catecholamines and 
metadrenalines in U and P
Monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors
↑ metadrenalines in U and P
Buspirone
↑ metadrenalines in U
Calcium-channel 
blockers
↑ catecholamines in U and P
Nicotine
↑ catecholamines in U and P
Caffeine
↑ catecholamines in U and P
Analytical interference with HPLC 
assays
Methyldopa
Analytical interference with HPLC 
assays
Labetalol
Analytical interference with HPLC 
assays
Levodopa
Analytical interference with HPLC 
assays
↑ catecholamines and 
metadrenalines in U and P?
U, urine; P, plasma.
	
38  Clinical biochemistry of the cardiovascular system	
765
alcohol intake, reduction in dietary salt intake and atten-
tion to other cardiovascular risk factors.
The classes of drugs available include diuretics, cal-
cium channel antagonists, α- and β-blockers, ACE inhibi-
tors and angiotensin receptor antagonists, and centrally 
acting agents. Combinations of drugs are often required 
to achieve adequate control of blood pressure; if three or 
more are required in a young (<40 years) patient with 
normal renal function, a secondary cause of hyperten-
sion should be considered. Compliance with treatment 
can pose a considerable challenge, particularly because 
hypertension is generally asymptomatic but also because 
drug treatment may cause significant adverse effects.
CONCLUSION
Biochemical investigations play a key role in the manage-
ment of several distinct areas of cardiovascular disease.
Plasma concentrations of markers of myocyte necro-
sis form the basis of evidence-based criteria that influ-
ence decisions in the management of acute coronary 
syndrome. Increase in cardiac troponin concentrations is 
embedded in the universal definition of myocardial in-
farction, and new cardiac biomarkers, as well as panels 
of biomarkers with complementary timeframes, are cur-
rently being developed and evaluated.
The diagnostic and prognostic value of natriuretic 
peptides in heart failure is reflected in their inclusion 
as recommended first-line investigations, although they 
have limitations including lack of specificity.
Measurement of plasma lipids is well-established as a 
key component of the estimation of cardiovascular risk, and 
work is currently underway to examine the potential role of 
inflammatory markers in further stratifying this risk.
The biochemistry laboratory is involved in investiga-
tion of end-organ damage in hypertension, monitoring 
for side-effects of antihypertensive agents, and in the 
diagnosis of causes of secondary hypertension. A low 
threshold for investigation is necessary to avoid missing 
disorders such as phaeochromocytoma and primary aldo-
steronism, which are probably underdiagnosed.
Cardiovascular disorders are associated with high 
morbidity and mortality. They contribute significantly 
to the workload of modern routine clinical biochemistry 
laboratories in developed countries, and are likely to con-
tinue to do so for the foreseeable future.
Further reading
Atherogenesis
Goldstein JL, Ho YK, Basu SK et  al. Binding site on macrophages 
that mediates uptake and degradation of acetylated low density 
lipoprotein, producing massive cholesterol deposition. Proc Nat 
Acad USA 1979;76:333–7.
Key paper providing the first comprehensive description of the scavenger 
receptor.
Wong BW, Meredith A, Lin D et al. The biological role of inflammation 
in atherosclerosis. Can J Cardiol 2012;28:631–41. 
A review of the current understanding of atherogenesis with a particular 
focus on the role of inflammation.
Myocardial injury
Gaze DC, Collinson PO. Multiple molecular forms of circulating 
cardiac troponin: analytical and clinical significance. Ann Clin 
Biochem 2008;45:349–55. 
An interesting description of the biochemical structure of troponin 
molecules, including discussion of the significance of post-translational 
modifications.
Kelley WE, Januzzi JL, Christenson RH. Increases of cardiac troponin 
in conditions other than acute coronary syndrome and heart failure. 
Clin Chem 2009;55:2098–112. 
A well-written and wide-ranging review of reports of non-cardiac 
troponin elevations.
McCann CJ, Glover BM, Menown IB et al. Novel biomarkers in early 
diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction compared with cardiac 
troponin. Eur Heart J 2008;29:2843–50. 
An indication of what may succeed troponins as cardiac biomarkers of the 
future, with particular emphasis on H-FABP.
Thygesen K, Alpert JS, Jaffe AS et  al. Joint European Society of 
Cardiology/American College of Cardiology Foundation/American 
Heart Association/World Heart Federation Task Force for the 
Universal Definition of Myocardial Infarction. Third universal 
definition of myocardial infarction. Eur Heart J 2012;33:2551–67. 
Updated version of the 2007 universal guideline, which embeds laboratory 
measurement of troponin as the basis of diagnosis of MI. Claimed with some 
justification to be a ‘global document’.
Heart failure
van Kimmenade RR, Januzzi Jr. JL. Emerging biomarkers in heart 
failure. Clin Chem 2012;58:127–38. 
A good review of established and emerging biomarkers in heart failure.
Cardiovascular risk factors and prevention
Fifth Joint Task Force of the European Society of Cardiology, 
European Association of Echocardiography, European Association 
of Percutaneous Cardiovascular Interventions et  al. European 
Guidelines on cardiovascular disease prevention in clinical practice 
(version 2012): the Fifth Joint Task Force of the European Society 
of Cardiology and Other Societies on Cardiovascular Disease 
Prevention in Clinical Practice (constituted by representatives of 
nine societies and by invited experts). European Journal of Preventive 
Cardiology 2012;19:585–667.
Hypertension
Peaston RT, Ball S. Biochemical detection of phaeochromocytoma: 
why are we continuing to ignore the evidence? Ann Clin Biochem 
2008;45:6–10. 
A thought-provoking paper supporting a low threshold for screening with 
metadrenalines
Stowasser M, Taylor PJ, Pimenta E et al. Laboratory investigation of 
primary aldosteronism. Clin Biochem Rev 2010;31:39–56. 
A comprehensive account of how, who and when to screen for this group of 
disorders, with good discussion of potential pitfalls.
APPENDIX 1: PROTOCOL FOR  
INVESTIGATION OF ALDOSTERONISM: 
SCREENING AND CONFIRMATORY TESTS
Patient preparation
Ideally, all drugs that have an effect on the renin–aldosterone 
system should be discontinued for two weeks before samples 
are collected. Aldosterone antagonists (e.g. spironolactone) 
and oestrogens must be discontinued for at least six weeks. 
Where antihypertensive drugs cannot safely be withheld, 
verapamil (slow-release), hydralazine, doxazosin or prazo-
sin can be used as these have minimal effect on the ­renin– 
aldosterone system. If essential to continue other drugs to 
control blood pressure, as a minimum, β-blockers and ACE 
inhibitors should be stopped for two weeks and calcium chan-
nel blockers withheld on the  day of the test until after its 
completion. The potential effects of interfering drugs must 
be taken into account in the interpretation of the renin and al-
dosterone results if they have to be continued (see Box 38.4).
766	
Clinical biochemistry
The patient must be encouraged to take a liberal 
amount of dietary sodium (typically 100–150 mmol/day). 
Administer potassium salts orally, or if necessary intra-
venously, to restore plasma potassium concentration to 
within the reference range or, if this is not attainable, to 
the maximum concentration possible. Discontinue this 
supplementation 24 h before blood samples are taken. 
The patient must be well hydrated at the time of the test.
Screening procedure
Collect blood mid-morning, after the patient has been up 
(sitting, standing or walking) for at least two hours and 
then seated for 5–15 min.
Draw blood into a tube containing anticoagulant (type 
required is assay dependent). The sample should be taken 
rapidly to the laboratory, but not on ice as cooling of the 
sample promotes conversion of inactive renin precursor 
to active renin. Care must be taken to avoid haemoly-
sis, which will result in an artefactual increase in plasma 
potassium concentration.
Measure plasma aldosterone, renin and electrolytes.
Interpretation of results of screening test
A high aldosterone:renin ratio indicates probable primary 
aldosteronism (PA). The particular decision limits used are 
method dependent and therefore vary from laboratory to 
laboratory, although if the ratio of aldosterone (in pmol/L) 
to PRA (in pmol/mL/h) is > 2000, the patient almost cer-
tainly has PA. Patients with a positive screening test should 
proceed to a confirmatory test before further investiga-
tions are undertaken to determine the cause and location 
of the disease. If either aldosterone or renin results are ab-
normal but the ratio is not clearly diagnostic, the screening 
test should be repeated after a further period off-treatment 
from all potentially interfering drugs, if some had initially 
been continued. Other causes of abnormal aldosterone or 
renin results should be reviewed (see Table 38.4).
CONFIRMATORY TESTS
A number of different confirmatory tests have been de-
scribed, and there is no definitive evidence as to which 
has the best diagnostic performance. Of the two tests 
most commonly used in the UK, the saline suppression 
test is more convenient and safer to perform than the 
fludrocortisone suppression test.
Saline suppression test
The test is only indicated when the screening test dem-
onstrates a high aldosterone:renin ratio. The same patient 
preparation requirements as for the screening test apply. The 
saline suppression test is contraindicated in patients with 
severe uncontrolled hypertension, chronic kidney disease, 
heart failure, cardiac arrhythmia or severe hypokalemia.
Procedure
1.	 Start test between 08.00 and 09.30 h.
2.	 Place indwelling catheter in antecubital fossa for infu-
sion of 0.9% saline.
3.	 Place indwelling catheter in opposite arm for blood 
sampling.
4.	 Position patient in recumbent position for 1 h prior to 
commencing the infusion, and throughout test. Blood 
pressure and heart rate must be monitored throughout 
the test.
5.	 Draw blood into a tube containing anticoagulant (type 
required is assay dependent), for aldosterone, renin 
and electrolytes – do not place on ice but send to the 
laboratory immediately.
6.	 Infuse 2 L of 0.9% saline over 4 h.
7.	 At completion of infusion, immediately (with 
­patient still recumbent) draw another blood sample 
for measurement of aldosterone and renin – do not 
place on ice but send to the laboratory immediately.
Interpretation
Plasma aldosterone concentration of   > 140 pmol/L at the 
end of the test confirms a diagnosis of PA.
Fludrocortisone suppression test
The test is only indicated when the screening test demon-
strates a high aldosterone:renin ratio. The same patient 
preparation requirements as for the screening test apply. 
The fludrocortisone suppression test is contraindicated 
in the elderly and those with severe hypertension owing 
to the risks associated with sodium retention. This test 
should be performed on an in-patient basis.
Procedure
1.	 Day 1 (mid-morning). Ensure that the patient is 
­upright for at least 30 min then draw blood into a 
tube containing anticoagulant (type required is assay 
dependent), for aldosterone, renin and ­electrolytes – 
do not place on ice but send to the laboratory 
immediately.
2.	 Administer fludrocortisone 0.1 mg 6-hourly for four 
days.
3.	 Administer oral slow-release sodium tablets 30 mmol 
8-hourly with meals for four days.
4.	 Administer slow-release potassium tablets in sufficient 
quantity to maintain plasma potassium concentration 
close to 4.0 mmol/L. Monitor plasma potassium con-
centration at least twice daily.
5.	 Day 4 (mid-morning). Ensure that the patient is up-
right for at least 30 min and repeat blood sample as 
on day 1.
Interpretation
Upright plasma aldosterone > 170 pmol/L on day 4 con-
firms PA, provided renin is fully suppressed.
Reference
Funder JW, Carey RM, Fardella C et al. Case Detection, Diagnosis, 
and Treatment of Patients with Primary Aldosteronism: An Endocrine 
Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 2008;93: 
3266–3281.
767
C H A P T E R  3 9
Therapeutic drug monitoring
Mike Hallworth
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  767
Pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics  767
Which drugs should be measured?  769
USE OF THERAPEUTIC DRUG MONITORING  771
Appropriate clinical question  771
Accurate patient information  772
Appropriate sample  772
Accurate analysis  774
Relevant clinical interpretation  774
Effective action taken  774
PROVISION OF A THERAPEUTIC DRUG 
­MONITORING SERVICE  775
Staff  775
Turnaround time  775
Point-of-care testing  775
Reporting  775
Units  775
Quality assurance  776
Continuing education  776
PHARMACODYNAMIC MONITORING, BIOMARKERS 
AND PHARMACOGENETICS  776
Integrating information  777
INDIVIDUAL DRUGS  777
Analgesic/anti-inflammatory drugs  777
Antiarrhythmics and cardiac  
glycosides  777
Anticonvulsants (antiepileptics)  778
Antidepressants and antipsychotic 
drugs  780
Antimicrobial drugs  781
Antineoplastic drugs  782
Bronchodilator drugs  783
Immunosuppressants  783
Opiate and opioid drugs  785
APPENDIX  786
INTRODUCTION
The aim of therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) is to 
aid the clinician in the choice of drug dosage in order 
to provide the optimum treatment for the patient and, 
in particular, to avoid iatrogenic toxicity. It can be based 
on pharmacogenetic, demographic and clinical informa-
tion alone (a priori TDM), but is normally supplemented 
with measurement of drug or metabolite concentrations 
in blood or markers of clinical effect (a posteriori TDM). 
Measurements of drug or metabolite concentrations are 
only useful where there is a known relationship between 
the plasma concentration and the clinical effect, no im-
mediate simple clinical or other indication of effective-
ness or toxicity and a defined concentration limit above 
which toxicity is likely. Therapeutic drug monitoring has 
an established place in enabling optimization of therapy 
in such cases.
Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics
Before discussing which drugs to analyse or how to 
carry out the analyses, it is necessary to review the basic 
elements of pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics. 
Essentially, pharmacokinetics may be defined as what 
the body does to drugs (the processes of absorption, 
distribution, metabolism and excretion), and pharmaco-
dynamics as what drugs do to the body (the interaction 
of pharmacologically active substances with target sites 
(receptors) and the biochemical and physiological con-
sequences of these interactions). The processes involved 
in drug handling are summarized in Figure 39.1, which 
also indicates the relationship between pharmacokinet-
ics and pharmacodynamics, and will now be discussed 
briefly. For a more mathematical treatment, the reader 
is referred to the pharmacokinetic texts listed in Further 
reading.
Adherence
The first requirement for a drug to exert a clinical ef-
fect is obviously for the patient to take it in accordance 
with the prescribed regimen. Patients are highly moti-
vated to comply with medication in the acute stages of 
a painful or debilitating illness, but as they recover and 
the purpose of medication becomes prophylactic, it is 
768	
Clinical biochemistry
easy for them to underestimate the importance of regular 
dosing. ‘Compliance’ is the traditional term used to de-
scribe whether the patient takes medication as prescribed, 
though ‘adherence’ has become the preferred term in 
recent years as being more consistent with the concept 
of a partnership between the patient and the clinician. 
‘Compliance’, however, remains in widespread use. In 
chronic disease states such as asthma, epilepsy or bipolar 
disorder, variable adherence is widespread. The fact that 
a patient is not taking a drug at all is readily detectable by 
measurement of drug concentrations, although variable 
adherence may be more difficult to identify by monitor-
ing plasma concentrations.
Absorption
Once a drug has been taken orally, it needs to be absorbed 
into the systemic circulation. This process is described by 
the pharmacokinetic parameter bioavailability, defined as 
the fraction of the absorbed dose that reaches the sys-
temic circulation. Bioavailability varies between individu-
als, between drugs and between different dosage forms of 
the same drug. In the case of intravenous administration, 
all of the drug goes directly into the systemic circulation 
and bioavailability is 100% by definition, but different 
oral formulations of the same drug may have different 
bioavailability depending, for example on the particular 
salt or packing material that has been used. Changing the 
formulation used may require dosage adjustment guided 
by TDM to ensure that an individual’s exposure to drug 
remains constant. Other routes of absorption such as 
intramuscular, subcutaneous or sublingual may exhibit 
incomplete bioavailability. The total amount of drug ab-
sorbed can be determined from the area under the plasma 
concentration/time curve (see Fig. 39.2).
Distribution
When a drug reaches the bloodstream, the process of dis-
tribution to other compartments of the body begins. The 
extent of distribution of a drug is governed by its rela-
tive solubility in fat and water, and by the binding capa-
bilities of the drug to plasma proteins and tissues. Drugs 
that are strongly bound to plasma proteins and exhibit 
low lipid solubility and tissue binding will be retained in 
the plasma and show minimal distribution into tissue flu-
ids. Conversely, high lipid solubility combined with low 
binding to plasma proteins will result in wide distribu-
tion throughout the body. The relevant pharmacokinetic 
parameter is the volume of distribution, which is defined 
as the theoretical volume of a compartment necessary to 
account for the total amount of drug in the body if it were 
present throughout the compartment at the same con-
centration found in the plasma. High volumes of distri-
bution thus represent extensive tissue binding.
After reaching the systemic circulation, many drugs 
exhibit a distribution phase during which the drug con-
centration in each compartment reaches equilibrium, 
represented by Line B in Figure 39.2. This may be rapid 
(~15 min for gentamicin) or prolonged (at least six hours 
for digoxin). There is generally little point in measuring 
the drug concentration during the distribution phase, 
especially if the site of action of the drug for clinical or 
toxic effects lies outside the plasma compartment and the 
plasma concentration in the distribution phase is not rep-
resentative of the concentration at the receptor.
Between-patient variations in volume of distribution 
caused by differences in physical size, the amount of adi-
pose tissue and the presence of disease (e.g. ascites) can 
significantly weaken the relationship between the dose 
of drug taken and the plasma concentration in individual 
patients and hence increase the need for concentration 
monitoring.
Elimination (metabolism and excretion)
When a drug has been completely distributed throughout 
its volume of distribution, the pharmacokinetics enter the 
elimination phase (line C in Fig. 39.2). In this phase, the 
drug concentration falls owing to metabolism of the drug 
(usually in the liver) and/or excretion of the drug (usu-
ally via the kidneys into the urine or via the liver into the 
Dose 
prescribed
Dose 
taken
Drug 
in blood
Active
site
Effect
Other tissues
Excreted/
inactivated drug
Adherence
(compliance)
Absorption
Metabolism/
elimination
Distribution
Pharmacokinetics
Pharmacodynamics
FIGURE 39.1  ■  Processes involved in drug handling.
Plasma drug concentration
B
A
X
C
1000
100
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
Time (hours)
12
14
16
18
1
0.1
FIGURE 39.2  ■  Concentration/time curve for a drug administered 
by any route other than intravenously. Line A represents the ab-
sorption phase; line B indicates the distribution half-life and line 
C the elimination half-life. At point X, absorption, distribution 
and metabolism are all in progress. The areas of the rectangles 
can be summed to estimate the total amount of drug absorbed, 
the ‘area under the curve’ (AUC) (hatched area).
	
39  Therapeutic drug monitoring	
769
bile). These processes are described by the pharmacoki-
netic parameter clearance, which is a measure of the ability 
of the organs of elimination to remove active drug. The 
clearance of a drug is defined as the theoretical volume of 
blood that can be completely cleared of drug in unit time 
(cf. creatinine clearance, see Chapter 7). Factors affect-
ing clearance and hence the rate of elimination include 
body weight, body surface area, renal function, hepatic 
function, cardiac output, plasma protein binding and the 
presence of other drugs which affect the enzymes of drug 
metabolism including alcohol and nicotine (tobacco use). 
Pharmacogenetic factors may also have a profound influ-
ence on clearance.
Rate of elimination is often expressed in terms of the 
elimination rate constant or the elimination half-life, which 
is the time taken for the amount of drug in the body to fall 
to half its original value and is generally easier to apply in 
clinical situations. Both the elimination rate constant and 
the elimination half life can be calculated from the clear-
ance and the volume of distribution (see Pharmacokinetic 
texts in Further reading).
With some drugs (e.g. phenytoin), the capacity of the 
clearance mechanism is limited, and once this is saturated 
there may be large increments in plasma concentrations 
with relatively small increases in dose. This phenomenon 
makes these drugs very difficult to use safely without ac-
cess to concentration monitoring.
Protein binding
Many endogenous constituents of plasma are carried on 
binding proteins in plasma (e.g. bilirubin, cortisol and 
other hormones), and drugs are also frequently bound 
to plasma proteins (usually albumin and α1-acid glyco-
protein). Acidic drugs (e.g. phenytoin) are, in the main, 
bound to albumin, whereas basic drugs bind to α1-acid 
glycoprotein and other globulins.
The proportion of drug bound to protein can vary 
from zero (e.g. lithium salts) to almost 100% (e.g. my-
cophenolic acid). The clinical effect of a drug and the 
processes of metabolism and excretion are related to the 
free concentration of a drug, with drug bound to protein 
effectively acting as an inert reservoir. Variations in the 
amount of binding protein present in plasma can thus 
change the total measured concentration of the drug in 
the blood without necessarily changing the free (active) 
concentration, and this is a further reason why measured 
plasma concentrations may not relate closely to clinical 
effect. Other drugs or endogenous substances that com-
pete for the same binding sites on protein will also affect 
the relationship between free and bound drug. For these 
reasons, it has been suggested that the free concentration 
of a drug rather than the total (free + protein-bound) con-
centration should be measured by a TDM service, at least 
for those drugs exhibiting significant protein binding, 
e.g. phenytoin. Despite the apparent logic of this idea, 
it has not been widely adopted because of methodologi-
cal difficulties and continuing controversy about whether 
the theoretical benefits are realized in clinical practice. 
It is nonetheless important to be aware of the effects of 
changes in protein binding when interpreting total drug 
concentrations in plasma, especially:
•	 when the free fraction of a drug may change within 
an individual over time, e.g. in pregnancy (with fall-
ing albumin concentration) or when other drugs 
bound at the same binding site are added or with-
drawn
•	 when there is a highly abnormal binding protein 
concentration in plasma; for example, in severe 
hypoalbuminaemia
•	 when a pathological state (e.g. uraemia) results in 
the displacement of drug from the binding sites.
The discussion above has outlined the pharmacoki-
netic factors that govern the relationship between dose 
and the drug concentration in the plasma or at the active 
site, and has indicated how these may vary between pa-
tients to produce poor correlation between the dose pre-
scribed and the effective drug concentration at the site 
of action. In general, once steady-state has been reached, 
plasma concentrations in the individual should exhibit 
a constant relationship to the concentration at the site 
of action governed by the distribution factors discussed 
above, but this may not be the case if blood supply to tar-
get tissues is impaired (e.g. for poorly vascularized tissues 
or a tumour that has outgrown its blood supply (cyto-
toxic drugs) or a site of infection that is not well perfused 
(antibiotics)).
Pharmacodynamic factors
Pharmacodynamics is the study of the relationship be-
tween the concentration of drug at the site of action and 
the biochemical and physiological effect. The response 
of the receptor may be affected by the presence of drugs 
competing for the same receptor, the functional state of 
the receptor or pathophysiological factors such as hypo-
kalaemia. Interindividual variability in pharmacodynam-
ics may be genetic or reflect the development of tolerance 
to the drug with continued exposure. High pharmacody-
namic variability severely limits the usefulness of mon-
itoring drug concentrations as they are likely to give a 
poor indication of the effectiveness of therapy.
Which drugs should be measured?
The above discussion provides a basis for determining 
which drugs are good candidates for therapeutic drug 
monitoring. As stated at the beginning of this chapter, 
the aim of TDM is the provision of useful information 
that may be used to modify treatment. For this reason, 
it is generally inappropriate to measure drug concentra-
tions where there is a good clinical indicator of drug 
effect. Examples of this are the measurement of blood 
pressure during antihypertensive therapy; glucose in 
patients treated with hypoglycaemic agents; clotting 
studies in patients treated with heparin or warfarin, and 
cholesterol in patients treated with cholesterol-lowering 
drugs. While plasma concentration data for such drugs 
are valuable during their development to define pharma-
cokinetic parameters and dosing regimens, TDM is not 
generally helpful in the routine monitoring of patients. 
It may have a limited role in detecting poor adherence 
or poor drug absorption in some cases. However, where 
there are no such clinical markers of effect or where 
770	
Clinical biochemistry
symptoms of toxicity may be confused with those of the 
disease being treated, concentration monitoring may 
have a vital role.
Therapeutic drug monitoring is useful only for drugs 
that have a poor correlation between dose and clini-
cal effect (high pharmacokinetic variability). Clearly, if 
dose alone is a good predictor of pharmacological effect, 
then measuring the plasma concentration has little to 
contribute.
However, clinically useful TDM does require that 
there is a good relationship between plasma concentra-
tion and clinical effect. If drug concentration measure-
ments are to be useful in modifying treatment, then they 
must relate closely to the effect of the drug or its toxic-
ity (or both). This allows definition of an effective thera-
peutic ‘window’ – the concentration range between the 
minimal effective concentration and the concentration at 
which toxic effects begin to emerge – and allows titration 
of the dose to achieve concentrations within that window. 
Demonstration of a clear concentration–effect relation-
ship requires low between-individual pharmacodynamic 
variability (see above), the absence of active metabolites 
that contribute to the biological effect but are not mea-
sured in the assay system and (usually) a reversible mode 
of action at the receptor site. Reversible interaction with 
the receptor is required for the intensity and duration of 
the response to the drug to be temporally correlated with 
the drug concentration at the receptor.
Many drugs have active metabolites, and some drugs 
are actually given as pro-drugs, in which the parent com-
pound has zero or minimal activity and pharmacological 
activity resides in a product of metabolic transformation. 
For example, mycophenolate mofetil is metabolized to 
the active immunosuppressant mycophenolate. It will be 
clear that useful information cannot be obtained from 
drug concentration measurements if a substantial pro-
portion of the drug’s effect is provided by a metabolite 
that is not measured and whose concentration relation-
ship to the parent compound is undefined. In some cases 
(e.g. amitriptyline/nortriptyline), both drug and metabo-
lite concentrations can be measured and the concentra-
tions added to give a combined indication of effect, but 
this assumes that drug and metabolite are equally active. 
In other cases (e.g. carbamazepine and carbamazepine 
10,11-epoxide), the active metabolite is analysed and 
reported separately.
Therapeutic drug monitoring is most valuable for 
drugs which have a narrow therapeutic window. The 
therapeutic index (therapeutic ratio, toxic-therapeutic 
ratio) for a drug indicates the margin between the thera-
peutic dose and the toxic dose – the larger, the better. 
For most patients (except those who are hypersensitive), 
penicillin has a very high therapeutic ratio and it is safe to 
use in much higher doses than those required to treat the 
patient, with no requirement to check the concentration 
attained. However, for other drugs (e.g. immunosuppres-
sives, anticoagulants, aminoglycoside antibiotics and car-
diac glycosides), the margin between desirable and toxic 
doses is very small, and some form of monitoring is es-
sential to achieve maximal efficacy with minimal toxicity.
The criteria for TDM to be clinically useful are sum-
marized in Box 39.1.
The list of drugs for which TDM is of proven value 
is relatively small (Box  39.2). Phenytoin and lithium 
are perhaps the best and earliest examples of drugs that 
meet all the above criteria and for which TDM is essen-
tial. The aminoglycoside antibiotics, chiefly gentamicin 
and tobramycin, also qualify on all counts. A number of 
other drugs that are frequently monitored fail to meet 
one or more of the criteria completely, and the effective-
ness of TDM as an aid to management is therefore re-
duced. The evidence for the utility of monitoring many 
drugs is based more on practical experience than well-
designed studies. However, for newer agents such as the 
BOX 39.2	
Drugs for which there is a clear 
indication for measurement
•	 Aminoglycoside antibiotics (e.g. gentamicin, tobramycin)
•	 Carbamazepine
•	 Ciclosporin
•	 Digoxin
•	 Lamotrigine
•	 Lithium
•	 Methotrexate
•	 Phenytoin
•	 Sirolimus
•	 Tacrolimus
•	 Theophylline
Drugs whose measurement may be useful in some 
circumstances but not generally practised
•	 Amiodarone
•	 Antiretroviral drugs (protease inhibitors, NNRTIs)
•	 β-Blockers
•	 Caffeine
•	 Chloramphenicol
•	 Clozapine
•	 Disopyramide
•	 Flecainide
•	 Flucytosine
•	 Methadone
•	 Morphine
•	 Mycophenolic acid
•	 Olanzapine
•	 Phenobarbital
•	 Procainamide (and N-acetylprocainamide)
•	 Teicoplanin
•	 Tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline/nortriptyline, 
imipramine/desipramine, dothiepin)
•	 Valproate
•	 Vancomycin
BOX 39.1	
Criteria for clinically useful TDM
•	 Absence of good clinical markers of drug effect
•	 Poor correlation between dose and clinical effect (high 
pharmacokinetic variability)
•	 Good correlation between plasma drug concentration 
and clinical effect (low pharmacodynamic variability, no 
active metabolites)
•	 Narrow concentration interval between therapeutic and 
toxic effects
	
39  Therapeutic drug monitoring	
771
immunosuppressants and antiretroviral drugs, there is 
good evidence supporting the benefits of TDM in im-
proving clinical outcomes. (Further information is given 
in Individual Drugs, below.)
USE OF THERAPEUTIC DRUG MONITORING
Once the narrow range of drugs for which TDM can pro-
vide useful information has been defined, it should not 
be assumed that TDM is necessary for every patient on 
these drugs at every visit. For TDM to be used for maxi-
mum patient benefit and optimal cost-effectiveness, six 
important criteria must be satisfied each time a sample is 
taken. These are summarized in Box 39.3 and will now be 
discussed briefly.
Appropriate clinical question
The first essential for making effective use of any labora-
tory test is to be clear at the start what question is being 
asked. This is particularly true for TDM requests, and 
much time, money and effort is wasted on requests where 
the indication for analysis has not been clearly defined. 
If the question is uncertain, the answer is likely to be 
unhelpful.
The two main reasons for monitoring drugs in blood 
are to ensure effective therapy and to avoid toxicity. 
Effective therapy requires that sufficient drug reaches 
the drug receptor to produce the desired response (which 
may be delayed in onset). Where a drug is prescribed and 
the desired effect is not achieved, this may or may not be 
due to insufficient dosage, since there may be other rea-
sons (individual idiosyncrasy, drug interactions etc.) for 
the lack of effect. Those at the extremes of age – neonates 
and the very elderly – have metabolic processes that ren-
der them differently susceptible even to weight-adjusted 
doses. For example, in neonates, the metabolism of theo­
phylline is qualitatively as well as quantitatively different 
from that in older children. In the very elderly, there may 
be considerable alterations in absorption and also renal 
clearance. Drug interactions may also produce a reduced 
clinical effect for a given dose.
In patients on long-term therapy, once a steady-state 
concentration that produces a satisfactory clinical ef-
fect has been obtained, this concentration can be docu-
mented as an effective baseline for the individual patient. 
If circumstances subsequently change, then changes in 
response can be related back to both the dose and the 
plasma concentration of the drug. This is particularly im-
portant for psychotropic drugs. ‘Baseline’ concentrations 
may however change over time as disease processes de-
velop, or gradually with increasing age or changes in drug 
metabolism.
The avoidance of iatrogenic toxicity is probably the 
most pressing case for the practice of TDM. The aim is 
to ensure that drug (or metabolite) concentrations are not 
so high as to produce symptoms/signs of toxicity. Since a 
narrow therapeutic index is a prerequisite for drugs suit-
able for TDM, it is inevitable that toxicity will occur in a 
small proportion of patients, even with all due care being 
exercised. Toxicity can never be diagnosed solely from 
the plasma drug concentration, and it must always be 
considered in conjunction with the clinical circumstances 
since some patients will show toxicity when their con-
centrations are within the generally accepted therapeutic 
range and others will tolerate concentrations outside the 
range with few or no ill-effects. The advantage of regular 
monitoring is that such circumstances may be recorded 
and the range for that individual adjusted accordingly.
There are two main factors that may lead to inappro-
priately high plasma drug concentrations. The first is an 
inappropriate dosing regimen, either due to a single gross 
error or (more often) a gradual build-up of plasma con-
centration either because the dose is slightly too high for 
the individual or because of the development of hepatic 
or renal insufficiency.
The second factor leading to toxicity is pharmacoki-
netic drug interactions. Patients are often treated with 
more than one drug, which can interfere with each other’s 
actions in a number of ways, for example:
•	 displacement from protein binding sites
•	 competition for hepatic metabolism
•	 induction of hepatic metabolizing systems
•	 competition for renal excretory mechanisms.
Examples of the more commonly encountered drug 
interactions involving drugs measured for TDM pur-
poses are given in Table 39.1. There are, however, nu-
merous other examples and the analyst faced with an 
unusual response or an inappropriate plasma concentra-
tion should seek a full drug history to assist in determin-
ing the explanation. This history should include specific 
enquiry about the use of alternative therapies, since 
many herbal and other non-pharmaceutical remedies 
(which may not be immediately mentioned by patients) 
may have significant effects on drug concentrations 
due to the induction of drug metabolizing enzymes. 
­St John’s wort (Hypericum perforatum), a perennial herb 
with bright yellow flowers, is one example. It has been 
shown to induce the hepatic drug-metabolizing enzymes 
CYP3A4 and CYP2B6, and hence reduce the steady-
state concentrations of many drugs.
Therapeutic drug monitoring is particularly useful in 
confirming toxicity when both under- and overdosage 
with the drug in question give rise to similar clinical fea-
tures, for example arrhythmias with digoxin, or fits with 
phenytoin, and where high drug concentrations give rise 
to delayed toxicity, for instance high aminoglycoside con-
centrations, which may give rise to irreversible ototoxic-
ity if prompt action is not taken.
Where a patient is known to be suffering from toxic-
ity and the plasma drug concentration is high, monitor-
ing is often required to follow the fall in concentration 
BOX 39.3	
Criteria for effective drug 
monitoring
•	 Appropriate clinical question
•	 Accurate patient information
•	 Appropriate sample
•	 Accurate analysis
•	 Relevant clinical interpretation
•	 Effective action taken
772	
Clinical biochemistry
following cessation of treatment. For example, in anti-
convulsant overdose, it is important for the clinician to 
know when drug concentration(s) are likely to reach the 
therapeutic range, since reinstatement of therapy will 
then be required to prevent seizures.
Other important reasons for therapeutic drug moni-
toring include guiding dosage adjustment in clinical situa-
tions in which the pharmacokinetics are changing rapidly 
(e.g. neonates, children or patients in whom hepatic or 
renal function is changing) and defining pharmacokinetic 
parameters and concentration–effect relationships for 
new drugs.
The use of TDM to assess adherence (compliance) is 
to some extent controversial. Clearly, assessment of ad-
herence could provide justification for monitoring every 
drug in the pharmacopoeia, at enormous cost and for 
little clinical benefit. Further, application of TDM in this 
situation is not simple. A patient with a very low or un-
detectable drug concentration is usually assumed to be 
non-compliant, but the situation is much less clear when 
a concentration that is only slightly low (based on popu-
lation data) is found. Is the patient non-compliant or are 
other factors (such as poor absorption, induced metabo-
lism or altered protein binding) leading to the low con-
centration? Much harm may be done in these situations 
by assumptions of poor adherence to therapy. Adherence 
can be assessed in other ways, by tablet-counting, super-
vised medication in hospital or the use of carefully posed 
questions that are non-judgemental, for example ‘How 
often do you forget to take your tablets?’ Such approaches 
are likely to be more effective than TDM in detecting 
and avoiding poor adherence to therapy, though TDM 
may have a role in patients with poor symptom control, 
who deny poor adherence despite careful questioning and 
interventional reinforcement.
Accurate patient information
Proper interpretation of TDM data depends on having 
some basic information about the patients and their re-
cent drug history. The importance of this requirement has 
led many laboratories to design specific request forms for 
TDM. These are now being superseded by computerized 
request ordering systems that allow collection of essential 
items of information at the time of making the request, 
although it remains important to keep the requesting in-
terface user-friendly and not too complex. Intelligent sys-
tem design is necessary. Basic information requirements 
for TDM requests are summarized in Table 39.2.
Appropriate sample
The vast majority of TDM applications require a blood 
sample. In general, serum or plasma can be used, al-
though for a few drugs that are concentrated within red 
cells, for example, ciclosporin, whole blood is preferable 
as concentrations are higher and partition effects are 
avoided. The literature is poor on the differentiation be-
tween serum and plasma samples and careful selection of 
sample tubes is necessary to avoid interferences by anti-
coagulants, plasticizers, separation gels etc, either in the 
assay system or by absorption of sample drug onto the 
gel or the tube, reducing the amount available for analy-
sis. If in doubt, serum collected into a plain glass tube 
with no additives is usually safest. Haemolysis should be 
avoided, as it may cause in vivo interference if the drug 
is concentrated in erythrocytes, or in vitro interference 
in immunoassay systems. For drugs that are minimally 
protein bound, there need be no restrictions on the use 
TABLE 39.2  Information requirements for  
TDM requests
Essential
Desirable
Patient
Name
Weight
 
Age
Renal/hepatic 
function
 
Gender
 
 
Hospital/health system ID 
number
 
 
Pathology/clinical details
 
Problem
Reason for request
 
 
(e.g. poor response, ?toxic)
 
Therapy
Drug of interest 
dose 
formulation and route of 
administration 
duration of therapy 
date/time last given
Other drugs – 
list all
TABLE 39.1  Common drug interactions 
­encountered in therapeutic drug monitoring
Effector
Drug(s) affected (examples)
Interactions due to induction of metabolism
Phenytoin
Phenytoin, phenobarbital, digoxin
Phenobarbital
Phenobarbital, phenytoin, 
prednisolone, warfarin, digoxin
Rifampicin
Cortisone, digoxin, methadone, 
quinidine, theophylline
St John’s wort
Ciclosporin, tacrolimus, 
digoxin, theophylline, 
antiretrovirals
Interactions due to inhibition of metabolism
Chloramphenicol
Phenytoin, tolbutamide
Cimetidine
Diazepam, phenytoin, 
theophylline, warfarin
Ethanol
Diazepam
Erythromycin
Theophylline
Isoniazid
Carbamazepine, phenytoin
Oral contraceptives
Theophylline
Quinidine
Digoxin
Valproate
Phenobarbital
Interactions due to effects on excretion
Cimetidine, ranitidine
Procainamide
Verapamil
Digoxin
Amiodarone
Digoxin
Spironolactone
Digoxin
Quinidine
Digoxin
Interactions due to displacement from protein binding
Valproate
Phenytoin
Salicylate
Warfarin, sulphonylureas, 
methotrexate
Interactions due to enhanced absorption
Erythromycin
Digoxin
	
39  Therapeutic drug monitoring	
773
of tourniquets; however, stasis should ideally be avoided 
for drugs which are highly bound to albumin, e.g. phe-
nytoin. Care should also be taken to avoid contamination 
with local anaesthetics, for example lidocaine, which are 
sometimes used before venepuncture. Where intravenous 
therapy is being given, care must be taken to avoid sam-
pling from the limb into which the drug is being infused.
Urine is of no value for quantitative TDM. Saliva may 
provide a useful alternative to avoid venepuncture (espe-
cially in children) or when an estimate of the concentra-
tion of free (non-protein-bound) drug is required. Saliva 
is effectively an in vivo ultrafiltrate and concentrations re-
flect plasma free drug concentrations quite well for drugs 
that are essentially unionized at physiological pH. Salivary 
monitoring is unsuitable for drugs that are actively se-
creted into saliva (e.g. lithium) and drugs that are strongly 
ionized at physiological pH (e.g. valproic acid, quinidine) 
as the relationship between salivary and plasma concen-
trations becomes unpredictable. Careful collection of the 
sample is required, and the mouth should be thoroughly 
rinsed with water prior to sampling. Sapid (taste related) 
or masticatory (chewing on an elastic band) stimulation of 
saliva flow is used to increase volume. The mucoproteins 
in saliva make the sample difficult to handle, and cen-
trifugation is usually necessary to remove cellular debris. 
These and other problems have meant that salivary analy-
sis has not been widely adopted for routine TDM.
It is normally necessary for the patient to be at steady-
state on the current dose of drug, i.e. when absorption 
and elimination are in balance and the plasma concentra-
tion is stable. This is true except when suspected toxicity 
is being investigated, when it is clearly inappropriate to 
delay sampling until steady-state has been reached. The 
time taken to attain the steady-state concentration is de-
termined by the plasma half-life of the drug, and the re-
lationship between the number of half-lives which have 
elapsed since the start of treatment and the progress to-
wards steady-state concentrations is shown in Table 39.3.
It is frequently stated that five half-lives must elapse 
before plateau concentrations are achieved, unless load-
ing doses are employed when they are achieved much 
more rapidly. As shown in Table 39.3, the plasma con-
centration after 3.3 half-lives is 90% of the predicted 
steady-state concentration, and this may be taken as the 
minimum time for sampling for routine purposes after 
starting a drug or changing the dose. For drugs with a 
long half-life (e.g. digoxin or phenobarbitone), two weeks 
or more may be required before steady-state is achieved, 
especially if the drug is renally excreted and renal func-
tion is poor.
In neonates, the rapidly changing clinical state, degree 
of hydration and dosage requirements make the concept 
of steady-state a theoretical ideal rather than an attain-
able goal and there is little value in delaying measure-
ments in the hope of attaining steady-state.
A further requirement for many drugs is for samples to 
be taken at the appropriate time following the last dose. 
The size of the fluctuations in plasma concentration be-
tween doses depends on the dosage interval and the half-
life of the drug. Frequent dosing avoids large peaks and 
transient toxic effects but is unpopular with patients, dif-
ficult to comply with and more likely to lead to medica-
tion errors. Less frequent dosing can give rise to large 
fluctuations in plasma concentration. To some extent, 
these opposing considerations can be reconciled with the 
use of sustained-release preparations.
There is no single optimum time for taking samples in 
relation to dose. The most reproducible for sampling is 
immediately (<30 min) before a dose (trough concentra-
tion), when the lowest concentrations in the cycle will be 
obtained. This is the optimum time if an indication of 
drug efficacy is required, and will show least between-
sample variation in patients on chronic therapy. The use 
of peak and trough concentrations for detecting toxicity 
of aminoglycoside antibiotics has become less relevant 
with the advent of once-daily dosing regimens, but sam-
pling at two hours post-dose for ciclosporin can give an 
excellent estimate of the probable area under the curve 
and has become a common and effective TDM tech-
nique, though sampling in the middle of the absorption/
distribution phase in this way does require very accurate 
standardization of sampling time in relation to the last 
dose. In the case of digoxin, a specimen should not be 
taken within 6 h of the dose, since the digoxin absorption 
and distribution peak may be extremely sharp and high 
(Fig. 39.3) and serum digoxin concentrations in this pe-
riod do not reflect tissue concentrations.
TABLE 39.3  Percentage of steady-state plasma 
concentration attained at various times after 
starting/changing therapy
Time (drug half-lives)
% steady-state
0.5
29
1.0
50
2.0
75
3.0
88
3.3
90
4.0
94
5.0
97
7.0
99
0.0
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time (hours)
14
16
18
20
22
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
3.5
4.0
4.5
Plasma drug concentration
5.0
FIGURE 39.3  ■ The concentration/time curve for a patient given 
digoxin orally. Note the sharp peak and relatively stable plateau 
concentration after 6 h.
774	
Clinical biochemistry
Further details on optimal sampling times for individ-
ual drugs are given in the relevant sections of this chapter. 
When computer programmes are used for pharmacoki-
netic parameter optimization and dosage prediction, it 
becomes extremely important that dosage and sampling 
times are accurately known, as large prediction errors can 
result from inaccurate data.
Accurate analysis
Establishing a relationship between plasma drug concen-
trations and effect requires accurate, precise and reliable 
analytical methods. The choice of methods is vast, en-
compassing immunoassays (isotopic and optical), chro-
matography (e.g. gas liquid chromatography (GLC) and 
high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC), in-
creasingly with mass spectrophotometric detectors) and a 
variety of novel techniques involving dry chemistry.
Selecting the most appropriate analytical methods is 
often challenging, and the choice depends on the avail-
ability of staff, expertise and equipment, the anticipated 
batch sizes, the range of drugs to be measured and the 
turnaround time required, There is no ‘best fit’ for every 
situation. Some guidelines are given in Table 39.4. Assays 
used in routine TDM must be specific, showing no in-
terferences from endogenous compounds, drug metabo-
lites or exogenous sources, and must also work with small 
sample sizes (certainly <1 mL plasma/serum and ideally 
10–100 μL).
Most analytical methods determine the total concen-
tration of drug in plasma or serum. As discussed above, 
it is sometimes useful to obtain an estimate of the free 
(non-protein-bound) drug concentration. The main 
methods for separation of bound and free drug prior to 
quantitation by conventional assays are equilibrium dialy-
sis, ultrafiltration and centrifugation through a fine-mesh 
membrane. The latter two are non-equilibrium tech-
niques and are therefore much quicker than equilibrium 
dialysis, which generally requires an overnight incuba-
tion. It is often difficult to assess the reliability of differ-
ent procedures as no single method gives consistently 
accurate estimates of free drug concentration.
Relevant clinical interpretation
In the 40 years or so that TDM has been practised rou-
tinely, it has been shown that having drug concentration 
measurements available to clinicians does not in itself 
result in improved clinical care. Improved outcome de-
pends on application of the analytical result to a specific 
clinical situation with appropriate expertise.
In particular, it is important to understand that the 
widely quoted (and just as widely misused) ‘therapeutic 
ranges’ for drugs represent a guide to the approximate 
concentrations that produce a therapeutic response in the 
majority of patients, rather than a set of inflexible concen-
tration limits to which dosage regimens must be directed. 
‘Target ranges’ has been suggested as a better term, which 
at least implies that these are aims, rather than that all 
concentrations within the specified range are therapeutic 
(and all outside are not). Many patients need plasma drug 
concentrations above the upper limit of the target range 
for effective therapy, and such concentrations must not 
provoke knee-jerk dosage reduction. Specialist clinicians 
usually appreciate this fact, but non-specialists frequently 
do not, and laboratory staff or pharmacists have an essen-
tial educational role here. Conversely, plasma drug con-
centrations below the lower limit of the target range may 
produce a satisfactory response in some patients, and ar-
bitrary dose increases will merely increase the likelihood 
of toxicity without added benefit. In one of the earliest 
papers on TDM, Koch–Weser wrote: ‘Therapeutic deci-
sions should never be based solely on the drug concentra-
tion in the serum’. The cardinal principle, often repeated 
but still forgotten, is to treat the patient, not the drug 
concentration.
Effective action taken
As implied above, drug concentrations above the target 
range do not invariably require a reduction in dosage. If 
the patient is symptom-free, a careful search for signs of 
toxicity should be made. If there is no evidence of toxicity, 
the patient may be best served by doing nothing, although 
for some drugs (e.g. phenytoin) continued monitoring for 
the development of long-term undesirable effects is ad-
visable. Similarly, drug concentrations below the target 
range in a patient who is well and free from symptoms 
do not necessarily require an increased dose, although in 
some cases (e.g. digoxin), they may provide evidence that 
the drug is no longer effective, and that stopping it under 
medical supervision may be worth trying.
For most drugs, there is a relatively linear relationship 
between dose and plasma concentration at steady-state, 
the major exception to this being phenytoin (see later); 
thus doubling the dose should double the plasma concen-
tration. The difficulty, therefore, is in determining the 
initial dose to use, especially where a rapid effect, for ex-
ample the prevention of cardiac arrhythmias, is required. 
The aim then is to achieve a steady-state concentration 
rapidly, without waiting for five half-lives to elapse, par-
ticularly for drugs with long half-lives. For this reason a 
‘loading’ dose of several times the daily maintenance dose 
is given, effectively reaching steady-state over two half-
lives (Fig. 39.4). The calculation of the doses required for 
TABLE 39.4  Guidelines for choice of methods for 
therapeutic drug monitoring analyses
Purpose for which 
required
Most appropriate method(s)
On-site analyses in 
clinics
Point of care immunoassay 
devices
Urgent analyses
Optical immunoassays
Batch analyses, single 
drug
Optical immunoassays, 
HPLC, GC, HPLC/mass 
spectrometry (MS)
Batch analyses, multiple 
drugs
HPLC, GC (optical 
immunoassays become 
uneconomic)
Single analyses with 
metabolite patterns
HPLC/MS or LC/MS
For some drugs, no choice of method exists.
	
39  Therapeutic drug monitoring	
775
loading and maintenance of a steady-state concentration 
is relatively straightforward and the relevant equations 
are given in Appendix 39.1.
In practice, dosage prediction can be approached in two 
main ways. It can be estimated from average population 
parameter values using the equations in Appendix 39.1, or 
the measurement of one or more drug concentrations at 
appropriate times in the specific individual allows calcu-
lation of patient-specific parameters, which then allows 
further dosage optimization – TDM-assisted dosage opti-
mization. The details are beyond the scope of this chapter 
and specialist pharmacokinetic texts (see Further reading) 
should be consulted. Numerous nomograms and soft-
ware packages are available for dosage optimization based 
on TDM data and Bayesian principles. It is vital to ensure 
that the baseline data are accurate, for example ensuring 
that the time the drug was actually taken in relation to 
the sampling time is known (rather than when it was sup-
posed to be taken).
PROVISION OF A THERAPEUTIC DRUG  
MONITORING SERVICE
The basic essentials for an effective TDM service are the 
availability of appropriate analytical methods and quality 
assurance procedures, specialist expertise and the ability 
to produce results within a clinically relevant time.
Staff
A TDM service requires experienced analysts who un-
derstand the basis of the procedures involved and are 
competent to advise on the analytical sensitivity and 
specificity of the methods being used and to maintain 
exacting standards of accuracy, precision and document 
control. In addition, it is essential that the service has 
access to specialist clinical advice from someone who 
understands the principles of pharmacokinetics and 
­therapeutics – an appropriately trained laboratory sci-
entist, a pharmacist or a specialist clinician. The best 
service is generally obtained with a team approach in 
which pharmacists, clinical scientists, technical and 
medical staff all play a role. Difficult cases can then 
be discussed before any samples are taken and advice 
obtained on whether concentration monitoring is in-
dicated and on the appropriate timing of any samples 
required. Following analysis, results are scrutinized by 
members of the team and appropriate recommendations 
for action conveyed to the clinician.
However, this ideal degree of involvement is impracti-
cal in many hospital situations, and even more difficult 
for outpatient or primary care work. Provided the request 
form contains the necessary clinical information (see 
above), laboratory staff can check these details on receipt 
of the specimen and advise if the specimen or the reason 
for analysis is appropriate. Once the analysis is complete, 
all results (or just those which fall outside defined lim-
its) can be assessed by specialist staff and communicated 
to the requesting clinician with the appropriate degree 
of urgency and with recommendations for action where 
appropriate.
Turnaround time
The ideal turnaround for TDM analyses requires that re-
sults are returned to the clinician before the next dose of 
the drug is due, in order that adjustments can be made 
immediately. This is not feasible in cases of three or four 
times daily dosage regimens but, provided that a respon-
sive service is available, patients should not be exposed to 
inappropriate dosage regimens for more than 24 h after 
the specimen was taken.
Point-of-care testing
Point-of-care testing is appropriate in some clinical situa-
tions since the availability of a plasma drug concentration 
at the time of consultation allows the clinician to make 
immediate decisions on dosage adjustments based on 
objective data. The savings in patient time and improve-
ments in clinic throughput have been shown to outweigh 
the extra costs of on-site testing in a number of settings. 
Several methods are available for on-site TDM testing, 
but need to be carefully evaluated to ensure that their 
analytical performance is adequate in the setting in which 
they are used.
Reporting
The reporting of a plasma concentration alone is of lim-
ited value to the clinician who is not fully familiar with 
TDM. Reports that contain information on the reason 
for the request, the dosage and timing along with the re-
sult and appropriate interpretative comments are much 
more useful. All urgent results should be telephoned and 
the fact noted. The provision of cumulative reports im-
proves liaison between the laboratory and the clinician, 
and has been shown to improve patient care.
Units
There has been considerable debate about the appropri-
ate units (mass or molar) for reporting measurements of 
Plasma drug concentration
1000
100
10
1
0.1
0
8
16
24
32
Time (hours)
40
48
56
64
FIGURE 39.4  ■ The effect of a loading dose on the rate of achiev-
ing a steady-state concentration
776	
Clinical biochemistry
drug concentration. Most of the toxicological literature 
has been in mass units, but molar units have theoretical 
advantages in making it easier to equate drug and metab-
olite concentrations. Uniformity of reporting is impor-
tant for patient safety reasons, as confusion over units can 
result in dangerous misinterpretations. Within the UK, 
at least, there is now agreed consensus that SI mass units 
with the litre as the unit of volume should be used for all 
therapeutic drug assays, except for a specified few which 
have always been reported in molar units (methotrexate, 
lithium, thyroxine and iron).
Quality assurance
Measurements of plasma drug concentrations can only be 
used effectively to diagnose toxicity or under-dosage and 
to monitor treatment if the measurements are accurate 
and reproducible. The need for effective internal quality 
control and external quality assessment procedures for all 
methods used to produce results is therefore as great as in 
other areas of clinical biochemistry. Analytical laborato-
ries should be accredited to ISO 15189.
Continuing education
A good TDM service provides an environment for edu-
cation of trainee staff, not only from biochemistry but 
from clinical pharmacy and clinical pharmacology. The 
involvement of staff from other disciplines and their 
exposure to the analytical and interpretational aspects 
should be encouraged. Insistence on the provision of full 
clinical information and the feedback of interpretation on 
correctly documented cases can lead to considerable im-
provements in the effectiveness of the service.
PHARMACODYNAMIC MONITORING,  
BIOMARKERS AND PHARMACOGENETICS
Classic TDM uses drug concentration measurements in 
body fluids to guide optimization of therapy and mini-
mize adverse consequences. In recent years, other meth-
ods of guiding drug therapy have been introduced, and 
though they do not fit the strict definition of TDM they 
merit discussion as they are becoming increasingly rel-
evant to the provision of effective drug therapy.
Pharmacodynamic monitoring is the study of the biologi-
cal effect of a drug at its target site, and has been applied 
to areas of immunosuppressive therapy and cancer che-
motherapy. For example, the biological effect of the im-
munosuppressive calcineurin inhibitors ciclosporin A and 
tacrolimus can be assessed by direct measurement of cal-
cineurin phosphatase activity. The main disadvantage of 
pharmacodynamic monitoring that has emerged to date 
is that the assays involved are often significantly more 
complex and time-consuming than the measurement of a 
drug by chromatography or immunoassay.
Any biochemical measurement that can be used to 
determine efficacy, extent of toxicity or individual phar-
macodynamics for a therapeutic agent is called a thera-
peutic biomarker. Hitherto, most such markers have been 
markers of toxicity rather than of therapeutic efficacy 
(e.g. urinary N-acetylglucosaminidase as an index of tu-
bular damage caused by nephrotoxic drugs), but there 
is increasing interest in biomarkers that give direct in-
formation about drug efficacy, for example red cell 
6-­thioguanine nucleotide concentrations in the assess-
ment of thiopurine drug efficacy or measurement of 
inosine 5′-monophosphate dehydrogenase (IMPDH) ac-
tivity as a marker of the IMPDH inhibitor mycophenolic 
acid. Biomarker monitoring can provide an integrated 
measure of all biologically active species (parent drug and 
metabolites) present, so that therapeutic ranges can be 
defined more closely. It is also often free from the matrix 
and drug disposition effects that frequently complicate 
drug concentration measurements.
Pharmacogenetic studies (studies of genetic influences 
on pharmacological responses) have wide-ranging clini-
cal relevance. The enzymes responsible for metaboliz-
ing drugs exhibit wide interindividual variation in their 
protein expression or catalytic activity, resulting in quan-
titative and qualitative differences in drug metabolism be-
tween individuals. This variation may arise from transient 
effects on the enzyme, such as inhibition or induction by 
other drugs or metabolites, or may result from specific 
mutations or deletions at the gene level. Pharmacogenetic 
polymorphism is defined as the existence in a population 
of two or more alleles at the same locus that result in 
more than one phenotype with respect to the effect of 
a drug, the rarest of which occurs with a significant fre-
quency (usually taken as 1%). The term pharmacogenomics 
is used to describe the range of genetic influences on drug 
metabolism, and the application of this information to 
the practice of tailoring drugs and dosages to specific in-
dividuals to enhance safety and/or efficacy. This practice, 
often referred to as ‘Personalized Medicine’, is a major 
growth area for 21st century medicine.
Determination of an individual’s ability to metabolize 
a specific drug may be performed either by administering 
a test dose of the drug or a related compound and measur-
ing the metabolites formed (phenotyping), or by specific 
genetic analysis (genotyping). The information obtained 
can dramatically improve the clinician’s ability to select a 
drug dose appropriate to the specific requirements of the 
individual. For example, many of the isoenzymes of the 
cytochrome P450 superfamily responsible for drug oxi-
dation show genetic polymorphisms that affect the extent 
of drug metabolism and produce differences in clinical 
response. The CYP2D6 isoform has more than 100 al-
lelic variants, and metabolizes about a quarter of all drugs 
used in medicine, including many antiarrhythmics and 
psychoactive drugs. The rate of metabolism of a test dose 
of debrisoquine or dextromethorphan has been widely 
used for the determination of CYP2D6 phenotype and 
the differentiation of poor metabolizer (PM), extensive 
metabolizer (EM) and ultra extensive metabolizer (UEM) 
phenotypes. Alternatively, genetic analysis can be used to 
define the CYP2D6 genotype and identify the alleles as-
sociated with the PM phenotype (of which the most com-
mon are CYP2D6*3, *4, *5 and*6). Once determined, the 
phenotype can be used to guide dosing for any of the wide 
range of drugs metabolized by the CYP2D6 isoform, and 
ensure that lower doses are used for individuals with the 
PM phenotype, avoiding toxicity. The PM phenotype 
	
39  Therapeutic drug monitoring	
777
is found in 7-10% of Caucasians but less frequently in 
people of Asian origin.
Pharmacogenetic data have many other clinical appli-
cations, including anticoagulation (polymorphisms of the 
CYP2C9 isoform and the VKORC1 genes in assessing 
susceptibility to warfarin), ­oncology/­immunosuppression 
(thiopurine methyltransferase polymorphisms and aza-
thioprine therapy), psychiatry (CYP2D6 isoforms and 
rate of metabolism of some antidepressants), epilepsy, 
pain control and other areas. (See Chapter 43 for a fur-
ther discussion of this topic.)
Integrating information
Pharmacogenetics and new biomarkers provide in-
valuable adjuncts to conventional drug concentration 
monitoring, and promise to deliver the ability to create 
individualized therapeutic regimens. However, integrat-
ing the information from all three strands is complex, and 
will require developments in decision support software 
and effective strategies for presenting the information 
in an accessible and comprehensible format to those in-
volved in the provision of care. Pre-treatment pharmaco-
genetic profiling will allow identification of individuals 
who are likely to be particularly susceptible or resistant 
to a proposed regimen, allowing better selection of drug 
and initial dose. However, the effect of factors such as 
disease, age or drug interactions means that pharmacoge-
netics can never tell the whole story, and measuring the 
concentrations of drugs, metabolites or other biomarkers 
will still be necessary to complete the picture and deliver 
truly personalized medicine.
INDIVIDUAL DRUGS
Analgesic/anti-inflammatory drugs
Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid)
Aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) is a widely available drug 
used as a self-prescribed analgesic and as a prophylactic 
(at low dose) for thromboembolic disease. It is prescribed 
in relatively high doses for inflammatory arthropathies, 
since it has both analgesic and anti-inflammatory proper-
ties. Aspirin causes gastric erosions and, for this reason, is 
available in a variety of formulations designed to reduce 
this side-effect. Once absorbed, aspirin is rapidly con-
verted to salicylate. Salicylate metabolism is complex and 
variable and its excretion is highly dependent upon uri-
nary acidity, hence the concurrent ingestion of antacids 
can lead to lower plasma concentrations. The commonest 
symptom of toxicity is tinnitus, which occurs in the ma-
jority of patients once the plasma concentration exceeds 
400 mg/L (2.9 mmol/L). Plasma salicylate concentra-
tions may need to be monitored in a minority of patients 
to avoid toxicity. When used as an anti-inflammatory 
agent, plasma concentrations should lie between 150 and 
300 mg/L (1.1–2.2 mmol/L), measured just before a dose. 
The half-life of salicylate varies widely between 3 and 
20 h, depending on the dose and duration of therapy.
Value of monitoring: low.
Antiarrhythmics and cardiac glycosides
Amiodarone
Amiodarone is used in the treatment of intractable ar-
rhythmias. It can be given intravenously or orally. It is 
strongly tissue bound and has a very high volume of dis-
tribution (about 5000 L), leading to a plasma half-life of 
approximately 50 days. There is considerable interpatient 
variability. Effective combined plasma concentrations 
of amiodarone and its active metabolite, desethylamio-
darone, are in the range 0.5–2.5 mg/L (0.7–3.7 μmol/L). 
Most patients do not require concentration monitor-
ing, but in some patients it may be useful to differenti-
ate treatment failure from poor adherence or suboptimal 
dosing, while in others it may assist in the confirmation 
of concentration-related side-effects.
Value of monitoring: moderate.
Digoxin and digitoxin
The cardiac glycosides digoxin and digitoxin increase 
the force of cardiac contraction and increase cardiac 
output, and are used in the treatment of cardiac failure. 
They are also useful in the management of certain su-
praventricular arrhythmias. Digitoxin is structurally and 
functionally similar to digoxin, but is less frequently 
used in the UK.
Digoxin has a long half-life (20–60 h) and is usually 
given once daily. Clearance is primarily by the kidneys 
and a reduced glomerular filtration rate (GFR) can lead to 
toxicity. Effective plasma concentrations are 0.5–2.0 μg/L 
(0.6–2.6 nmol/L), with concentrations at the lower end 
of this range (0.5–1.0 μg/L; 0.6–1.3 nmol/L) recom-
mended for the treatment of heart failure. Blood samples 
should be taken at least 6 h post-dose to allow time for 
distribution into tissues. Digoxin acts by inhibition of the 
Na
+,K
+-ATPase pump in the membranes of cardiac myo-
cytes. Studies on red blood cells have shown that patients 
on long-term therapy adapt by production of additional 
pump activity. As a result, the interpretation of plasma 
concentrations is different depending upon whether ther-
apy is newly instituted or long term. There is no clear re-
lationship between digoxin concentration and therapeutic 
effect, but toxicity is a major problem and is more likely 
at plasma concentrations >2.3 μg/L (3.0 nmol/L). Toxicity 
at any digoxin concentration is inversely proportional to 
plasma potassium concentration and, in the presence of 
hypokalaemia, toxicity may be observed at plasma digoxin 
concentration as low as 1.2 μg/L (1.5 nmol/L). The pa-
tient’s age and the severity of heart disease are indepen-
dent risk factors for development of toxicity. Although the 
most common presentation of digoxin toxicity is brady-
cardia, there may also be other cardiac arrhythmias which, 
coupled with underlying cardiac pathology, may give rise 
to a confused clinical picture that may be clarified by 
the measurement of digoxin concentrations. Significant 
numbers of patients die with digoxin concentrations 
>2.3 μg/L. The possible contribution of digoxin to the 
cause of death is not always suspected. It should be noted 
that, if a patient is treated with anti-digoxin antibodies to 
reverse toxicity (see Chapter 40), further measurements of 
778	
Clinical biochemistry
digoxin concentration will not be possible using the com-
monly available immunoassays until the antibodies have 
been cleared, which may take up to a week.
It should be noted that in some patients, notably ne-
onates, there exist in the plasma digoxin-like interfer-
ing substances (DLIS) that can lead to falsely elevated 
‘digoxin’ concentrations when measured by immuno-
assay. Elevated DLIS concentrations are encountered 
in patients with volume-expanded conditions such as 
uraemia, essential hypertension, liver disease and pre-
eclampsia, suggesting that DLIS may be a hormone 
involved in natriuresis. Falsely low digoxin values 
due to the presence of DLIS have also been reported. 
Commercially available immunoassays for digoxin vary 
in their specificity for DLIS and their ability to differ-
entiate DLIS from exogenous digoxin. The presence of 
DLIS should be considered if digoxin concentrations 
are unexpectedly high.
Value of monitoring: moderate to high.
Disopyramide
Disopyramide is effective in controlling supraventricular 
and ventricular arrhythmias after myocardial infarction. 
Its use is limited by anticholinergic side-effects including 
dry mouth, blurred vision and difficulty in urination, and 
it is contra-indicated in prostatic enlargement. Monitoring 
can be helpful in ensuring efficacy and avoiding toxicity, 
though variable protein binding complicates the picture. 
Monitoring of free disopyramide concentration is rec-
ommended, although the assay is not always easily avail-
able. Target ranges for trough values are 1.5–5.0 mg/L 
(4.4–14.7 μmol/L) for total disopyramide and 0.5–2.0 mg/L 
(1.5–5.9 μmol/L) for free disopyramide.
Value of monitoring: moderate.
Flecainide
Flecainide is used to control serious symptomatic arrhyth-
mias, junctional re-entry tachycardia and paroxysmal 
atrial fibrillation. It is eliminated via the kidneys (40–45%) 
and metabolized in the liver, where it is a substrate for the 
CYP2D6 isoform. The half-life is shortened and plasma 
concentrations are lower in extensive metabolizers. The 
usual target range is 0.2–1.0 mg/L (0.5–2.4 μmol/L), with 
most patients responding in the lower half of the range.
Value of monitoring: moderate.
Procainamide
Procainamide is used to control ventricular arrhythmias 
after myocardial infarction and atrial tachycardia. It is me-
tabolized in the liver to N-acetylprocainamide (NAPA), 
which is also active, though slightly less potent. The rate 
of acetylation of procainamide to NAPA is genetically de-
termined with a bimodal distribution, patients being clas-
sified as either slow or fast acetylators. Procainamide has 
a relatively short half-life (2–5.5 h) and is rapidly cleared. 
N-acetylprocainamide has a longer half-life (6–12 h) than the 
parent drug and renal impairment can result in the accumu-
lation of toxic concentrations of the metabolite. Monitoring 
of procainamide should therefore include quantitation of 
both procainamide and NAPA. Trough samples are prefera-
ble. Procainamide concentrations should fall between 4 and 
10 mg/L (17–42 μmol/L). Procainamide and NAPA concen-
trations combined should not exceed 30 mg/L (100 μmol/L).
Value of monitoring: moderate.
Anticonvulsants (antiepileptics)
Carbamazepine/oxcarbazepine
Carbamazepine is a drug of choice for the treatment 
of simple and complex focal seizures and generalized 
tonic–clonic seizures. It is also used for the prophylaxis 
of bipolar affective disorder and mania, and for pain 
relief in trigeminal neuralgia. Metabolism is primarily 
by hepatic oxidation. The major metabolite, the 10,11- 
epoxide, is active but is seldom measured routinely, which 
complicates the interpretation of plasma carbamazepine 
concentrations. The best available information suggests 
that carbamazepine, when prescribed alone, is effective 
at plasma concentrations of 4–12 mg/L (17–50 μmol/L). 
Nystagmus, ataxia and drowsiness may occur at concen-
trations >12 mg/L and more serious toxicity >15 mg/L 
(60 μmol/L). Protein binding is variable and drug con-
centrations in saliva have been studied but have not 
proved to be widely useful. A troublesome erythematous 
rash occurs in about 4% of patients, and other chronic 
side-effects including hepatic and haematological prob-
lems may occur, although these are not dose related. 
Carbamazepine induces its own metabolism, and therapy 
needs to be initiated at a low dose and built up slowly 
over weeks. The unpredictable relationship between dose 
and concentration, the narrow therapeutic index and the 
presence of numerous drug interactions that alter the 
pharmacokinetics support the requirement for therapeu-
tic drug monitoring until stable therapy is established.
Oxcarbazepine is also licensed for the same indica-
tions as carbamazepine. It is effectively a pro-drug for 10- 
hydroxycarbazepine, which is active. The role of therapeutic 
monitoring has not been established.
Value of monitoring: high (carbamazepine); low 
(oxcarbazepine).
Ethosuximide
Ethosuximide is used in the treatment of absence seizures 
and is administered once daily as it has a long half-life. 
In most patients, therapy can be optimized on the basis 
of clinical response and EEG checks. Toxicity is read-
ily recognizable clinically as anorexia, nausea, vomiting 
and dizziness. There is therefore no real need to measure 
plasma concentrations except in patients receiving multi-
ple therapy to decide which drug is responsible for symp-
toms of toxicity. The therapeutic range is usually taken 
as 40–100 mg/L (280–710 μmol/L) with toxicity likely at 
concentrations >150 mg/L (1060 μmol/L).
Value of monitoring: low to moderate.
	
39  Therapeutic drug monitoring	
779
Phenobarbital/primidone
Phenobarbital (phenobarbitone) is an anticonvulsant 
drug in its own right and also the active metabolite of 
primidone. It is effective but may be sedative in adults 
and cause behavioural disturbances in children, and is 
therefore not a recommended first- or second-line drug. 
Phenobarbital has a relatively long half-life and is cleared 
by both the renal and hepatic routes. There is a wide inter-
individual variation in handling and, for this reason, there 
are no well-defined therapeutic limits for plasma pheno-
barbital concentrations. The majority of well-controlled 
patients have plasma concentrations of 10–40 mg/L 
(40–160 μmol/L), although some individuals may require 
much higher concentrations owing to the development 
of tolerance. The toxic symptoms associated with inap-
propriately high dosage progress from increasing drowsi-
ness to coma. Primidone therapy can be monitored by the 
phenobarbital concentration if required.
Value of monitoring: moderate (phenobarbital); low 
(primidone).
Phenytoin
Phenytoin is still widely used and is effective for the treat-
ment of tonic-clonic and focal seizures, but is no longer 
a first- or second-line drug for the treatment of epilepsy. 
It is well absorbed, has a long elimination half-life and 
is cleared mainly by oxidation in the liver. Its enzymatic 
removal is, however, saturable and the concentration at 
which this occurs varies between individuals. Once satu-
ration has occurred, there is an exponential (zero order) 
increase in plasma concentration (Fig. 39.5); saturation 
can occur within the therapeutic range, so small incre-
ments in dose can lead to large increments in plasma 
concentration and severe toxicity. In addition, phenytoin 
induces its own metabolism, leading to increased clear-
ance and lower plasma concentrations after some weeks. 
Interaction with other drugs, particularly valproate, 
can also cause changes in clearance. The drug is highly 
protein-bound, and, at a given plasma total drug concen-
tration, the lower the plasma protein concentration, the 
higher will be the free (effective) drug concentration. The 
unpredictable relationship between dose and plasma con-
centration, the narrow therapeutic index and the many 
clinically significant drug interactions mean that moni-
toring is essential for safe and effective use of the drug. 
The usual target range is 5–20 mg/L (20–80 μmol/L) but 
higher concentrations may be required in severe epilepsy. 
Neurotoxicity (nystagmus, dysarthria, ataxia) is usually 
concentration-dependent, though signs of chronic toxic-
ity, for example gum hyperplasia, are not so clearly linked 
to concentration.
Value of monitoring: high.
Valproate
Sodium valproate is a popular drug because it does not 
give rise to drowsiness or the CNS side-effects asso-
ciated with other anticonvulsants, although it carries 
a higher risk of congenital malformation and should 
be used with caution in women of childbearing age. It 
is recommended as a first-line drug in most types of 
epilepsy and is used widely in children. It is also used 
in the treatment of bipolar disorder. However, there is 
no well-documented relationship between plasma val-
proate concentration and relief from seizures; indeed, 
seizures appear to be absent for some time following 
a dose of valproate when plasma concentrations are 
too low to measure. A number of cases of severe he-
patocellular damage, some fatal, have been reported in 
patients receiving valproate alone. These appear to be 
idiosyncratic and are not related to plasma concentra-
tion. There is, therefore, no reason to measure plasma 
valproate in order to avoid hepatotoxicity; however, 
where the risk of liver damage is high, for example in 
young children or those with seizure disorders associ-
ated with metabolic or degenerative disorders, learning 
disorders or organic brain disease, baseline and follow-
up liver enzyme measurements are indicated.
Valproate is highly protein bound (90–95%) and, when 
given together with other anticonvulsant drugs, for exam-
ple phenytoin, can give rise to a (transient) increase in the 
concentration of free phenytoin. There may, on occasion, 
be some value in analysing valproate in order to adjust phe-
nytoin or carbamazepine therapy or in the management of 
complex regimens, but the vast majority of valproate mea-
surements are an unnecessary drain on resources.
Value of monitoring: low.
Newer anticonvulsant drugs
There is a now a plethora of newer antiepileptic drugs 
such as clobazam, clonazepam, felbamate, gabapen-
tin, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, piracetam, retigabine, 
Plasma drug concentration
Limit of
metabolism
Dose
Phenytoin
Other
drugs
FIGURE 39.5  ■ The relationship between dose and plasma con-
centration for phenytoin as compared with most other drugs 
(dotted line). The point where hepatic metabolism is saturated 
(at which divergence occurs) is specific to the individual.
780	
Clinical biochemistry
rufinamide, topiramate, vigabatrin and zonisamide. Data 
on concentration–effect relationships are limited, and 
TDM is not widely used outside specialist centres, since 
there are no accepted target ranges and most have a wide 
therapeutic range with overlap of toxic and non-effective 
concentrations. Tentative target ranges are available in 
the literature (see Further reading). Routine monitoring 
cannot be recommended at present, except for monitor-
ing of lamotrigine concentrations on combination ther-
apy because of the marked effect of drug interactions.
Value of monitoring: low to moderate.
Antidepressants and antipsychotic drugs
Tricyclic antidepressants (amitriptyline,  
clomipramine, dosulepin, doxepin, imipramine, 
lofepramine, nortriptyline, trimipramine)
The tricyclic antidepressants show wide interindividual 
genetic differences in metabolism, and for many of them 
a good relationship between plasma concentration and 
clinical effectiveness has been shown. Their use is dimin-
ishing in favour of selective serotonin release inhibitors 
(SSRIs), which are better tolerated and less toxic in over-
dose. Monitoring is potentially valuable to reduce the in-
cidence of toxicity in susceptible patients.
Value of monitoring: moderate.
Selective serotonin release inhibitors (SSRIs) 
(citalopram, escitalopram, fluoxetine, fluvoxamine, 
paroxetine and sertraline)
Therapeutic drug monitoring for SSRIs is of little clinical 
importance in routine practice, primarily because of their 
much lower toxicity.
Value of monitoring: low.
Lithium
The lithium cation is of great clinical use in the man-
agement of bipolar disorder. Lithium is, however, 
extremely toxic, with a low therapeutic index. It is pre-
scribed orally as uncoated lithium carbonate or as a 
slow-release preparation. The usual therapeutic range is 
0.4–1.0 mmol/L in samples taken 12 h post-dose, with an 
upper limit of 0.8 mmol/L in the elderly. Concentrations 
up to 1.2 mmol/L may be required for the acute treat-
ment of mania in younger patients. Since lithium is 
nephrotoxic and is excreted renally, excessive dosing can 
produce a vicious circle in which plasma concentrations 
increase, causing renal damage, excretion is reduced and 
concentrations increase further. Plasma concentrations 
>1.5 mmol/L require intervention, and concentrations 
>3.0 mmol/L on chronic therapy are potentially fatal. 
High concentrations in acute overdosage are less serious 
than on chronic therapy, since the tissues are not satu-
rated and distribution will lead to a rapid fall in plasma 
concentration.
Patients newly started on lithium should be monitored 
regularly until the relationship between dose and plasma 
concentration is established. Thereafter, monitoring can 
be less frequent. Lithium competes with sodium for reab-
sorption in renal tubules, and alterations in sodium balance 
or fluid intake may precipitate toxicity. Patients on lithium 
who start diuretics, or develop diarrhoea and vomiting or 
renal problems should be assessed and their serum lithium 
measured. Lithium should not be stopped completely since 
acute withdrawal can give rise to severe psychiatric symp-
toms. Thyroid dysfunction (most often hypothyroidism), 
hyperparathyroidism and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus 
are recognized side-effects of lithium therapy. Lithium has 
a half-life of 20–40 h depending on the duration of treat-
ment; steady-state concentrations are therefore obtained 
approximately seven days after the start of therapy.
Value of monitoring: high.
Other antidepressants
There is no good evidence for a significant relationship 
between drug concentration and therapeutic outcome 
for the tetracyclic antidepressants maprotiline, mianse-
rin and mirtazapine, the monoamine oxidase inhibitors 
moclobemide and tranylcypromine or for trazodone and 
reboxetine.
Value of monitoring: low.
Antipsychotic drugs
The first-generation antipsychotic drugs such as haloperi-
dol and the phenothiazines chlorpromazine, ­fluphenazine 
and perphenazine show marked variation in metabo-
lism between individuals according to their CYP2D6 
genotype. Drug and metabolites accumulate in poor 
metabolizers and overdosing leading to extra-pyramidal 
side effects and irreversible tardive dyskinesia may occur. 
If CYP2D6 genotyping is not available, TDM may be 
useful in assessing phenotype and guiding therapy.
The development of second generation antipsychotic 
agents, for example clozapine, olanzapine, quetiapine, ami-
sulpride, aripiprazole and risperidone, has proved to be a 
significant advance in the treatment of schizophrenia. The 
atypical (or second-generation) antipsychotics have several 
therapeutic properties in common; however, they can differ 
significantly with regard to clinical potency and side-effects.
Therapeutic drug monitoring may assist in avoidance 
of extrapyramidal side-effects by maintaining minimum 
effective concentrations during chronic treatment, al-
though for the majority of patients this is a matter of 
quality of life rather than safety. Monitoring is available 
from specialist centres in difficult cases. In the case of 
clozapine, there is a strong correlation between clozap-
ine plasma concentrations and the incidence of seizures. 
Clozapine also carries a significant risk (∼3%) of agranu-
locytosis and regular (weekly at the start of therapy) dif-
ferential white blood cell monitoring is required.
Value of monitoring: moderate (haloperidol, clozapine) 
to low.
	
39  Therapeutic drug monitoring	
781
Antimicrobial drugs
Most antimicrobial drugs are well tolerated and do not 
require therapeutic drug monitoring. The exceptions to 
this general principle include the aminoglycoside antibi-
otics, the glycopeptides vancomycin and teicoplanin, and 
chloramphenicol.
Aminoglycosides (amikacin, gentamicin, 
tobramycin)
The aminoglycosides are an important group of antimi-
crobial drugs used in the treatment of severe systemic in-
fection by some Gram-positive and many Gram-negative 
organisms. Amikacin, gentamicin and tobramycin are also 
active against Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Streptomycin is 
active against Mycobacterium tuberculosis and is now gener-
ally reserved for tuberculosis (see below). Neomycin is 
too toxic for systemic use and can only be used for topi-
cal application (skin, mucous membranes). The parent 
compounds are produced by moulds of the Streptomyces 
family (streptomycin, tobramycin, neomycin) or the 
Micromonospora family (gentamicin). The different host 
organisms account for the variation in spelling of the 
suffix.
The aminoglycoside antibiotics exhibit relatively 
simple pharmacokinetics. They are large, highly polar 
molecules with very poor oral bioavailability, and must 
be given parenterally. They are not protein bound and 
not metabolized, and are excreted through the kidneys. 
The plasma half-life is 2–3 h, except when renal function 
is impaired, but the drug may accumulate in tissues. If 
therapy is continued for longer than a week, tissue sites 
become saturated and plasma concentrations may rise.
These drugs exhibit significant systemic toxicity at 
plasma concentrations just above those necessary for 
bactericidal activity. The main toxic effects are nephro-
toxicity and ototoxicity. Nephrotoxicity further reduces 
the ability to excrete aminoglycosides, and a vicious cycle 
may be precipitated. Nephrotoxicity is often reversible, 
as is mild ototoxicity, but severely damaged cochlear hair 
cells cannot be replaced and patients may be left with ir-
reversible hearing loss and disturbed balance.
The drug concentration at which bactericidal effects 
are achieved (the minimum inhibitory concentration, 
MIC) is relatively easy to determine in vitro but often has 
little relevance in vivo, owing to variable penetrance of 
the drug to the site of infection and differing conditions 
at the infection site. Aminoglycosides also show a marked 
post-antibiotic effect – suppression of bacterial growth 
persists for some time after the drug is no longer pres-
ent in the plasma. This makes definition of target plasma 
concentrations difficult, and this difficulty has been com-
pounded in recent years by changes in the ways in which 
aminoglycosides are administered.
Until the mid-1990s, aminoglycosides were adminis-
tered every 8 or 12 h, to give relatively stable plasma con-
centrations in view of their short half-life. It has become 
clearer that less frequent dosing (every 24 h or more) pro-
duces higher peak concentrations, which enhance bacte-
rial kill, and lower trough concentrations, which reduce 
the systemic toxicity. Such regimens are more convenient, 
less toxic, reduce adaptive resistance and are generally 
more suitable in patients with normal renal function. The 
approach was originally devised as once daily dosing, but a 
more accurate term is probably ‘extended dosing interval’, 
in which a plasma concentration measurement is used to 
design an individual dosing interval which reflects the pa-
tient’s needs and renal function. The Hartford nomogram 
(Nicolau et al. 1995, see Further reading) is an example 
of this approach, but local guidelines should be consulted 
on dosage and serum concentrations. Monitoring is es-
sential to achieve effective therapy while avoiding toxicity, 
particularly in infants, the elderly, the obese and patients 
with cystic fibrosis, if high doses are being used or if renal 
function is impaired.
Value of monitoring: high.
Glycopeptides (vancomycin and teicoplanin)
The glycopeptide antibiotic vancomycin is used intra-
venously in endocarditis and other serious infections 
caused by Gram-positive cocci including multi-resistant 
Staphylococci (MRSA). It is also used orally in the treat-
ment 
of 
antibiotic-associated 
(pseudomembranous) 
colitis. Like the aminoglycosides, the glycopeptides are 
poorly absorbed, not metabolized, excreted renally and 
are potentially nephrotoxic and ototoxic. Indications for 
monitoring have been controversial, but there is defi-
nitely a role for monitoring in patients with poor renal 
function to achieve maximum effect with minimal tox-
icity. Teicoplanin is similar to vancomycin, but has a 
longer duration of action such that once-daily dosing is 
sufficient. No relationship between plasma concentration 
and toxicity has been established, and teicoplanin is not 
normally monitored.
Value of monitoring: moderate (vancomycin), low 
(teicoplanin).
Chloramphenicol
Chloramphenicol is a powerful broad-spectrum an-
tibiotic that carries a risk of serious haematological 
side-effects when given systemically. It is used to treat 
life-­threatening infections such as cholera, typhoid fever, 
resistant Haemophilus influenzae, septicaemia and menin-
gitis. Chloramphenicol is metabolized in the liver to the 
active glucuronide, and peak plasma concentrations (2 h 
post-dose) in the range 10–25 mg/L (30–77 μmol/L) are 
desirable. Concentration monitoring is essential in neo-
nates and recommended in children under four years, the 
elderly and patients with hepatic impairment.
Value of monitoring: moderate.
Antifungal drugs
The successful management of invasive fungal infections 
remains challenging to clinicians, and the incidence of 
invasive mycosis has risen in parallel with the rise in the 
population of immunocompromised patients. The mor-
bidity and mortality caused by these infections remains 
782	
Clinical biochemistry
high, and TDM has a role in ensuring that adequate drug 
concentrations are attained at the site of infection without 
systemic toxicity. Four triazole antifungal drugs (flucon-
azole, itraconazole, posaconazole and voriconazole) have 
been approved for use. They show marked inter- and 
intraindividual variations in blood drug concentrations 
after dosing, owing to variable absorption from the gut 
(itraconazole, posaconazole) and polymorphism in the 
CYP2C19 enzyme (voriconazole). The pyrimidine ana-
logue flucytosine also exhibits wide interpatient variation 
in blood concentration owing to variation in renal elimi-
nation. The high pharmacokinetic variability and need 
for optimal adjustment of drug exposure to ensure that 
infections are treated adequately are arguments in favour 
of TDM, but although concentration–effect relationships 
have been demonstrated for the triazoles and flucytosine, 
optimal target blood concentrations have not been de-
finitively established and concentration measurements in 
clinically relevant timescales are not yet readily available. 
Itraconazole and flucytosine concentrations should be 
measured routinely in all patients during the first week of 
therapy and in patients with poor responses. Monitoring 
of posaconazole and voriconazole should be considered 
in patients who are not responding to therapy, those with 
gastrointestinal dysfunction, children and those taking 
drugs which interact with triazole antifungal agents.
Value of monitoring: moderate.
Antitubercular drugs
The treatment of active tuberculosis (TB) always requires 
the use of multiple antibacterial agents. It is usually treated 
in two phases – an initial phase using four drugs and a 
continuation phase using two drugs. The most frequently 
used regimen is isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and 
ethambutol (or, rarely, streptomycin), followed by isonia-
zid and rifampicin. Isoniazid and rifampicin are the key 
components of this regimen, and both drugs show signifi-
cant pharmacokinetic variability. The majority of patients 
are completely cured by standard regimens, and TDM 
has no role in dosage optimization in these patients. 
However, patients who are slow to respond to treatment, 
have drug-resistant TB, are at risk of drug–drug interac-
tions or have concurrent disease states (e.g. acquired im-
munodeficiency syndrome) that significantly complicate 
the clinical picture may require individualization of drug 
therapy, and may benefit from TDM. Early intervention 
guided by concentration monitoring may prevent the 
development of further drug resistance. The pharma-
cokinetic interactions between antitubercular drugs and 
other medications can often be of considerable clinical 
concern. Rifampicin is a potent inducer of cytochrome 
P450 CYP3A and decreases plasma concentrations of the 
HIV-protease inhibitors significantly; isoniazid is a P450 
enzyme inhibitor. Patients with HIV are at particular risk 
for drug–drug interactions.
When TDM is justified, the 2 h post-dose concentra-
tions of isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and etham-
butol are usually most informative. Unfortunately, low 
2 h values do not distinguish between delayed absorption 
or malabsorption and non-adherence. In such cases, a 
second sample, often collected at 6 h post-dose, provides 
additional information. Trough concentrations of many 
anti-TB drugs are below the limit of detection of current 
assays and have limited relevance. Plasma concentrations 
required for effective therapy, especially on multi-drug 
regimens, are only partially known, as detailed pharma-
cokinetic and pharmacodynamic information in humans 
is lacking. There is a clear dose–response relationship 
for rifampicin and pyrazinamide and low isoniazid con-
centrations are also associated with poorer outcomes. 
Second-line TB drugs such as p-aminosalicylic acid, cy-
closerine and ethionamide are not usually monitored. 
Streptomycin is used against resistant organisms. It is 
nephrotoxic and should be used with great care in pa-
tients with renal impairment; concentration monitoring 
is essential in such patients.
Value of monitoring: moderate.
Antiretroviral drugs
Several classes of antiretroviral drugs are used in the 
management of infection by HIV:
•	 nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, e.g. zi-
dovudine, abacavir, didanosine, emtricitabine, lami-
vudine, stavudine and tenofovir
•	 non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors, e.g. 
efavirenz, etravirine and nevirapine
•	 protease inhibitors, e.g. atazanavir, darunavir, 
fosamprenavir, indinavir, lopinavir, nelfinavir, rito-
navir, saquinavir and tipranavir
•	 fusion inhibitors, e.g. enfuvirtide
•	 entry inhibitors, e.g. maraviroc
•	 integrase inhibitors, e.g. raltegravir.
The nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors 
(NRTIs) are pro-drugs that require activation by intra-
cellular phosphorylation. Plasma NRTI concentrations 
therefore do not correlate with clinical effect and NRTIs 
are not suitable for TDM.
Non-nucleoside 
reverse 
transcriptase 
inhibitors 
(NNRTIs) display highly variable pharmacokinetics; the 
cytochrome P450 isoenzyme involved in their metabolism 
(CYP2B6) has a polymorphic variant resulting in slower 
metabolism and higher plasma concentrations. The pro-
tease inhibitors (PIs) also have highly variable pharmaco-
kinetics, but their plasma concentrations have been shown 
to correlate with virological response. Therapeutic drug 
monitoring for NNRTIs and PIs may have an important 
adjunctive role in individualizing therapy in high-risk pa-
tients or those with PI resistance. Adherence remains a 
major problem, especially in developing countries where 
patient understanding is often poor. Concentrations are 
normally monitored 1h post-dose. Protease inhibitors 
and NNRTIs can be quantitated by liquid chromatogra-
phy tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS) in a single run.
Value of monitoring: low to moderate.
Antineoplastic drugs
Despite their considerable toxicity, there are no con-
trolled trials that indicate clear advantages to routine 
	
39  Therapeutic drug monitoring	
783
concentration monitoring of anticancer drugs, with the 
exception of methotrexate (see below). Antineoplastic 
agents are often used in combinations of up to four drugs, 
which makes the establishment of therapeutic ranges dif-
ficult. Areas under the concentration–time curve give a 
better indication of total exposure to the drug than iso-
lated plasma concentrations, but are more difficult to ap-
ply routinely. Pharmacokinetic optimization protocols 
for many classes of cytotoxic compounds have been used 
in some specialized centres and a role for monitoring has 
been proposed for some newer drugs such as the tyrosine 
kinase inhibitor imatinib in chronic myeloid leukaemia.
Value of monitoring: low (except methotrexate – see 
below).
Methotrexate
Methotrexate is widely used in a variety of chemothera-
peutic regimens for malignancies, where it is given in high 
doses by the intravenous route over periods of 6–12 h. It is 
also used orally at low dose (7.5–25 mg weekly) in Crohn 
disease, rheumatoid arthritis and as an antipsoriatic agent.
Methotrexate is an inhibitor of folic acid metabolism. 
The rationale behind high-dose therapy is that a short pe-
riod of exposure to high concentrations of drug will elimi-
nate rapidly dividing cells, while sparing those growing 
more slowly. At the end of the infusion, methotrexate con-
centrations should fall rapidly. Where this is not the case, 
or where the rate of infusion produces too high a plasma 
concentration, folinic acid (leucovorin) is infused to provide 
a source of folate and reverse toxic effects. Measurement 
of methotrexate concentrations may therefore be re-
quired in two circumstances – to allow adjustment of infu-
sion to maintain a steady plasma concentration at 10
–4 M 
and to ensure that the concentrations at 24 and 48 h after 
the start of the infusion have fallen to <5–10 μmol/L and 
<0.5–1.0 μmol/L, respectively, depending on the protocol. 
A rapid turnaround time is required. Folinic acid may in-
terfere in some assay systems, complicating measurements 
made after treatment has been given. Methotrexate is me-
tabolized to 7-hydroxymethotrexate and both the parent 
drug and metabolite are excreted via the kidneys and are 
nephrotoxic due to their low solubility; prehydration, al-
kalinization and good renal function are essential for the 
safe use of this drug. Hepatotoxicity has been reported in 
a number of patients. Monitoring of liver function and the 
plasma concentration of the N-terminal propeptide of col-
lagen type III to detect hepatic fibrosis is advised in patients 
on long-term oral treatment; renal function and white 
blood cell counts should also be monitored. Methotrexate 
concentration monitoring is not usually necessary in pa-
tients on low-dose regimens.
Value of monitoring: high (on high-dose regimens).
Bronchodilator drugs
Theophylline/caffeine
Theophylline is a bronchodilator used for the relief of 
asthma that has a number of other pharmacological ef-
fects, notably the stimulation of cardiac output and the 
dilatation of peripheral blood vessels. It is no longer a 
first- or second-line drug in asthma, but is still useful in 
patients who have difficulty with inhalers and those with 
predominantly nocturnal symptoms. Theophylline has 
a short half-life (3–13 h in adults), but the availability of 
sustained-release preparations compensates for this and 
allows dosing at 12 or 24 h intervals. It also has a narrow 
therapeutic window and wide pharmacokinetic variabil-
ity, so it is important to have access to TDM if the drug is 
to be used effectively and safely.
In outpatients, adherence has been shown to be er-
ratic, with as few as 30% of patients taking the drug as 
prescribed. In such cases, TDM can contribute little 
unless the patient is toxic or grossly non-compliant. 
However, in inpatients, and especially those receiving 
intravenous therapy, TDM can be of great assistance in 
dosage optimization and in confirming toxicity. Steady-
state trough concentrations are the most reproducible 
for monitoring, except when toxicity is suspected.
Theophylline is metabolized in the liver by a variety of 
pathways, including oxidation via the cytochrome P450 
system (CYP1A2/CYP2E1), which is subject to induction 
by drugs such as phenytoin. In addition to this, theophyl-
line shows dose-dependent excretion. It is therefore pref-
erable that those involved in its monitoring are familiar 
with the pharmacokinetic optimization programmes that 
are available.
The target range in adults is 10–20 mg/L (55–
110 μmol/L). The range is lower in neonates (5–15 mg/L; 
25–80 μmol/L). This is partly due to sensitivity and partly 
because babies under six months old metabolize theoph-
ylline in a different manner to adults, converting a pro-
portion to caffeine, an active metabolite. After six months, 
caffeine production is replaced by the adult pattern of 
metabolism to a variety of methylated urates, including 
3-methylxanthine, which is also active. Caffeine has now 
taken over as the drug of choice to treat neonatal apnoea, 
as dose regimens are simpler and the effects are more pre-
dictable. Caffeine concentrations in the range 5–20 mg/L 
(25–100 μmol/L) are generally associated with response 
in neonatal apnoea, but the lower toxicity and simpler 
pharmacokinetics mean that TDM is rarely required.
Side-effects of theophylline are relatively frequent – mild 
or moderate effects such as nausea, headache and jitteriness 
are common within the target range, and more serious ef-
fects (tremor, agitation, insomnia, diarrhoea, palpitations, 
seizures and cardiac arrhythmias) occur with increasing fre-
quency at plasma concentrations >20 mg/L (110 μmol/L). 
Caffeine produces much less tachycardia and fewer fits.
Oral therapy with theophylline may involve the free 
base or any of a number of salts. For intravenous therapy, 
a water-soluble salt such as aminophylline (theophylline 
ethylenediamine) is used (aminophylline is approximately 
80% w/w theophylline).
Value of monitoring: high (theophylline); low to mod-
erate (caffeine).
Immunosuppressants
Monitoring of immunosuppressants has become an es-
sential adjunct to drug therapy for organ transplant 
784	
Clinical biochemistry
patients because of the relatively narrow therapeutic in-
dex of these agents. Therapeutic drug monitoring is im-
portant for three of the major immunosuppressants in 
current use: ciclosporin, tacrolimus, and sirolimus. All 
three of these drugs are lipophilic and are concentrated in 
red cells, so whole blood samples are commonly used for 
analysis. The indications for and approach to monitoring 
of mycophenolic acid are more controversial.
Ciclosporin
Ciclosporin is a cyclic peptide, widely used for preven-
tion of graft rejection following kidney, liver, heart, lung, 
heart–lung, bone marrow or pancreas transplants. It is 
also used in lower doses as an immunosuppressant in 
severe psoriasis, atopic dermatitis, nephrotic syndrome, 
ulcerative colitis and rheumatoid arthritis, and in the 
prophylaxis and treatment of graft-versus-host disease. 
Ciclosporin inhibits calcineurin phosphatase and limits 
T cell activation, producing immunosuppression with-
out myelosuppression. However, it is nephrotoxic, and 
the major difficulty with its use lies in balancing the risks 
of undertreatment, leading to rejection of the organ, and 
overtreatment, which can cause kidney damage. This is 
particularly relevant in renal transplantation, where it is 
essential to determine whether a rising plasma creatinine 
concentration is due to nephrotoxicity or rejection.
The pharmacokinetics of ciclosporin vary widely 
between patients, and target plasma concentrations are 
dependent on the transplant type, time after transplan-
tation, sample time post-dose, analytical method used 
and other drugs administered. It is not possible to give 
specific guidance here and local protocols should be 
consulted. The drug is highly lipophilic and accumu-
lates in red cells, so EDTA whole blood is the preferred 
matrix for assay. Trough (pre-dose) concentrations have 
traditionally been used; although concentrations at 2 h 
post-dose (C2) give a better indication of ciclosporin 
exposure, they do require precise timing. Immunoassays 
and LC-MS assays have been used. Ciclosporin is me-
tabolized in the liver by CYP3A, producing more than 
30 metabolites that have variable cross-reactivity in 
immunoassays, explaining some of the differences in 
apparent ciclosporin concentrations determined by dif-
ferent assays.
Value of monitoring: high.
Sirolimus
Sirolimus is a macrolide antibiotic, also known as ra-
pamycin. It is structurally similar to tacrolimus, but has a 
different mode of action. Both sirolimus and tacrolimus 
bind to a binding protein (FK binding protein, FKBP), 
but the sirolimus-FKBP complex then binds to a protein 
kinase, mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR). This 
interaction blocks signal transduction in the second phase 
of T cell activation. Sirolimus reduces acute rejection 
when co-administered with a calcineurin phosphatase in-
hibitor and steroids, and allows earlier withdrawal of ci-
closporin When sirolimus is given concurrently with the 
microemulsion formulation of ciclosporin, the absorption 
of sirolimus is markedly enhanced, almost doubling the 
effective dose, so it is recommended to give sirolimus 4 h 
after ciclosporin. The drug is metabolized in the liver by 
CYP3A, and is also a substrate for the P-glycoprotein 
transporter system. Sirolimus is not nephrotoxic so is par-
ticularly useful in kidney transplantation, but has a range 
of other adverse effects, including lipid disturbances, 
anaemia, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia and impaired 
wound healing. Over-suppression of the immune system 
is associated with infection and neoplasia. Blood concen-
trations are a better guide to effect than dose is, and con-
centration monitoring is advised, particularly in patients 
with hepatic impairment or on interacting drugs. Pre-
dose (trough) concentrations measured on EDTA whole 
blood should be in the region of 4–12 μg/L when the drug 
is being given with ciclosporin and 12–20 μg/L when ci-
closporin has been withdrawn. Liquid chromatography 
or LC-MS are the preferred analytical methods, but an 
immunoassay is also available.
Value of monitoring: high.
Tacrolimus
Like ciclosporin, tacrolimus is a calcineurin phospha-
tase inhibitor used to prevent or treat graft rejection in 
kidney, liver and heart transplant patients. It is also me-
tabolized in the liver by CYP3A and is concentrated in 
red blood cells, so EDTA whole blood samples are used 
for monitoring. Unlike ciclosporin, it is not intrinsi-
cally nephrotoxic, but does cause renal vasoconstriction, 
which leads to chronic graft dysfunction. Adverse ef-
fects are minimized by using the lowest dose consistent 
with efficacy and by the use of combined therapy with 
other drugs such as mycophenolic acid, allowing dose 
minimization for all drugs. Monitoring is essential, par-
ticularly in hepatic impairment and during or following 
treatment with drugs that induce or inhibit metabolism. 
Target concentration ranges vary with transplant type, 
other drug therapy and analytical method, but are typi-
cally in the range 5–15 μg/L. Immunoassays or LC-MS 
are used.
Value of monitoring: moderate to high.
Mycophenolic acid
Mycophenolic acid (MPA) is increasingly used in solid 
organ transplantation as an antiproliferative immunosup-
pressant. It is used for the prophylaxis of acute rejection 
in kidney, liver and heart transplantation in combination 
with calcineurin phosphatase inhibitors (ciclosporin/ta-
crolimus) and corticosteroids. It is given as the pro-drug 
mycophenolate mofetil (MMF), or as the enteric-coated 
sodium salt of MPA. It is rapidly absorbed and mainly ex-
creted renally, with <10% hepatic metabolism to the inac-
tive glucuronide. Concentrations in plasma are relatively 
high (1–3 mg/L; 3–9 μmol/L) and trough plasma (EDTA 
or heparin) samples are often used for monitoring, al-
though the optimum measures of MPA exposure are still 
the subject of considerable debate as trough plasma con-
centrations vary widely. Limited-sampling strategies to 
	
39  Therapeutic drug monitoring	
785
give a better estimate of the area under the concentration–
time curve have been advocated. The general routine use 
of MPA monitoring in solid-organ transplantation is not 
currently recommended, though monitoring has a role in 
specific patient populations, including those at increased 
immunological risk or those with changing renal or he-
patic function.
Value of monitoring: low to moderate.
Opiate and opioid drugs
Methadone/buprenorphine
Methadone and buprenorphine are synthetic opioids used 
as adjunct therapy in the treatment of opiate dependence. 
The primary requirement in this setting is to confirm that 
patients have been taking their medication, rather than 
selling it, since these drugs have a street value. Qualitative 
testing of urine is used to achieve this. For patients on 
methadone therapy, urine is often tested for the metha-
done metabolite EDDP (2-ethylidine-1,5-dimethyl-3, 
3-diphenyl pyrrolidine), as this guards against adultera-
tion of urine specimens with the medication and confirms 
that drug has actually been ingested. Monitoring of plasma 
concentrations has not yet been shown to be routinely 
useful, despite significant pharmacokinetic variation and 
much recent interest in dosage optimization for opiate 
substitutes.
Value of monitoring: low.
Morphine
Morphine is used as a short-term analgesic, often as 
­patient-controlled analgesia following surgical proce-
dures, and for long-term analgesia in conditions with 
protracted pain, for example the later stages of malignant 
disease. Morphine kinetics are complex and absorption 
can be erratic. There is also an active metabolite, mor-
phine 6-glucuronide (M6G), with analgesic properties 
superior to morphine. Heroin (diacetylmorphine) is con-
verted rapidly to morphine via a short-lived monoacetyl-
morphine intermediate. Until recently, morphine was not 
part of the repertoire of drugs for which therapeutic mon-
itoring was advocated, but there is now evidence that, in 
patients in whom analgesia is difficult to achieve, plasma 
morphine concentrations can be useful. The method of 
choice is high performance liquid chromatography – mass 
spectrometry, since the active metabolites M6G and co-
deine can also be determined; this is of particular use in 
patients with renal insufficiency in whom there may be 
accumulation of M6G.
Value of monitoring: low to moderate.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I am grateful to Dr Michael J. Stewart who was the au-
thor of this chapter in previous editions of the book.
Further reading
General pharmacokinetics
Brunton L, Chabner BA, Knollman B, editors. Goodman and Gilman’s 
The pharmacological basis of therapeutics. 12th ed. New York: 
McGraw-Hill; 2011. 
A huge compendium of knowledge of all aspects of therapy. Regularly 
updated and exceptionally valuable. Appendices give the key pharmacokinetic 
data on most drugs of interest and useful clinical data on toxicity.
Clark W, McMillin G. Application of TDM, pharmacogenomics and 
biomarkers for neurological disease pharmacotherapy: focus on 
antiepileptic drugs. Pers Med 2006;3:139–49.
Hallworth M, Watson I. Therapeutic drug monitoring and laboratory 
medicine. London: ACB Venture Publications; 2008. 
A useful practical guide for clinical laboratories.
Hammett-Stabler CA, Dasgupta A. Therapeutic drug monitoring data – 
a concise guide. Washington DC: AACC Press; 2007. 
Invaluable concise guide.
Llorente Fernandez E, Pares A, Ajuria I et  al. State of the art in 
therapeutic drug monitoring. Clin Chem Lab Med 2010;48:437–46. 
Review of the application of quality management to TDM.
Macleod S. Therapeutic drug monitoring in pediatrics: how do children 
differ? Ther Drug Monit 2010;32:250–2.
Rowland 
M, 
Tozer 
TN. 
Clinical 
pharmacokinetics 
and 
pharmacodynamics – concepts and applications. Baltimore, MD: 
Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins; 2011. 
Excellent and long-established general pharmacokinetic text.
Analytical methods
Adaway JE, Keevil BG. Therapeutic drug monitoring and 
LC-MS/MS. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci 
2012;883–884:33–49.
Brandhorst G, Oellerich M, Maine G et al. Liquid chromatography-
tandem mass spectrometry or automated immunoassays: what 
are the future trends in therapeutic drug monitoring? Clin Chem 
2012;58:821–5.
Hallworth M. Therapeutic drug monitoring. In: Moffat AC, Osselton D, 
Widdop B et al. editors. Clarke’s analysis of drugs and poisons. 4th ed 
London: Pharmaceutical Press; 2011. p. 59–72. 
Contains comprehensive tables with suggested analytical approaches for 
commonly monitored drugs.
Antiarrhythmics/cardiac glycosides
Dasgupta A. Therapeutic drug monitoring of digoxin: impact of 
endogenous digoxin and exogenous digoxin-like immunoreactive 
substances. Toxicol Rev 2006;25:273–81. 
A useful explanation of this intriguing analytical problem.
Anticonvulsants
Patsalos PN, Berry DJ, Bourgeois BFD et al. Antiepileptic drugs – best 
practice guidelines for therapeutic drug monitoring: A position paper 
by the sub-commission on therapeutic drug monitoring, I L A E 
Commission on therapeutic strategies. Epilepsia 2008;49:1239–76. 
Authoritative review.
Antidepressants/antipsychotics
Hiemke C, Baumann P, Bergemann N et  al. AGNP consensus 
guidelines for therapeutic Drug monitoring in psychiatry: update 
2011. Pharmacopsychiatry 2011;44:195–235. 
Comprehensive review.
Antimicrobial drugs
Dasgupta A. Advances in antibiotic measurement. Adv Clin Chem 
2012;56:75–104.
Nicolau DP, Freeman CD, Belliveau PP et  al. Experience with a 
once-daily aminoglycoside program administered to 2,184 patients. 
Antimicrob Agents Chemother 1995;29:650–5.
Antifungal drugs
Hussaini T, Ruping MJ, Farowski F et al. Therapeutic drug monitoring 
of voriconazole and posaconazole. Pharmacotherapy 2011;31:214–25.
786	
Clinical biochemistry
Antitubercular drugs
Magis-Escurra C, van den Boogard J, Ijdema D et  al. Therapeutic 
drug monitoring in the treatment of tuberculosis patients. Pulm 
Pharmacol Ther 2012;25:83–6.
Antiretrovirals
Pretorius E, Klinker H, Rosenkrantz B. The role of therapeutic 
drug monitoring in the management of patients with human 
immunodeficiency virus infection. Ther Drug Monit 2011;33:265–74.
Antineoplastic drugs
Bach DM, Straseski JA, Clarke W. Therapeutic drug monitoring in 
cancer chemotherapy. Bioanalysis 2010;2:863–79.
Immunosuppressants
Brandhorst G, Oellerich M, Brunet M et  al. Individually tailored 
immunosuppression – is there a role for biomarkers? Clin Chem 
2011;57:376–81.
Taylor PJ, Tai CH, Franklin ME et  al. The current role of liquid 
chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry in therapeutic drug 
monitoring of immunosuppressant and retroviral drugs. Clin 
Biochem 2011;44:14–20.
Wavamunno 
MD, 
Chapman 
JR. 
Individualization 
of 
immunosuppression: concepts and rationale. Curr Opin Organ 
Transplant 2008;13:604–8.
Methadone/buprenorphine
Brunen S, Vincent PD, Baumannn P et al. Therapeutic drug monitoring 
for drugs used in the treatment of substance-related disorders: 
literature review using a therapeutic drug monitoring appropriateness 
rating scale. Ther Drug Monit 2011;33:561–72.
APPENDIX 39.1: CALCULATIONS FOR THE  
­DETERMINATION OF DOSE ­REQUIREMENTS 
TO ACHIEVE STEADY-STATE 
CONCENTRATIONS
The loading dose depends on the volume of distribution 
(Vd). Hence, to calculate a loading dose use:
The maintenance dose required for steady-state de-
pends on the clearance and is calculated by:
Average population values for clearance, volume of 
distribution, bioavailability and formulation correction 
factor (if relevant) may be found in reference texts.
Loadingdose
V
desiredplasmaconcentration C
Bioavailabili
P
=
×
d
(
)
ty F
correctionfactor
forformulation S
( ) ×
( )
Maintenancedose=
Clearance Cl
desiredplasma
concentration(C
(
) ×
P )
intervalbetweendoses T
Bioavailability F
correction f
×
( )
( ) ×
actorfor
formulation S( )
787
INTRODUCTION
Poisoning can be defined as an interaction between a 
foreign chemical (toxin) and a biological system that 
results in damage to a living organism. In general, the 
medical profession has been more concerned with the 
acute effects of toxins and the clinical management of 
toxicity, but chronic effects of toxins have much more 
importance on a global scale. For example, acute inges-
tion of ethanol may result in intoxication, which can 
cause death directly from its acute depressant effects 
and also through intoxication-related accidents and 
violence. However, alcohol-related liver disease, my-
opathy, hypertriglyceridaemia and cancers are all effects 
of chronic alcohol abuse and together, cause far more 
deaths than the acute effects of alcohol. Other types of 
chronic or delayed effects of toxins include mutagen-
icity, carcinogenicity and teratogenicity. For example, 
many cases of bronchogenic carcinoma are a direct 
result of exposure to cigarette smoke. Increasing con-
cerns about environmental contamination by chemicals 
has added a further dimension to toxicology, especially 
as many chemicals, such as pesticide residues, may be 
found in small amounts in the general population, who 
do not appear to be suffering any ill effects.
The interaction between a toxin and the biological 
system is highly complex. Once the biological system has 
been exposed to the toxin, the toxin is subject to various 
processes. In the case of a drug, this is usually termed 
pharmacokinetics, but in the case of a poison, the term 
toxicokinetics may be used. This includes absorption, for 
which the route of administration is of great importance, 
as are the dose of the toxin and the duration of exposure. 
Once a toxin has entered the bloodstream, its distribu-
tion depends to a large extent, on its physicochemical 
characteristics, including its degree of lipid or water 
solubility and its degree of ionization. Metabolism is a 
further important process, which usually renders toxins 
inactive, but which may also convert some substances of 
low toxicity into highly toxic metabolites. Classic exam-
ples of this include paracetamol (acetaminophen), meth-
anol and ethylene glycol. Finally, toxins are excreted, 
although some remain within the body for many years. 
All of these processes determine the amount of toxin that 
interacts with tissues to produce a toxic effect.
The study of the interaction between toxins and 
tissues is called toxicodynamics. An understanding of 
the nature of this interaction is essential for an intel-
ligent approach to the diagnosis and management of 
poisoning. This interaction may cause functional and 
metabolic disturbances that produce the characteris-
tic clinical features of poisoning and the laboratory 
changes that may be essential for diagnosis or manage-
ment. These changes are summarized in Figure 40.1.
C H A P T E R  4 0
Poisoning
James W. Dear
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  787
AETIOLOGY OF POISONING  788
Intrauterine  788
Neonates  788
Infants  788
Childhood  788
Adult life  788
TYPES OF LESION IN POISONING  788
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF POISONING:  
GENERAL PRINCIPLES  789
Diagnosis  789
Management  791
SPECIFIC POISONS  795
Paracetamol (acetaminophen)  795
Salicylate  796
Chloroquine  798
Digoxin  798
Iron  798
Other metals  798
Organophosphates  799
Alcohols and glycols  799
Drug and substance abuse  800
Benzodiazepines  803
Theophylline  803
Antidepressants  803
Lithium  804
Cyanide  805
Carbon monoxide  805
Methaemoglobinaemia  805
Plant and fungal toxins  806
CONCLUSION  807
APPENDIX  807
788	
Clinical biochemistry
This chapter covers several of the more common 
types of acute poisoning and also some aspects of chronic 
poisoning. Clinical features are given in some detail, as 
these frequently integrate with the metabolic and bio-
chemical changes.
AETIOLOGY OF POISONING
Intrauterine
A number of drugs, such as tretinoin, should not be taken 
by women intending to become pregnant because of their 
known teratogenicity. Other drugs, such as phenytoin and 
several other anticonvulsants, are teratogenic but their 
continued use may be considered necessary during preg-
nancy. As far as poisoning and overdose during pregnancy 
are concerned, the fetus generally only suffers damage sec-
ondary to the mother’s illness, and the management is no 
different from that of overdose in non-pregnant women. 
One exception is carbon monoxide, which has a higher af-
finity for fetal haemoglobin than adult haemoglobin; the 
mother should be treated aggressively even in apparently 
mild poisoning. Antidotes such as acetylcysteine or desfer-
rioxamine should not be withheld because the patient is 
pregnant.
Neonates
During the neonatal period, particularly in premature in-
fants, there is a risk of iatrogenic overdose because of the 
poor metabolic and excretory capacity relative to body 
weight. Particular care should be taken with drugs such 
as theophylline, digoxin, chloramphenicol and morphine.
Infants
The commonest cause of poisoning between the ages of 
one and four is termed accidental poisoning because of the 
natural exploratory activities of children at this stage of 
life. Each year, this results in 20 000 admissions to hospital 
in Britain, but only about ten fatalities. The commonest 
agents involved are paracetamol and oral contraceptives, 
but most fatalities occur from ­tricyclic antidepressants, 
salicylates, iron, methadone and ­quinine. Another form 
of poisoning in this age group is non-­accidental injury, 
which is usually inflicted by a carer such as the mother, 
and the child may present with ­repeated episodes of flop-
piness and collapse, depending on the substance respon-
sible. This is most commonly with a drug prescribed for 
the mother, though salt and other readily available chem-
icals have been used (see Chapter 44).
Childhood
Later in childhood, substance abuse, particularly volatile 
substance abuse (‘glue sniffing’), can cause serious prob-
lems. There are about 30 deaths each year in Britain from 
this cause. Acute and chronic alcohol toxicity are often 
underestimated in this age group. Intentional drug over-
dose is common, but suicide is rare.
Adult life
In early adult life, particularly in females, drug over-
dose in the form of parasuicidal gestures is common, 
though rarely fatal. In later adult life, suicidal intent 
is commoner and parasuicidal gestures are less fre-
quent. The commonest causes of suicidal poisoning in 
England are tricyclic antidepressants, analgesic drugs 
and carbon monoxide. Male suicides are approximately 
three times as frequent as female suicides. Accidental 
poisoning in adults is usually domestic, the commonest 
agent being carbon monoxide, or industrial, in which 
a wide range of chemicals may be involved. Homicidal 
poisoning, though rare, may go undetected if it is not 
suspected.
TYPES OF LESION IN POISONING
Many types of poisoning involve a highly specific interac-
tion between the toxin and one type of tissue. This has 
led to a ‘target organ’ oriented approach in toxicology, 
which is of great help in understanding poisoning, where 
damage to a single organ or tissue produces a character-
istic clinical and pathological picture. Examples include 
poisoning with paracetamol, salicylates, cholinesterase 
inhibitors and cardiac glycosides. In other instances, the 
type of toxicity may be less clearly definable. The acute 
effects of ethanol are mainly due to its central nervous de-
pressant effect. Cocaine, tricyclic antidepressants, many 
volatile substances, some β-adrenergic blocking drugs 
and dextropropoxyphene can all produce cardiotoxicity 
due to a quinidine-like sodium channel blocking effect. 
However, the clinical features are definable as a toxic ef-
fect on the heart.
An important way in which many poisons can affect 
the organism is by interference with the oxygen path-
way from the inspired air to cellular respiration. Thus, a 
reduction in the oxygen content of the inspired air may 
cause acute hypoxaemia, rapidly leading to collapse and 
coma. Interference with the mechanics of respiration 
by poisons may result in hypoxaemia and hypercapnia 
(type II respiratory failure), while disturbances of oxy-
gen transfer produce hypoxaemia alone (type I respira-
tory failure). Even if the oxygen content of the air is not 
diminished and respiration is functioning adequately, 
FIGURE 40.1  ■ The factors involved in poisoning.
	
40  Poisoning	
789
disturbances to other processes may prevent oxygen 
reaching its site of action (see Chapter 5). The oxygen-
carrying capacity of the blood may be reduced by the 
presence of carboxyhaemoglobin or methaemoglobin 
or, more rarely, by acute haemolysis. Cardiac output 
may be reduced by a number of poisons that cause car-
diac arrhythmias, depress the contractility of the heart 
or cause extreme vasodilatation. The final step where 
poisons may interfere with the oxygen pathway is block-
age of the cytochrome enzyme chain as occurs with 
toxins such as cyanide and hydrogen sulphide. These ef-
fects and the main poisons involved are summarized and 
outlined in Table 40.1.
DIAGNOSIS AND MANAGEMENT OF 
­POISONING: GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Diagnosis
In most cases of poisoning, the diagnosis is provided by 
the history and clinical examination. In some patients, 
however, there may be no history, though poisoning may 
be suspected because of the circumstances or the clinical 
features. In rare cases, the clinical presentation may mimic 
other medical conditions and it is necessary to consider 
the diagnosis of poisoning, especially when there are un-
usual features of the illness. Examples of these conditions 
include carbon monoxide, lead and paraquat poisoning, 
and drug and substance abuse.
The clinical features of poisoning depend most of all 
on the type of agent involved, but also on the route of 
exposure (oral, intravenous, percutaneous or inhaled), 
the duration of exposure and time elapsed since expo-
sure, and also the patient’s age and medical background 
(conditions such as diabetes, asthma, chronic renal failure 
and epilepsy). Clinical examination may reveal signs of 
injection marks, cutaneous burns, buccal corrosion, tablet 
residues in the mouth or cutaneous blisters. These blis-
ters (originally called ‘barbiturate blisters’) may be found 
following overdose with barbiturates, benzodiazepines, 
tricyclic antidepressants or chloral hydrate, or exposure 
to carbon monoxide. There may be evidence of pulmo-
nary aspiration or secondary hypostatic pneumonia in co-
matose patients.
Clinical examination may indicate that a specific 
­agonist/receptor pathway has been either over-stimulated 
or blocked by a poison. These syndromes are termed 
toxidromes and provide a useful initial guide to poi-
son identification when the agent involved is unknown 
(Table 40.2).
In the severely ill patient, baseline haematological and 
biochemical investigations will be necessary and arterial 
blood gas estimations will also be required. A chest radio-
graph is usually indicated. The results of haematological 
and biochemical investigations may be of great assistance 
in making the diagnosis and monitoring the response 
to treatment. The tests to be carried out and their fre-
quency depend very much on the poison involved. Many 
of these are given later in this chapter, and a general sum-
mary is given in Table 40.3. Toxicological investigations 
may also be required: in some cases, these may only be 
available in specialized laboratories. The usual samples 
required are blood (note that whole blood is required for 
measurement of carboxyhaemoglobin, methaemoglobin, 
cyanide and several metals) and urine (50 mL in a univer-
sal container with no preservative). Urine should always 
be provided where possible, since many types of analysis, 
such as drugs of abuse, are more efficiently carried out 
on urine samples. Some of these assays are qualitative, 
TABLE 40.1  Some typical causes of blockade of the oxygen pathway due to poisoning, with  
mechanisms and typical values 
Note that whatever the initial effect of a poison, there may be subsequent progression down the list of effects towards cell 
death. The effects of two or more poisons may be additive
Cause
Mechanism
Effect
Asphyxiant gases (e.g. butane, methane, 
carbon dioxide, nitrogen)
Hypoxic gas mixture
Reduced inspired oxygen fraction (FiO2) 
(normal ~0.21)
Respiratory depression (e.g. opioids, 
barbiturates, other sedatives and 
hypnotics). Respiratory muscle disorders: 
paralysis (e.g. organophosphates, 
botulinum toxin) or spasm (e.g. strychnine, 
phencyclidine)
Failure of ventilation (type II 
respiratory failure)
Reduced alveolar oxygen tension (PAO2) 
(normal ~13.3 kPa)
Aspiration pneumonitis
Adult respiratory distress syndrome (e.g. 
paraquat)
Failure of oxygen transfer (type 
I respiratory failure)
Reduced arterial oxygen tension (PaO2) 
(normal 10–13.3 kPa)
Carboxyhaemoglobin (carbon monoxide); 
methaemoglobin (e.g. nitrites); haemolysis 
(e.g. arsine, stibine)
Loss of functioning 
haemoglobin
Reduced arterial oxygen content (CaO2) 
(normal 18–21 volumes %)
Myocardial depressants (e.g. β-blockers, 
calcium antagonists, tricyclic antidepressants, 
dextropropoxyphene, cocaine)
Reduced cardiac output
Reduced tissue oxygen delivery (QO2) 
(normal 12–16 mL/kg per min)
Chemical asphyxiants (cyanide, hydrogen 
sulphide)
Block of cytochrome enzyme 
chain
Reduced tissue oxygen consumption (VO2) 
causing failure of oxidative metabolism 
(normal 3–4 mL/kg per min). Cell death
790	
Clinical biochemistry
TABLE 40.2  Syndromes caused by poisoning
Clinical features
Example agent(s)
Anticholinergic syndrome (muscarinic antagonist)
Dry skin
Hyperthermia
Thirst
Dry mouth
Dilated pupils
Tachycardia
Urinary retention
Decreased bowel sounds
Tricyclic antidepressants (TCA)
Antipsychotics
Antihistamines
Atropa belladona
Inocybe mushrooms
Antimitotic syndrome (cytotoxic to dividing cells)
Bone marrow suppression (aplastic anaemia, leucopenia, thrombocytopenia)
Alopecia
Vomiting, diarrhoea, mucositis
Antineoplastic drugs
Colchicine
Radiation exposure
Cholinergic syndrome (nicotinic and muscarinic agonist)
Defaecation
Urination
Miosis
Bradycardia
Tachycardia
Emesis
Lacrimation
Hyperhidrosis
Muscle paralysis and respiratory failure
Organophosphates
Carbamate insecticides
Nicotine
Laburnum species
Hemlock species
Corrosive poisoning
GI tract pain
Vomiting
Haematemesis
Dyspnoea
Drooling
Aspiration/inhalation causing stridor/pneumonitis
Skin contact causing pain, ulceration, necrosis
Eye contact causing inflammation of all layers
Hydrofluoric acid
Sodium hydroxide
Paraquat
Fume fever
History of unpleasant smells
Chills
Cough
Dyspnoea
Headache
Myalgia
Malaise
Metal oxides (esp zinc oxide)
Polymer fumes
Other toxic industrial chemicals
Metabolic acidosis
Deep and rapid (Kussmaul) breathing
Obtunded consciousness
Tachycardia
Hypotension
Ethylene glycol
Methanol
Aspirin
Paracetamol
Iron
Cyanide
Carbon monoxide
Methaemoglobinaemia
Blue–grey ‘apparent’ central cyanosis (blue to grey lips, tongue and mucus 
membranes, and slate grey skin)
Persistent cyanosis despite oxygenation
Fatigue, dizziness, headaches
Depressed consciousness
Seizures
Urine may be discoloured black or brown
Benzene derivatives (phenols, cresols, 
aniline)
Sodium nitrite
Organic nitrites
Chlorates
Copper salts
Prilocaine
Opioid syndrome
Depressed consciousness
Hypoventilation
Pinpoint pupils
Naloxone response
Hypotension
Pulmonary oedema
Opioids
(Continued)
	
40  Poisoning	
791
but may be necessary in order to confirm the presence 
of compounds, which are not easily detectable in blood.
Poisons centres now exist in most countries, with spe-
cialized facilities for provision of information on the tox-
icity of substances and on the management of poisoning. 
Most hold stocks of specialized antidotes, such as snake 
antivenoms. Many also have an analytical laboratory and 
some have patient care facilities. They are usually acces-
sible by telephone or e-mail. In the UK, there are several 
poisons centres that provide information on poisoning: 
see Appendix 40.1.
Management
When an acutely ill patient presents, the first priority, 
regardless of the cause of the illness, is to establish the 
airway and provide immediate supportive treatment. 
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation or urgent ventilatory 
support may be needed. Depending on the patient’s state, 
questioning about the possible agent involved, obtaining 
an antidote or taking diagnostic samples may waste valu-
able time. In view of the frequency of opioid abuse, nalox-
one (an opioid antagonist) may have both a diagnostic and 
a therapeutic role. Once any immediate life-­threatening 
problems have been dealt with, full supportive care must 
be provided while attempts are made to establish the 
diagnosis and treat the poisoning.
Respiratory support
In comatose patients, the most important measure is to 
maintain the airway and support ventilation as required, 
since respiratory complications are the commonest causes 
of death in unconscious poisoned patients. The uncon-
scious patient should be placed in the left lateral (re-
covery) position in order to keep the airway patent and 
to minimize the risk of aspiration of gastric contents. 
Regular observation is essential as mechanical ventilation 
is not infrequently required.
Cardiovascular support
The circulation must be supported in order to maintain 
tissue perfusion and the electrocardiogram should be 
monitored, since cardiac dysrhythmias are common in 
poisoning. Antiarrhythmic agents and inotropic agents 
may be necessary.
Central nervous system complications
A brief convulsion due to cerebral hypoxia or to a toxic 
effect of the poison is not an indication for anticonvulsant 
TABLE 40.2  Syndromes caused by poisoning (Continued)
Clinical features
Example agent(s)
Sedative – hypnotic poisoning
Depressed consciousness
Ataxia
Dysarthria
Nystagmus
Ethanol
Benzodiazepines and related drugs
Gamma hydroxybutryrate (GHB)
Gamma butyrolactone (GBL)
Barbiturates
Serotonin agonist syndrome
Restlessness
Agitation
Confusion
Hyperreflexia
Clonus
Tremor
Shivering
Hypertonia
Fever/hyperthermia
Flushing
Seizures
Serotonin-specific re-uptake inhibitors (SSRI)
Monoamine oxidase Inhibitors (MAOI)
Tricyclic antidepressants
Venlafaxine
Methylenedioxymetamfetamine (MDMA)
Amfetamines
Cocaine
Tramadol
Triptans
Linezolid
St John’s wort
‘Legal highs’
Psilocybe mushrooms
Sympathomimetic syndrome
Hyper/hypotension
Tachycardia
Neurological excitation
Tremor
Hyperreflexia
Seizures
Cocaine
Amfetamines
‘Legal highs’
Vesicant poisoning (blistering agents)
Conjunctivitis
Keratitis
Dermatitis
Severe blistering
Nitrogen mustards
Methyl bromide
792	
Clinical biochemistry
TABLE 40.3  Indications for measurement of drugs and poisons or other biochemical tests in actual 
or suspected poisoning
Toxin or measurement
Indications for measurement
Interpretation
Amfetamines (including 
MDA and MDMA)
Abuse
Tests can confirm exposure
Carbamazepine
1. Overdose
Ataxia >12 mg/L (50 μmol/L)
Severe poisoning >40 mg/L (170 μmol/L)
2. Therapeutic monitoring
Therapeutic range 5–10 mg/L (20–40 μmol/L)
Carboxyhaemoglobin
1. Carbon monoxide inhalation
May confirm exposure and indicate severity (normal <1%; 
<5% in smokers)
2. Smoke-exposed fire victims
Carboxyhaemoglobin >12% indicates potential for 
pulmonary damage
3. Methylene chloride exposure
Carbon monoxide is a metabolite of methylene chloride 
(dichloromethane)
Chloroquine
Accidental or deliberate overdose
May confirm ingestion and indicate potential toxicity
Cholinesterase (red 
blood cell, RBC)
1. Acute poisoning with 
organophosphates
RBC cholinesterase <20% of normal indicates significant 
exposure (usually by ingestion)
2. Chronic exposure to 
organophosphates
Plasma pseudocholinesterase <50% of normal helps to 
confirm exposure but is a poor guide to severity
Digoxin
1. Digoxin or digitoxin overdose
In patients with severe poisoning blood digoxin 
concentration >6 h after overdose can be used to guide the 
dose of digoxin specific antibody
2. Detecting digitalis 
immunoreactivity in cardiac 
glycoside plant ingestion
May be used to confirm ingestion but is not a guide to 
severity
3. Detecting digitalis toxicity in 
therapeutic use
To confirm toxicity or undertreatment. Hypokalaemia may 
cause signs of toxicity with digoxin concentrations in the 
therapeutic range
Drug abuse screen
1. Suspected acute toxicity
May confirm diagnosis or need for treatment
2. Medicolegal indications
May be used to confirm abstinence (sample collection must 
be supervised)
3. Employment screening
May exclude from certain types of employment
Ethanol
1. Severe intoxication
Very high concentrations (>5000 mg/L) (110 mmol/L) in 
a severely obtunded patient may be an indication for 
haemodialysis
2. Intoxication (actual or possible) 
in head-injured patients
Low concentrations (<1500 mg/L) (32 mmol/L) help to exclude 
ethanol as a cause of behavioural disturbance or altered 
consciousness level
3. Monitoring of treatment of 
methanol or ethylene glycol 
intoxication
Blood ethanol should be maintained at 1000–2000 mg/L 
(22–43 mmol/L) to inhibit alcohol dehydrogenase
Ethylene glycol
Suspected toxicity
Confirm the presence of ethylene glycol in blood and monitor 
clearance with treatment
Iron
Overdose
Serum iron >3 mg/L (55 μmol/L) is associated with significant 
toxicity. In patients without features of severe poisoning, 
serial measurements are useful in determining need for 
treatment
Lead
1. Clinical suspicion of poisoning
May confirm toxicity and indicate need for antidote therapy. 
Patients with blood concentrations >50 μg/dL (2.4 μmol/L) 
should be considered for treatment
2. Monitoring industrial exposure
Employers must reduce lead exposure if an employee’s 
blood concentration is ≥50 μg/dL. If ≥60 μg/dL work may be 
suspended
Lithium
1. Acute overdose
Plasma concentrations may confirm ingestion and indicate 
possible toxicity, but clinical manifestations are the main 
guide to toxicity and need for haemodialysis (patient 
may be asymptomatic with plasma lithium >5 mmol/L, 
depending on time since ingestion)
2. Therapeutic monitoring
Therapeutic range 0.4–1.2 mmol/L (but see text). Toxicity 
in therapeutic use can occur at 1.5–2 mmol/L (often due 
to interactions with diuretic or NSAID therapy). Severe 
toxicity >4 mmol/L
Methanol
Suspected toxicity
Confirm the presence of methanol in blood and monitor 
clearance with treatment
Opioids
1. Overdose
Tests can confirm exposure; treatment is based on clinical decision
2. Abuse
Tests can confirm exposure
3. Toxicity in renal failure patients
Requires measurement of morphine 6-glucuronide
Osmolality (plasma)
Suspected methanol or ethylene 
glycol ingestion
If methanol/ethylene glycol cannot be directly measured then 
the plasma osmolar gap can be used as a surrogate marker 
for the presence of toxic alcohol in blood. As the toxic 
alcohol is metabolized to acid, the osmolar gap falls and 
may be normal if the patient presents late after ingestion
(Continued)
	
40  Poisoning	
793
drug therapy. However, if convulsions are repeated or 
prolonged, diazepam is the first-line drug. Drugs such as 
phenytoin, clomethiazole and thiopental may be required 
if there is no response to diazepam. In tricyclic antide-
pressant poisoning, administration of sodium bicarbonate 
may relieve convulsions. Phenytoin is contraindicated in 
tricyclic poisoning because both tricyclics and phenytoin 
are sodium channel blockers and these increase the risk of 
cardiac arrhythmias.
Body temperature
The core temperature should be recorded with a low-
reading thermometer, since hypothermia may complicate 
poisoning with sedative and antidepressant drugs. The 
patient should be wrapped in a space blanket, but ­active 
rewarming is not usually required. The prognosis is 
­better than in accidental hypothermia from other causes, 
and temperatures as low as 22 °C are compatible with full 
recovery. In hyperthermia (rectal temperature >39 °C), 
reduction of body temperature is a priority. Depending 
on the cause of the problem, different treatments may be 
required. Hyperthermic patients poisoned with agents 
that produce severe muscle rigidity may require elective 
paralysis with a muscle relaxant and mechanical ventila-
tion. Malignant hyperthermia or neuroleptic malignant 
syndrome can be treated with intravenous dantrolene.
Renal complications
Renal function should be monitored (bladder catheter-
ization may be necessary if there is oliguria or severe hy-
povolaemia). Acute kidney injury may occur as a result 
of a direct toxic effect or secondary to acute haemolysis 
with haemoglobinuria or rhabdomyolysis with myoglo-
binuria. There is controversy as to whether myoglobin 
and haemoglobin are directly toxic to the kidneys. Most 
probably they cause an obstructive lesion; alkalinization 
of the urine increases myoglobin excretion and may pre-
vent acute kidney injury.
TABLE 40.3  Indications for measurement of drugs and poisons or other biochemical tests in actual 
or suspected poisoning (Continued)
Toxin or measurement
Indications for measurement
Interpretation
Paracetamol
1. Paracetamol overdose
High concentrations are an indication for antidote 
administration according to nomogram
2. Comatose patient with 
suspected drug overdose
To exclude co-ingestion of paracetamol
Paraquat
1. Suspected ingestion (or other 
route of exposure)
Plasma paraquat concentrations can confirm ingestion and 
severity of exposure. Positive urine dithionite test confirms 
exposure. Dithionite test can be carried out on plasma – if 
positive, confirms massive ingestion
Phenobarbital
1. Overdose
Severe toxicity >50 mg/L (215 μmol/L)
2. Abuse
Concentrations may be in the range 30–60 mg/L (130–
260 μmol/L) with minimal impairment
3. Therapeutic monitoring
Therapeutic range 19–37 mg/L (80–160 μmol/L)
Phenytoin
1. Overdose
Ataxia may occur at plasma concentrations >30 mg/L. 
Dysarthria and lethargy at >40 mg/L. Plasma concentration 
needs to be corrected for albumin concentration
2. Following overdose to decide 
when therapy should be 
resumed
 
3. Therapeutic monitoring
Therapeutic range 10–20 mg/L (40–80 μmol/L)
Salicylate (aspirin)
1. Salicylate overdose
Provides an indication of severity and action to be taken. May 
indicate need for haemodialysis if >900 mg/L (6.4 mmol/L)
2. Comatose patient with 
suspected drug overdose
To exclude co-ingestion of salicylate
Solvents
1. Suspected poisoning in an 
unconscious patient
May provide diagnosis
2. Behavioural disturbance or 
suspected abuse
May confirm exposure
3. Industrial exposure
Tests can confirm excessive exposure
Theophylline
1. Acute overdose
High concentrations of >80 mg/L (440 μmol/L) in a severely 
symptomatic patient (convulsions, cardiac arrhythmias) 
may be an indication for haemoperfusion
2. Therapeutic monitoring
Toxicity may occur at 30 mg/L (170 μmol/L) in regular therapy. 
(Therapeutic range 10–20 mg/L)
Toxicology screen
1. Suspected acute poisoning in 
an unconscious patient
May provide diagnosis
2. Behavioural disturbance due to 
suspected abuse or poisoning
May provide diagnosis
3. Confirmation of brain stem 
death when drug administration 
is known or suspected
Presence of potentially toxic drugs prevents diagnosis of 
brain stem death
MDA, 3,4-methylenedioxyamfetamine; MDMA, 3,4-methylenedioxymetamfetamine; NSAID, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug.
794	
Clinical biochemistry
General supportive care
In the severely ill patient, general supportive care may 
be life saving. Regular turning will be needed to pre-
vent pressure necrosis of tissues, and care of the eyes and 
mouth will also be required.
Intestinal decontamination
Decontamination of the gut following ingestion of poi-
sons is controversial. Syrup of ipecacuanha to induce 
emesis is now obsolete; there is little evidence that it is ef-
fective in emptying the stomach. In the comatose patient, 
gastric lavage is still occasionally used. However, this pro-
cedure may wash some of the poison further down the 
gut, and it is now rarely recommended.
The most widely used method of gut decontamination 
is to administer activated charcoal, which adsorbs almost 
all drugs and poisons. The main exceptions are iron and 
­lithium, which are poorly adsorbed, and alcohols and 
glycols, whose molar load usually exceeds the adsorptive 
capacity of the charcoal. Repeated doses of activated 
­charcoal may be used for sustained-release preparations 
that have delayed absorption, and may also be used to 
eliminate certain ­poisons from the body if there is sig-
nificant enterohepatic recycling (e.g. carbamazepine and 
theophylline).
Antidotes
Antidotes form an important part of the management 
of certain poisons. In some cases (as with paracetamol, 
opioids, cardiac glycosides, organophosphates and snake 
bites), they may be life-saving. However, it should be 
noted that antidotal treatment is only required in a minor-
ity of poisonings. The most debated areas with regard to 
antidotes concern their effectiveness in ‘late’ paracetamol 
poisoning (when the patient presents more than 12 h after 
ingestion) and their effectiveness and use in the manage-
ment of poisonings by metals. A list of commonly used 
antidotes is given in Table 40.4.
TABLE 40.4  Commonly used antidotes
Poison
Antidote
Mechanism of action
Anticoagulants (warfarin type)
Vitamin K (phytomenadione)
Competitive antagonist at site of active 
prothrombin production in liver
Benzodiazepines
Flumazenil
Competitive antagonist at benzodiazepine 
receptors (often not recommended as may 
worsen toxicity by causing convulsions)
β-Blockers
Isoprenaline
Glucagon
Competitive antagonist at β-receptors.
Stimulates myocardial adenyl cyclase
Carbon monoxide
Oxygen (normobaric or hyperbaric)
Competitive displacement of carbon monoxide 
from haemoglobin, myoglobin and cytochrome 
molecules
Cyanide
Dicobalt edentate
Sodium nitrite
Sodium thiosulfate
Hydroxocobalamin
Chelates cyanide
Forms methaemoglobin, which combines with 
cyanide
Substrate for enzymatic detoxification of cyanide
Combines with cyanide to form cyanocobalamin
Digoxin, digitoxin
Fab antibody fragments
Antidote forms an inert complex with drug
Ethylene glycol
Ethanol
Competitive substrate for alcohol dehydrogenase, 
slows toxic metabolite production
Fomepizole (4-methyl pyrazole)
Inhibits alcohol dehydrogenase, slows toxic 
metabolite production
Heavy metals (lead, mercury, 
arsenic)
2,3-Dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA)
Chelating agent
2,3-Dimercapto-1-propanesulfonate 
(DMPS)
Chelating agent
Sodium calcium edentate
Chelating agent
Dimercaprol
Chelating agent
D-Penicillamine
Chelating agent
Hydrofluoric acid
Calcium gluconate
Forms an inert complex (calcium fluoride)
Iron salts
Desferrioxamine
Chelating agent
Methanol
Ethanol
Competitive substrate for alcohol dehydrogenase, 
slows toxic metabolite production
Fomepizole (4-methyl pyrazole)
Inhibits alcohol dehydrogenase, slows toxic 
metabolite production
Methaemoglobin
Methylthioninium chloride (methylene 
blue)
Cofactor for reduction of methaemoglobin by 
NADPH
Ascorbic acid
Reducing agent
Narcotic analgesics (heroin, 
methadone etc.)
Naloxone
Competitive antagonist at opioid receptors
Organophosphates
Atropine
Competitive antagonist at acetylcholine receptors
Pralidoxime; obidoxime
Cholinesterase reactivators
Paracetamol
Acetylcysteine
Accelerates detoxification of potentially toxic 
metabolite
Thallium
Berlin (Prussian) blue
Chelating agent
	
40  Poisoning	
795
Elimination techniques
In some types of poisoning, active elimination techniques 
are indicated. This approach is most widely used in poi-
soning by salicylates, theophylline, ethylene glycol and 
methanol. The techniques include repeated oral doses 
of activated charcoal, enhanced renal elimination (by 
alkalinization of the urine or diuresis), haemoperfusion 
and haemodialysis. Haemodialysis may be required for 
the elimination of the poison (most notably in the case 
of salicylates, ethylene glycol and methanol) or for the 
support of renal function. Exchange transfusion may be 
used in infants. Peritoneal dialysis, plasmapheresis and 
continuous arteriovenous haemofiltration are less useful 
in removing poisons, although the latter is an effective 
technique to support renal function.
SPECIFIC POISONS
Paracetamol (acetaminophen)
Although paracetamol is safe when taken in the recom-
mended dose, it is potentially very toxic in overdose and, 
since it is widely available over the counter, it is currently 
the commonest cause of admissions to hospital for poi-
soning and also of acute hepatic necrosis. It causes ap-
proximately 150 deaths each year in Britain.
Mechanisms
Paracetamol is rapidly absorbed from the upper gastroin-
testinal tract and the majority is metabolized by conjuga-
tion with sulfate or glucuronate to non-toxic derivatives. 
However, a small proportion (approximately 8–10%) 
is metabolized by a specific cytochrome P450 enzyme, 
CYP2E1, to produce a highly reactive intermediate, 
N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine (NAPQI). This reactive 
metabolite can be metabolized by conjugation to form 
non-toxic mercapturic acid conjugates, provided gluta-
thione is present in the liver cell. When an overdose of 
paracetamol is taken, the rate of production of NAPQI 
may exhaust existing glutathione stores and the capacity 
of the liver to synthesize glutathione (Fig. 40.2). In this 
case, NAPQI covalently binds to sulfhydryl groups in 
hepatocytes, forming an irreversible complex, which can 
result in acute centrilobular necrosis of the liver. Since 
paracetamol is also metabolized in the cells of the renal 
tubules, a similar process can also occur in the kidneys, 
leading to acute kidney injury. There is usually a small 
amount of renal damage in the presence of hepatic dam-
age, but occasionally renal damage predominates and 
acute kidney injury may rarely be the presenting feature 
of paracetamol poisoning.
Toxic dose
The upper therapeutic limit for an adult of 4 g daily in 
divided doses is generally accepted as being safe, but 
doses above this can cause severe hepatotoxicity and pos-
sibly death. However, owing to the wide variation in the 
metabolic handling of paracetamol by the body, much 
larger overdoses (>50 g) may have little effect in some 
individuals, producing nothing more than a minor rise in 
plasma aminotransferase activities.
Clinical features
In the first hours after ingestion of an overdose of 
paracetamol, symptoms may be minimal, unless it has been 
taken with some other drug, for example in a compound 
formulation with dihydrocodeine. There may be malaise, 
nausea and vomiting. A very large overdose may cause de-
pression of consciousness or metabolic acidosis. By 24–36 h, 
there may be pain in the right hypochondrium. Plasma ami-
notransferase activities will rise at this time, but the peak val-
ues are a poor indicator of prognosis. The prothrombin time 
(or international normalized ration, INR) is a reliable prog-
nostic indicator of severe hepatotoxicity. Hypoglycaemia 
and coagulation defects may complicate the hepatic failure. 
By about 48 h, the early signs of hepatic encephalopathy 
may appear. Death usually occurs after five or six days.
Management
Giving an antidote is more important than emptying the 
stomach or giving activated charcoal. After a single acute 
overdose, an antidote should be given if the patient’s plasma 
paracetamol concentration is on or above the line on the 
treatment nomogram (Fig.  40.3). The need for treat-
ment following repeated supratherapeutic dosing (stag-
gered overdose) cannot be assessed using the nomogram 
and treatment decisions are based on the dose ingested 
and the patient’s body weight. Repeated plasma paracetamol 
FIGURE 40.2  ■  Metabolism of paracetamol. Induction of the cy-
tochrome P450 pathway increases the production of the toxic 
metabolite, N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine, causing depletion 
of glutathione stores; a protein-depleted diet leading to defi-
ciency of amino acids may make less glutathione available. In 
both cases, increased toxicity may result following an overdose.
796	
Clinical biochemistry
estimations should not be performed routinely, but may be 
helpful in doubtful cases.
Acetylcysteine is the antidote of choice and the intra-
venous route is the only reliable method of treatment in 
a patient who is comatose or vomiting. Although the ef-
fectiveness of acetylcysteine diminishes considerably with 
time once 12 h have passed since ingestion, later admin-
istration improves outcome even in patients with estab-
lished liver failure. Acetylcysteine should also be given if 
the time of the overdose is in doubt or not known. Its 
main adverse effect is anaphylactoid reactions, which 
respond to administration of antihistamines and discon-
tinuation or slowing of the infusion.
Salicylate
Although the use of aspirin (acetylsalicylic acid) as an 
analgesic is decreasing, the management of salicylate 
poisoning remains a major challenge. The potentially le-
thal dose in adults is between 24 and 30 g, but death can 
occur in children under 18  months, from as little as 
300 mg. Most fatal poisonings occur in elderly people, 
because they lack the metabolic reserves to cope with 
salicylate poisoning and also because attempted suicide 
with aspirin is commoner in old age. The use of aspirin 
preparations in children under 16 years of age is largely 
restricted to rheumatological indications because of the 
risk of Reye syndrome in children given aspirin for viral 
illnesses. However, this risk is very low.
Mechanisms
The mechanisms involved in salicylate poisoning are mul-
tiple and complex. The clinical features are mainly due to 
gastrointestinal irritation, stimulation of the respiratory 
centre causing respiratory alkalosis and uncoupling of 
oxidative phosphorylation, leading to heat production 
and metabolic acidosis. Many other mechanisms are also 
involved in salicylate poisoning. These are summarized 
and correlated with the clinical features in Figure 40.4.
Clinical features
Salicylate poisoning usually presents with nausea and 
vomiting, increased rate and depth of respiration, sweat-
ing, tinnitus and sometimes deafness. Consciousness is 
preserved initially, but confusion, disorientation and loss 
of consciousness may occur, and usually indicate severe 
poisoning with a poor prognosis. The patient is often 
severely volume depleted because of vomiting, hyper-
ventilation and sweating. Excess heat production usually 
causes compensatory sweating in adults but there may be 
hyperpyrexia in children. There is usually a combined 
compensated metabolic acidosis and respiratory alkalo-
sis, with an arterial [H
+] of 32–40 nmol/L (pH 7.4–7.5). 
Later, the [H
+] rises (pH falls) as the alkali reserve di-
minishes, and this is a serious sign. In infants, metabolic 
acidosis may predominate from the start.
Salicylate overdose increases pulmonary capillary per-
meability, which, in severe poisoning, may cause non-
cardiogenic pulmonary oedema. This presents initially as 
lowering of the arterial oxygen tension and subsequently 
becomes apparent on chest radiographs. Acute kidney 
­injury is rare and is more likely to occur in children than 
in adults.
Laboratory measurements
Plasma salicylate concentration should be measured on 
presentation and at intervals of 4–6 h thereafter, un-
til it has fallen below the toxic range. This is especially 
0
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
2
4
6
8
10
12
Time (hours)
Treatment line
Plasma paracetamol concentration (mg/L)
Plasma paracetamol concentration (mmol/L)
14
16
18
20
22
24
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
FIGURE 40.3  ■  UK nomogram for treatment of paracetamol poisoning.
	
40  Poisoning	
797
important, since salicylates are precipitated in an acidic 
environment and may therefore be deposited in the stom-
ach, resulting in delayed absorption. Plasma concentra-
tions may continue to rise for many hours, particularly 
in serious overdoses. Experience has shown that in most 
cases with a fatal outcome, plasma salicylate concentra-
tions have risen progressively following admission to 
hospital.
Management
Activated charcoal should be given to patients presenting 
to hospital soon after overdose (within 1 h) and a sec-
ond dose may be given if plasma salicylate concentration 
continues to rise. Gastric lavage is rarely, if ever, indi-
cated but may be considered if a patient has presented 
early to hospital after taking a massive overdose. All 
symptomatic patients should have central venous pres-
sure monitored, and fluid replacement and correction 
of electrolyte imbalances, especially hypokalaemia, are 
priorities. Hypoglycaemia may need to be corrected. 
Elimination of salicylate can be promoted by adminis-
tration of sodium bicarbonate to produce a urine pH 
of >7.5 ([H
+] <32 nmol/L). This has been clearly dem-
onstrated, but the concept of ‘forced diuresis’ is now 
no longer used, since the excretion of salicylate is not 
influenced by urine volume. A urinary alkalinization 
regimen is recommended if the plasma salicylate con-
centration is greater than 500 mg/L (3.6 mmol/L). 
Haemodialysis may be necessary in severe poison-
ing with a plasma salicylate concentration >900 mg/L 
(6.4 mmol/L), or lower than this if complications are 
present. As well as removing salicylate, haemodialysis 
can also correct acid–base and electrolyte imbalances 
and is therefore preferred to charcoal haemoperfusion. 
The prothrombin time should be measured; it is rarely 
prolonged, but if it is, phytomenadione (vitamin K) 
should be administered intravenously.
FIGURE 40.4  ■  Pharmacological and metabolic effects of salicylates, leading to biochemical disturbances and clinical effects.
798	
Clinical biochemistry
Chloroquine
In overdose, this drug can produce hypokalaemia ([K
+] 
often <2 mmol/L), coma, convulsions and sudden cardio-
vascular collapse. An acute overdose of >5 g, systolic blood 
pressure <85 mmHg, a QRS complex duration >0.12 s 
and a blood chloroquine concentration >25 μmol/L are 
all regarded as predictors of a fatal outcome. Active re-
moval methods such as haemoperfusion and haemodialy-
sis are ineffective. Aggressive resuscitation with the use 
of intravenous noradrenaline (norepinephrine) and diaz-
epam may be life-saving. After treatment, severe hyper-
kalaemia may ensue, particularly if potassium salts have 
been given to correct hypokalaemia.
Digoxin
Clinical features
Digoxin and other cardiac glycosides, including plant tox-
ins from oleander (Nerium oleander) and yellow oleander 
(Thevetia peruviana), increase the force of contraction of 
the myocardium. Overdose increases the irritability of 
ventricular muscle, resulting in extrasystoles, ventricular 
tachycardia and fibrillation. Conduction is depressed and 
sinus bradycardia and various degrees of block may also 
occur. Since digoxin inhibits Na
+,K
+-ATPase, hyperkalae-
mia is a feature of digoxin poisoning. A plasma potassium 
concentration >5.3 mmol/L (in the absence of any other 
cause of hyperkalaemia) suggests severe poisoning with an 
increased likelihood of cardiac toxicity. Occasionally, the 
plasma potassium concentration itself may rise rapidly to 
life-threatening levels and require urgent treatment.
Other clinical features of acute poisoning include head-
ache, nausea, vomiting, abdominal discomfort, confusion, 
disorientation and visual blurring or distorted colour vision.
Management
Activated charcoal effectively adsorbs digoxin and should 
be used if the patient is not vomiting. Atropine may reverse 
bradycardia. Marked hyperkalaemia should be reversed 
with intravenous insulin and glucose. There is a concern 
that administration of intravenous calcium to counteract 
the effects of hyperkalaemia could worsen digoxin tox-
icity: however, observational studies do not demonstrate 
any adverse effects. Whenever there is evidence of severe 
poisoning such as cardiovascular collapse or refractory 
hyperkalaemia, digoxin-specific Fab antibody fragments 
should be obtained urgently. Given intravenously in an 
appropriate dose, this treatment should produce reversal 
of signs of toxicity within 20–30 min. These Fab antibod-
ies interfere with commonly available assays for digoxin, 
so measurements of serum digoxin concentration after 
treatment will not be reliable.
Iron
Toxicity
Iron absorption is normally regulated by the intesti-
nal mucosa. In overdose, iron-containing medication is 
corrosive and damages the mucosa, so that iron ions are 
absorbed in toxic amounts. When the plasma iron ex-
ceeds the iron binding capacity of transferrin, unbound 
iron circulates freely and may damage the liver, kidneys, 
cardiovascular system and central nervous system, lead-
ing to multi-organ failure.
Toxic doses in terms of elemental iron content are:
•	 mild-to-moderate poisoning: >20 mg/kg
•	 severe poisoning: >75 mg/kg
•	 lethal dose: >150 mg/kg.
Clinical features
The clinical course of iron poisoning can conveniently be 
divided into four phases. During the first 6 h there may be 
vomiting, abdominal pain and diarrhoea, resulting from 
direct irritation of the gastrointestinal mucosa. The vom-
itus or stools may be dark or blood stained and may smell 
metallic. Severe fluid loss can lead to lethargy, convul-
sions, coma, metabolic acidosis and shock. Leukocytosis 
(>15 × 10
9/L) and hyperglycaemia (>8.3 mmol/L) indi-
cate severe poisoning. This phase usually resolves after 
6 h and the patient is often relatively well for the next 
18 h. By about 24 h, the patient’s condition may worsen: 
this indicates severe poisoning. Features in this third 
phase include lethargy, coma, convulsions, cardiovascular 
collapse, metabolic acidosis, hypoglycaemia and renal and 
hepatic failure with coagulation abnormalities. Finally, a 
fourth phase of poisoning may follow the acute episode; 
it consists of stricture formation that may lead to small 
bowel obstruction 2–5 weeks after poisoning.
Analysis
Blood should be taken 2–6 h after ingestion. Measurement 
of serum iron concentration after 6 h may underestimate 
the amount of free iron because of distribution into tis-
sues. Serum iron concentrations in excess of total iron 
binding capacity indicate severe poisoning, but the es-
timation of iron binding capacity may be unreliable in 
overdose because of the shortcomings of the methods 
used. The serum iron concentration at 4 h after ingestion 
is the most reliable guide:
•	 <3 mg/L (55 μmol/L): mild toxicity
•	 3–5 mg/L (55–90 μmol/L): moderate toxicity
•	 >5 mg/L (>90 μmol/L): severe toxicity.
Treatment
Chelation therapy. Desferrioxamine binds free iron and 
the non-toxic complex is excreted by the kidneys. The 
decision to use it should be based upon the patient’s clini-
cal condition and on laboratory analysis. Once parenteral 
desferrioxamine has been given, colorimetric assay meth-
ods for iron are misleading because they measure both 
free and chelated iron.
Other metals
Poisoning with lead, mercury, bismuth, thallium or arse-
nic is uncommon, but may arise from deliberate, acciden-
tal or occupational exposure. Lead poisoning in children 
	
40  Poisoning	
799
may be due to pica or follow the use of surma eye make-
up in Asian children; in adults it is usually the result of 
occupational exposure.
The characteristic features of lead toxicity are anae-
mia with punctate basophilia of the red cells, peripheral 
muscle weakness, abdominal pain, colic and constipation, 
and encephalopathy if concentrations are high. Chronic 
poisoning may produce learning difficulties in children. 
Chelating agents such as 2,3-dimercaptosuccinic acid 
(DMSA) and 2,3-dimercaptopropane sulfonate (DMPS) 
are more effective than the traditional sodium calcium 
edetate and other chelating agents. DMSA and DMPS 
are water-soluble analogues of dimercaprol. DMSA is 
more effective in chelating lead, while DMPS can be used 
for mercury. Important advantages of DMSA and DMPS 
over the older chelating agents are that they can be given 
orally as an outpatient treatment and do not interfere 
with zinc and copper metabolism.
Orthopaedic implants, such as hip replacements, may 
contain cobalt and chromium metal. If the implant is 
functioning well, blood metal concentrations will be very 
low. However, elevated concentrations >119 nmol/L (co-
balt) or >134.5 nmol/L (chromium) are associated with a 
failing implant and may lead to local tissue reactions, with 
malignant tumours being described in case reports. In the 
UK, the Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory 
Agency has issued guidance about the follow-up of pa-
tients who have specific types of hip implants. They rec-
ommend at least annual assessment of patients during 
the life of the implant, with more frequent assessment if 
whole blood concentrations of either chromium or co-
balt are above the defined limits. It is unclear if elevated 
blood cobalt or chromium concentrations produce sys-
temic toxicity in the setting of a failing hip replacement. 
However, hip revision should be considered if they are 
persistently elevated.
Organophosphates
Organophosphate poisoning is a major public health issue 
worldwide resulting in 200 000 deaths each year. Most of 
these occur through ingestion with suicidal intent. In de-
veloped countries, however, the number of poisonings is 
low and deaths are very rare. The most serious poisoning 
occurs by ingestion; cutaneous absorption and inhalation 
of sprays rarely cause serious toxicity.
Toxicity
The acute toxicity of these compounds is due to the inhi-
bition of the enzyme acetylcholinesterase by phosphory-
lation, resulting in an accumulation of acetylcholine at 
postganglionic parasympathetic nerve endings (mus-
carinic receptors), parasympathetic ganglia (nicotinic 
receptors) and neuromuscular junctions (nicotinic re-
ceptors). All the organophosphates inhibit both red cell 
acetylcholinesterase and plasma cholinesterase (pseudo-
cholinesterase) and this provides the basis for biological 
monitoring of toxicity (red cell measurements being pre-
ferred for acute toxicity). For monitoring of occupational 
exposure, regular measurement of plasma cholinesterase 
activity should be carried out: a reduction of the pre-­
employment value by 30% indicates excessive exposure 
and the worker should be removed from exposure pend-
ing recovery of enzyme activity.
Phosphorylated 
acetylcholinesterase 
is 
relatively 
stable, which means that the features of poisoning may 
persist longer than the presence of the organophosphate 
in the bloodstream. Spontaneous reactivation of the en-
zyme depends mainly on the chemical structure of the 
organophosphate. Exposure to compounds such as di-
methylphosphates and dimethylphosphorothioates leads 
to dealkylation of the enzyme (a process referred to as 
‘ageing’), which makes the enzyme inaccessible to reac-
tivation, either spontaneously or by administration of 
reactivating agents such as pralidoxime. In poisoning by 
carbamates, the affected acetylcholinesterase undergoes 
rapid spontaneous reactivation.
Clinical features and management
Early symptoms of acute exposure to organophosphates 
are non-specific but lead on to more characteristic fea-
tures. In mild-to-moderate poisoning there may be 
headache, blurred vision, miosis, excessive salivation, 
­lacrimation, sweating, wheezing and lethargy. The pa-
tient should be kept under observation for at least 24 h. 
Severe poisoning may cause coma, convulsions, respira-
tory muscle paralysis, bradycardia and hypotension.
The first step is to maintain a clear airway and en-
sure adequate ventilation, after which atropine should be 
given until atropinization is achieved, that is, the heart rate 
is >80/min, secretions are inhibited or pupils are enlarged.
Pralidoxime (a specific cholinesterase reactivator) should 
ideally be started within 4 h of exposure. In patients who 
present late to hospital, enzyme inactivation becomes less 
reversible and pralidoxime is unlikely to have any effect if 
given after 24–36 h.
The patient may relapse after apparent recovery, as a 
result of an acute myopathy that is distinct from the acute 
toxicity or the delayed neuropathy that may occur after 
several weeks. This has been called the ­‘intermediate 
syndrome’.
Alcohols and glycols
One of the important features about alcohols from the 
clinical chemistry point of view is that they all cause a 
raised osmolar gap; comparison of measured and calcu-
lated osmolality can be used for the early confirmation 
of the potential severity of poisoning by alcohols and 
glycols.
Ethanol (ethyl alcohol)
Ethanol is probably the best known of all toxins. There 
are 100 deaths per year in England and Wales from acute 
alcohol toxicity, but the numbers of deaths from other 
causes, including road accidents and accidents in the 
workplace and also from chronic hepatic damage and 
cancers, is considerably greater than this, with the total 
toll being over 25 000 deaths each year. When alcohol is 
taken acutely, effects on behaviour can be demonstrated 
800	
Clinical biochemistry
at blood concentrations as low as 200 mg/L (4.3 mmol/L). 
Intellectual performance, judgement and coordination 
are progressively impaired at increasing blood concentra-
tions. The legal limit in the UK for being in charge of a 
motor vehicle is 800 mg/L (17.4 mmol/L). By 1600 mg/L 
(35 mmol/L), most people have marked impairment of 
coordination and are obviously drunk. However, toler-
ant individuals may have a blood alcohol concentration 
of >5000 mg/L (110 mmol/L), without apparent behav-
ioural impairment. By contrast, death from acute toxicity 
may occur in non-tolerant individuals with blood etha-
nol concentrations in the range 2000–3000 mg/L 
(43–65 mmol/L). A fatal outcome from acute alcohol 
­toxicity may result from cardiac or respiratory depression 
or from aspiration of vomit.
The effects of ethanol are increased by sedative and 
hypnotic agents, and deep coma may occur in a patient 
who has taken a combination of a relatively small amount 
of alcohol plus a small overdose of a benzodiazepine. The 
clinical assessment of a patient with a severe head injury 
may be confused by alcohol intoxication. In children, 
convulsions and hypoglycaemia may result from acute 
alcohol intoxication. Alcohol potentiates rebound hypo-
glycaemia and may also cause marked hypoglycaemia in 
adults. Alcoholic ketoacidosis may follow bouts of heavy 
drinking (see Chapter 5).
Dilute ethanol enhances gastric emptying, but high 
concentrations (e.g. at the strength found in spirits) may 
cause gastric irritation and can delay stomach emptying. 
In rare cases, haemodialysis may be indicated to remove 
ethanol from the bloodstream, but supportive care is usu-
ally sufficient.
Heavy ingestion of alcohol may lead to the clinical 
picture of alcoholic hepatitis, with fever, leukocytosis and 
hepatomegaly. More chronic ingestion can lead to hypertri-
glyceridaemia; hyperuricaemia is also common in chronic 
heavy alcohol drinkers. A pseudo-Cushing syndrome oc-
curs in a proportion of alcoholics and may be accompanied 
by an alcoholic myopathy. The commonest pathological 
sequel of long-term alcohol abuse is alcoholic cirrhosis, 
which is accompanied by typical physical signs and the bio-
chemical changes of hepatic impairment. Acute bleeding 
may occur from ruptured oesophageal varices. The most 
important tests for detecting chronic abuse, apart from the 
detection of alcohol in a morning blood or urine sample, 
are plasma γ-glutamyltransferase activity and carbohydrate 
deficient transferrin concentration (see Chapter 13).
The alcohol-dependent patient who discontinues 
drinking because of an accident or a hospital admission 
may develop the alcohol withdrawal syndrome, in which 
there is a risk of convulsions and death. Initial irritability 
may develop into frank hallucinations and infusion of a 
sedative drug such as clomethiazole may be needed.
Methanol (methyl alcohol)
Methanol is a common constituent of car engine anti-
freezes. Model aircraft fuel also contains methanol, as do 
some screenwashes, varnishes and thinners. As little as 
10 mL of pure methanol in a child and 50 mL in an adult 
can be fatal, causing profound metabolic acidosis, coma, 
convulsions and blindness.
Plasma osmolality, acid–base status and renal function 
should be checked in all patients with methanol inges-
tion. Direct measurement of blood methanol concentra-
tion is preferable to measurement of plasma osmolality 
(which is a surrogate indicator), but may not be available 
in a clinically useful timeframe. If plasma osmolality is 
normal and there is no acidosis (normal osmolal and an-
ion gap), treatment is not required. Enzymatic metabo-
lism of methanol to toxic metabolites can be prevented 
by either fomepizole (4-methyl pyrazole) or ethyl alco-
hol administration. Fluid administration may be required 
to maintain an adequate urine output for elimination of 
methanol. Acidosis should be corrected with intravenous 
sodium bicarbonate. Haemodialysis is indicated if visual 
disturbance is present, there are features of CNS toxic-
ity or severe metabolic acidosis or if the patient develops 
acute kidney injury.
Ethylene glycol
Ethylene glycol is a common constituent of automobile 
antifreezes. If ingested, it tends initially to cause signs 
of alcoholic intoxication followed later by tachycardia, 
pulmonary oedema, convulsions and then acute kidney 
injury (see Fig.  40.5). Metabolic acidosis, leukocytosis, 
hypocalcaemia and crystalluria are characteristic, owing 
mainly to the metabolic production of oxalate, which 
then combines with calcium. Oxalate deposition may lead 
to meningism and acute tubular injury. The presence of 
calcium oxalate crystals in the urine is typical and is a use-
ful diagnostic feature.
The main principles of treatment are as for methanol 
poisoning: to delay the metabolism of ethylene glycol to 
toxic metabolites by administering fomepizole or ethyl 
alcohol, to correct the metabolic acidosis and to hasten 
the elimination of ethylene glycol by increasing urine 
output or, in severe cases, by using haemodialysis. In ad-
dition, plasma calcium concentration should be moni-
tored (hypocalcaemia should be corrected if it occurs), as 
should renal function (acute kidney injury may require 
haemodialysis).
Drug and substance abuse
Many drugs and chemicals are widely abused and some 
cause serious medical complications. There are ap-
proximately 600 deaths from opioid abuse, 150 from co-
caine and 30 deaths from volatile substance abuse each 
year in the UK and, although other abused substances 
cause fewer deaths, they remain an important cause of 
morbidity.
Apart from opioid toxicity, the management of 
poisoning with this group of agents is mainly symp-
tomatic. Confirmation of exposure is often necessary 
for diagnostic or medicolegal reasons and Table 40.5 
gives a guide to the typical times during which urine 
tests remain positive. Immunologically based point-
of-care urine tests are commonly used for diagnosis 
of poisoning by drugs such as opioids, cocaine, canna-
bis, amfetamine and metamfetamine (usually includes 
3,4-methylenedioxymetamfetamine, 
MDMA, 
see 
below). Tests are also available for benzodiazepines, 
	
40  Poisoning	
801
methadone (which is structurally different to other 
opioids and does not give a positive result in tests for 
opioids), and phencyclidine (ketamine will cross-react 
in this test).
Amfetamines
The amfetamines are frequently abused for their stimu-
lant effects. Amfetamine sulphate may be injected, in-
haled or taken orally. Methylamfetamine (‘crystal meth’ 
or ‘ice’) comes in the form of crystals that can be smoked 
and is about 20 times more potent than amfetamine sul-
phate, but has similar effects.
The main complications of amfetamine toxicity 
include agitation, convulsions, cardiac arrhythmias, 
hyperthermia and myoglobinuric acute kidney injury, 
which can be aggravated by volume depletion. There 
is no specific pharmacological antidote and manage-
ment is generally supportive. Sedation and anticon-
vulsants will be needed for the patient who is agitated 
or fitting, and maintaining an acidic urine markedly 
increases the excretion of amfetamine and shortens its 
elimination half-life. However, if there is a suspicion 
of rhabdomyolysis, for example following repeated 
seizures, or if the plasma creatine kinase activity is 
raised or myoglobinuria is present, then alkalinization 
of the urine is recommended to prevent myoglobin-
uric kidney injury.
3,4-Methylenedioxymetamfetamine (MDMA)
3,4-Methylenedioxymetamfetamine, 
also 
known 
as 
‘Ecstasy’ or ‘E’, is an amfetamine derivative with differ-
ent properties from amfetamine; it typically produces 
euphoria, empathy and a subjective sense of increased en-
ergy, which is the reason why it has become popular as a 
‘dance drug’. First synthesized in 1914, it was briefly used 
as a mood-modifying agent, but was banned in the UK 
in 1977. In the usual doses (tablets or capsules contain 
30–150 mg; users take between half and five orally dur-
ing the course of an evening), it has few adverse effects 
in the majority of people. The commonest effects are 
FIGURE 40.5  ■  Metabolism and clinical effects of ethanol, methanol and ethylene glycol. Clinical effects are given in brackets; enzymes 
are in italics. The higher affinity of ethanol for alcohol dehydrogenase is the rationale for its use as an antidote in poisoning with other 
alcohols. Fomepizole also inhibits metabolism of alcohols by its high affinity for alcohol dehydrogenase.
TABLE 40.5  Duration of positive results in urine 
after a typical dose taken by a drug abuser
Substance
Limit of 
detection
Time of detection
Amfetamine
0.25 mg/L
1–2 days
Barbiturates
0.5 mg/L
1–3 days 
(longer for 
phenobarbital)
Cannabis
50–300 μg/L
2 days to 3 weeks 
(depends on 
usage and limit 
set)
Cocaine
0.3 mg/L
2–3 days
Codeine
0.25 mg/L
1–2 days
Dihydrocodeine
0.25 mg/L
1–2 days
LSD
0.5 mg/L
2–3 days
MDMA (‘Ecstasy’)
0.1 mg/L
1–2 days
Methadone
0.25 mg/L
2–5 days
Morphine
0.5 mg/L
1–2 days
Propoxyphene
0.3 mg/L
2–4 days
LSD, lysergic acid diethylamide; MDMA, 
3,4-methylenedioxymetamfetamine.
802	
Clinical biochemistry
trismus, tachycardia, sweating and agitation. A small pro-
portion of users develop muscle pain and stiffness, which 
may persist for a week. When the drug is taken before or 
during strenuous exercise such as dancing, it may lead, 
in rare cases, to collapse, convulsions and acute hyper-
thermia, rapidly followed by disseminated intravascular 
coagulation and rhabdomyolysis. Deaths have occurred 
after a single dose.
The reason for collapse is related to the combination 
of physical hyperactivity and inadequate fluid replace-
ment, but it is not known why only a very small num-
ber of individuals are affected. Management initially 
should be directed to restoring fluid volume and re-
ducing body temperature. Intravenous dantrolene may 
be effective. Ingestion of MDMA may also produce a 
serotonin ­syndrome, which is characterized by a triad 
of altered mental status (agitation, confusion), neuro-
muscular ­hyperactivity (clonus) and autonomic instabil-
ity (hyperthermia, tachycardia). In order to prevent the 
hyperthermia becoming fatal, paralysis and ventilation 
may be required. Another complication of MDMA use 
is hyponatraemia, which usually occurs when excess fluid 
has been taken but there has been insufficient exercise to 
sweat off the fluid. This occurs because MDMA causes 
serotonin production, which in turn causes release of ex-
cess arginine vasopressin (antidiuretic hormone) from the 
posterior pituitary. The patient is likely to be confused 
and may have convulsions, but has a normal body tem-
perature. Plasma sodium will be ≤125 mmol/L. The most 
important step in management is to avoid giving any flu-
ids; most patients will recover spontaneously.
Although MDMA is taken because it causes the re-
lease in the nervous system of large amounts of serotonin, 
which is one of the neurotransmitters responsible for the 
‘high’ caused by the drug, this leads to depletion of sero-
tonin and a ‘midweek low’ is a well-known consequence 
of MDMA consumption. Serotonin neurotoxicity has 
been demonstrated in animals, and a reduction in cogni-
tive abilities, particularly memory, has been demonstrated 
in humans following chronic intermittent use.
Heroin (diamorphine)
Heroin abuse is common in the UK, causing over 500 
deaths per year. Many of these are from respiratory 
failure, which may occur after the first use of the drug. 
Experienced users may die from acute respiratory depres-
sion or aspiration of vomit following loss of tolerance af-
ter a period of abstinence. Tolerance is rapidly lost; the 
dose requirement may fall by 10-fold over a period of 
2–3 days of abstinence, so that the dose which previously 
produced euphoria may prove fatal.
The classic signs of opioid toxicity consist of de-
pressed consciousness, which may amount to profound 
coma, small or ‘pinpoint’ pupils (pethidine is an excep-
tion to this and the atropine in Lomotil
®, a mixture of 
diphenoxylate and atropine, may cause dilated pupils) 
and respiratory depression. The pattern of opioid in-
duced respiratory depression is characteristic and con-
sists of a slowing of respiration, whereas other respiratory 
depressants tend to decrease the depth of respiration 
with less effect on the rate. An adequate dose of naloxone 
should reverse these symptoms; an initial dose may only 
produce a minimal or partial response and further doses 
may be required. The presence of other central nervous 
depressant drugs or other causes of coma may mask the 
response to naloxone.
Once the diagnosis of opioid toxicity has been con-
firmed by administration of naloxone, the choice can be 
made as to whether to continue reversal with an infusion 
of naloxone sufficient to maintain adequate spontaneous 
respiration or whether to ventilate the patient until the 
drug is metabolized. Diamorphine has a short elimina-
tion half-life of 2–4 h, so that treatment may not need 
to be prolonged. Other opioid drugs such as buprenor-
phine, dihydrocodeine, methadone and dextropropoxy-
phene have considerably longer elimination half-lives 
and a longer period of recovery should be anticipated.
Complications of heroin overdose include a chemi-
cal pneumonitis owing to aspiration of vomit, non-­
cardiogenic pulmonary oedema and non-traumatic 
rhabdomyolysis. The question of provoking heroin 
withdrawal symptoms in an addict by administration of 
naloxone is often raised; opioid withdrawal is a non-
fatal condition, which is, in any case, short-lived be-
cause of the short duration of effect of a single dose of 
naloxone (10–30 min).
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD)
Lysergic acid diethylamide is a synthetic hallucinogen, 
which may lead to a patient being admitted to an inten-
sive therapy unit because of behavioural disturbances, ac-
cidents or suicide attempts. There is no specific antidote.
Cocaine
The hydrochloride is typically snorted through a straw 
or a rolled up bank note, while the free base form, in 
small crystals or ‘rocks’, is drawn directly into the lungs 
by flaming a rock with a cigarette lighter. Cocaine pro-
duces marked vasospasm and hypertension, and patients 
most frequently present to emergency departments with 
chest pain. They may also present with confusion, con-
vulsions, myocardial infarction, acute heart failure or 
cerebral haemorrhage. There is no specific antidote, but 
intravenous diazepam relieves the chest pain and reduces 
the risk of convulsions. After this, blood pressure may be 
controlled with agents such as intravenous nitrates. Other 
management is supportive.
Cannabis
Tetrahydrocannabinol, the active ingredient of the can-
nabis plant, combines with receptors in the brain and 
periphery to cause mental effects together with vasodi-
latation and tachycardia. Effects last a few hours, but the 
drug can persist in tissues for a long time. Acute overdose 
is unlikely to be fatal, but heavy use is cumulative and can 
lead to agitation, hallucinations and paranoid behaviour.
The main psychoactive component of cannabis, Δ9-
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC), reaches peak concentration 
in the blood within minutes of smoking, but rapid absorp-
tion by fatty tissues then leads to a rapid fall. However, 
	
40  Poisoning	
803
one of the main metabolites of cannabis, 11-nor-Δ9-
tetrahydrocannabinol carboxylic acid (carboxy-THC), 
which is detectable in the blood shortly after use, persists 
in the blood for a week or more. Immunoassays do not 
distinguish between active THC and its inactive metab-
olites. For this reason, blood or urine tests may remain 
positive for a long time after cannabis consumption, and 
cannot be taken to indicate intoxication.
Solvents
Volatile substance abuse (solvent abuse, ‘glue sniffing’) 
is relatively common in teenagers. Most obtain a sen-
sation of intoxication within seconds of inhalation and 
come to little harm. The commonest substance abused 
is toluene. However, if the dose is too high, coma and 
convulsions may ensue and inhalation of vomit is a 
possibility. Since volatile substances (particularly chlo-
rinated hydrocarbons) sensitize the myocardium to cat-
echolamines, cardiac arrhythmias may occur and cause a 
fatal outcome. Butane from cigarette lighter refills may 
be inhaled directly; the gas may cause asphyxia or its 
cooling effect may cause cardiac arrest through vagal 
inhibition.
Chronic complications of solvent abuse are unusual, 
but brain, liver and kidney damage have all been reported. 
Carcinogenesis has not been documented. Management 
is generally symptomatic; cardiac arrhythmias may re-
spond to an intravenous dose of a β-blocker.
Benzodiazepines
The benzodiazepines are widely thought to be non-fatal 
in overdose, but about 200 deaths occur every year in the 
UK from respiratory depression, aspiration of vomit or 
hypothermia. Usually such deaths occur when benzodi-
azepines are combined with other agents such as ethanol. 
In most patients with an uncomplicated benzodiazepine 
overdose, the coma amounts to a deep sleep with an ad-
equate gag reflex and preserved tendon reflexes and re-
sponse to painful stimuli.
Patients rarely need management in an intensive 
therapy unit, but sometimes the drug has been co-­
ingested with ethanol, opioids, barbiturates or tricyclic 
antidepressants. The question may arise as to whether 
flumazenil should be given as a therapeutic or diagnostic 
test. Reversal of benzodiazepine toxicity could provoke 
convulsions due to simultaneously ingested tricyclic 
­antidepressants. In general, it should only be used in 
carefully considered circumstances.
Theophylline
Clinical features
Most oral preparations of theophylline are sustained- 
release formulations. The patient may be asymptomatic 
on presentation. Symptoms usually take several hours 
to develop and include vomiting, abdominal pain, hae-
matemesis, irritability and hyperventilation. A ­sinus 
tachycardia is usual and there may be hypotension, car-
diac arrhythmias (most commonly supraventricular 
tachycardia), convulsions, hypokalaemia and hypergly-
caemia. Coma is not common. Rhabdomyolysis and acute 
kidney injury are rare complications.
Management
Activated charcoal in repeated doses is the treatment 
of choice for severe poisoning. This is indicated if the 
patient is clinically severely poisoned and/or has a 
plasma theophylline concentration >40 mg/L. In life-­
threatening poisoning, charcoal haemoperfusion can be 
used, if available.
Antidepressants
Tricyclic antidepressants
Acute overdose with tricyclic antidepressants is the 
commonest cause of poisoning admissions to intensive 
therapy units in the UK. The mechanisms of toxicity 
are complex and are due to at least three pharmacologi-
cal effects:
•	 an anticholinergic effect, which causes delayed gas-
tric emptying, sinus tachycardia and mydriasis
•	 blockade of noradrenaline uptake at adrenergic syn-
apses, which may produce hypotension
•	 a quinidine-like or membrane-stabilizing effect. In 
low doses, this last effect is antiarrhythmic, but in 
overdose, it delays conduction and depresses con-
tractility. The quinidine-like effect slows sodium 
flux into cells and is the mechanism underlying car-
diac toxicity. It may be aggravated by hypoxaemia 
(Fig. 40.6).
Clinical features. There may be initial nausea, vomiting, 
agitation and hallucinations, giving way to coma. Tendon 
reflexes may be equal and very brisk, with extensor plan-
tar reflexes; as coma deepens, muscle tone becomes 
flaccid and reflexes are lost. The pupils are more often 
mid-sized than widely dilated. Convulsions are common 
and respiratory depression may occur.
The most serious and potentially fatal complications 
are cardiac arrhythmias (most commonly atrioventricular 
block, ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation, 
which may be followed by asystole) and profound hypoten-
sion, which may amount to electromechanical dissociation. 
Pulmonary oedema may occur. The electrocardiogram 
(ECG) shows a sinus tachycardia and there may be a right 
bundle branch block pattern. A QRS duration >100 ms is 
regarded as the best indicator of risk of cardiac toxicity.
Management. Cardiopulmonary status must be assessed 
urgently and resuscitation commenced if necessary. 
Poisoning is potentially reversible, provided hypoxic ce-
rebral damage has not occurred. In significant poisoning, 
the most important treatment is alkalinization with intra-
venous sodium bicarbonate, aiming for a blood [H
+] of 
32 nmol/L (pH 7.5). This is indicated even in the absence 
of acidosis when there is prolongation of the QRS dura-
tion on ECG, there are cardiac arrhythmias or resistant 
hypotension. Seizures should be treated with benzodiaz-
epines. If recurrent, phenobarbital or thiopentone may 
804	
Clinical biochemistry
be needed in a critical care setting. Phenytoin is contra-
indicated as both tricyclics and phenytoin block cardiac 
sodium channels. In life-threatening poisoning, lipid 
emulsion (e.g. intralipid) therapy may be considered; this 
acts as a lipid reservoir in the circulation that may ‘trap’ 
the drug and reduce the concentration at the receptor.
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors
Toxicity. Several drugs and foods are prohibited for pa-
tients taking monoamine oxidase inhibitors to prevent 
the well-known ‘cheese’ reaction, which consists of a sud-
den and severe rise in blood pressure owing to tyramine-
provoked release of noradrenaline.
Overdose of monoamine oxidase inhibitors produces 
symptoms that build up over 12–24 h, with muscle twitch-
ing progressing to widespread muscle spasms, trismus and 
opisthotonos. The blood pressure may vary between hypo-
tension and moderate hypertension; there is usually a sinus 
tachycardia and the patient is warm to the touch, sweating 
profusely and has fixed dilated pupils. The core tempera-
ture may rise steeply, leading to death from hyperthermia. 
The muscle spasms may lead to rhabdomyolysis, which 
can cause acute kidney injury. Disseminated intravascular 
coagulation may occur as a complication of hyperthermia.
Management. If the rectal temperature rises above 39 °C 
the patient should be electively paralysed with pancuronium 
and mechanically ventilated for 12–24 h both to reduce 
heat generation through muscle spasm (and thus correct 
­hyperthermia) and prevent rhabdomyolysis. Hypotension 
is usually secondary to hypovolaemia, but dopamine may 
be tried if fluid replacement fails to restore blood pressure.
Other antidepressants
Lofepramine. This tricyclic drug is metabolized to de-
sipramine, but toxicity in overdose is usually relatively 
mild and deaths are rare.
Trazodone. This drug is chemically unrelated to the 
tricyclic antidepressants. Toxicity is usually mild, with 
drowsiness, dizziness and occasionally coma.
Venlafaxine. This drug is less cardiotoxic than the tricyclic 
antidepressants, but may cause convulsions in overdose.
Fluvoxamine, fluoxetine, sertraline, paroxetine. These 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors rarely cause serious toxicity 
in overdose, though a mild serotonin syndrome may oc-
cur, and they can also interact with other drugs to produce 
a serotonin syndrome. Management is symptomatic.
Citalopram. This serotonin reuptake inhibitor is more car-
diotoxic than others, producing QT interval prolongation.
Lithium
Toxicity
Lithium is eliminated by the kidneys and reduced re-
nal function can lead to accumulation. The therapeutic 
range is narrow (plasma concentration 0.8–1.2 mmol/L 
in the management of hypomania or mania in bipolar 
affective disorder; 0.4–1.0 mmol/L for prophylaxis: note 
that blood should not be collected into a lithium hepa-
rin tube). Toxicity in therapeutic use can be caused by 
changes in fluid or electrolyte balance (particularly owing 
to reduction in fluid intake or increased fluid loss from 
diarrhoea or vomiting). Diuretic therapy or non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs may also cause toxicity by re-
ducing lithium excretion.
Clinical features
Symptoms of toxicity include confusion, agitation, 
drowsiness, tremor, hyper-reflexia, hypertonia, ataxia, 
vomiting, convulsions and, rarely, electrocardiographic 
changes, diabetes insipidus and acute kidney injury. In 
acute poisoning, serum concentrations of >5 mmol/L 
may be associated with minimal symptoms and the elimi-
nation half-life is relatively rapid. The development of 
marked neurological symptoms is an indication for active 
elimination. Deaths from lithium poisoning are rare, but 
neurological impairment may be permanent.
Management
Lithium is not adsorbed by activated charcoal but is read-
ily excreted by the kidneys and a high urine output should 
be ensured. Saline diuresis enhances lithium excretion 
but urine alkalinization does not.
FIGURE 40.6  ■  Mechanisms by which the membrane-stabilizing 
activity of drugs can cause death.
	
40  Poisoning	
805
In a symptomatic patient with high serum lithium con-
centrations after an acute overdose, haemodialysis should 
be considered. Although efficiently removed by haemo-
dialysis, lithium has a large volume of distribution leading 
to a ‘rebound’ rise in plasma concentrations and repeated 
dialyses may be necessary. Peritoneal dialysis is much less 
effective.
Cyanide
Cyanide can be rapidly fatal. It may be inhaled as hydro-
gen cyanide (either pure, as an industrial gas or as a prod-
uct of combustion in cases of smoke inhalation) or enter 
the body by ingestion of cyanide salts or intestinal hy-
drolysis of cyanogenic glycosides (e.g. following massive 
ingestion of stone fruit kernels or apple pips) or by cuta-
neous absorption of cyanide salts in industrial situations.
Cyanide acts as a chemical asphyxiant, rapidly blocking 
cellular oxygen utilization so that cerebral function and 
circulation are rapidly impaired with the development of 
a metabolic acidosis. Early signs include hyperventilation 
and tachycardia, but coma, cyanosis and convulsions soon 
supervene. Rapid diagnosis and intervention are essential. 
A high inspired oxygen content (or hyperbaric oxygen, if 
available) is an effective treatment, though its mode of 
action is unclear, perhaps being due to simple displace-
ment of cyanide. When the diagnosis is certain, dicobalt 
edetate can be given intravenously over 1 min, repeated as 
necessary, and is an effective antidote. Although relatively 
non-toxic when administered to a patient poisoned with 
cyanide, this antidote can produce severe anaphylactoid 
reactions with laryngeal oedema and convulsions if given 
to a patient who is not poisoned by cyanide. The safest 
course of action is not to give the antidote unless the pa-
tient’s level of consciousness is deteriorating. Another 
group of antidotes (amyl nitrite and sodium nitrite) act 
by producing methaemoglobin, each molecule of which 
can bind four cyanide ions. Sodium thiosulphate acts to 
neutralize cyanide by donating a sulphur group to pro-
duce sodium thiocyanate, in a reaction that is catalysed 
by rhodanese.
Subacute or chronic cyanide toxicity can also occur 
during prolonged nitroprusside therapy. The main clini-
cal feature is a lactic acidosis – if none is present then 
cyanide toxicity can be ruled out. Cyanide measurement 
is not usually necessary: a rapid improvement should oc-
cur after administration of sodium thiosulphate intrave-
nously. Other cyanide antidotes are not indicated.
Carbon monoxide
Toxicity
Carbon monoxide is a colourless, odourless gas produced 
by combustion of carbon-containing compounds. It has a 
high affinity for haemoglobin and cytochrome enzymes, 
and is highly toxic because it acts as a chemical asphyxi-
ant. It accounts for around 50 deaths each year in the 
UK, which may be suicidal from motor vehicle exhaust 
fumes, or accidental, mainly from release of products of 
combustion (of gas, solid or liquid fuels) in the home or 
exposure to fire smoke.
As little as 0.1% carbon monoxide in the inspired air can 
be fatal over a period of several hours, while 1% can be fatal 
in minutes. Toxicity is due mainly to combination of carbon 
monoxide with haemoglobin to form carboxyhaemoglobin, 
but is also due to interference with the cellular uptake of ox-
ygen as a result of its combining with cytochrome enzymes. 
Carboxyhaemoglobin in the blood has a half-life of about 
4 h if the patient is breathing air. The half-life is markedly 
reduced (to 1 h) if the patient is breathing 100% oxygen and 
is still further reduced (to 20 min) if the patient is breathing 
oxygen in a hyperbaric chamber at 2.5 atmospheres, but the 
effectiveness of hyperbaric oxygen in diminishing the toxic-
ity of carbon monoxide is hotly debated.
Clinical features
The symptoms of exposure are non-specific: lethargy, 
nausea, headache, drowsiness, hyperventilation, leading 
to vomiting, collapse, coma and convulsions. Elderly peo-
ple may present with stroke or exacerbation of coronary 
heart disease precipitated by reduced oxygen-­carrying 
capacity of the blood. Non-traumatic rhabdomyolysis 
may occur. If the source of exposure is not apparent, the 
diagnosis may also not be apparent. Once diagnosed or 
suspected, evidence should be sought, for example a mal-
functioning flue from a fire or heating appliance, or mo-
tor exhaust fumes. A rare cause is exposure to methylene 
chloride, which is metabolized to carbon monoxide by 
hepatic smooth endoplasmic reticulum.
Specific physical signs are minimal; the ‘cherry-red’ 
colour of carboxyhaemoglobin is usually only noted at 
post-mortem. Diagnosis of exposure should be made by 
measuring carboxyhaemoglobin on a whole blood sam-
ple. Correlation of the percentage of carboxyhaemoglo-
bin with clinical effects is poor and is complicated by the 
disappearance of carbon monoxide from the blood fol-
lowing exposure, while the clinical effects may remain for 
longer. However, normal values in non-smokers are <1% 
and in smokers <5%. Carbon monoxide is produced dur-
ing the catabolism of tetrapyrroles and severe haemolysis 
in haemolytic anaemia can, rarely, give a carboxyhaemo-
globin as high as 8%.
Management is by removal from exposure, resuscita-
tion as necessary and immediate administration of a high 
inspired oxygen concentration. Blood should be taken at 
the earliest possible moment for carboxyhaemoglobin es-
timation. The role of hyperbaric oxygen therapy in car-
bon monoxide poisoning is controversial but should be 
considered in life-threatening poisoning, if the treatment 
is available.
Methaemoglobinaemia
Causes
The more important causes of life-threatening methaemo-
globinaemia, likely to present with acute symptoms, are:
•	 aniline
•	 sodium or potassium nitrite
•	 amyl or butyl nitrite
•	 sodium or potassium nitrate
•	 sodium or potassium chlorate.
806	
Clinical biochemistry
Nitrites are more potent methaemoglobin formers 
than nitrates, but nitrate can be converted into nitrite 
by intestinal bacteria. Inhaled nitrites (amyl and butyl 
nitrites) produce little methaemoglobin unless the liq-
uid is swallowed, when severe toxicity may occur. Many 
drugs, including sulphonamides, dapsone and local an-
aesthetics, can increase methaemoglobin production 
but are unlikely to produce concentrations exceeding 
30%. It should also be noted that the cause may be iat-
rogenic, for example sodium nitrite given for cyanide 
poisoning.
Symptoms
At low concentrations, the patient may be deeply cya-
nosed but otherwise asymptomatic and require no 
treatment. At high concentrations, the patient may be 
dyspnoeic on exertion and have postural hypotension. At 
severely toxic concentrations, the patient becomes flac-
cid and comatose. Cardiac arrhythmias and convulsions 
may occur and may progress to cardiorespiratory arrest. 
Methaemoglobinaemia should be suspected if the skin has 
a blue or greyish, cyanosed appearance: the blood may be 
a dark or chocolate–brown colour. This colour change 
occurs with methaemoglobin concentrations of 15–20%, 
but clinical symptoms only appear at values >20–30%, 
while consciousness is likely to be lost at >50%. Death is 
common at >70%.
Management
In addition to supportive measures, which should in-
clude 100% oxygen, methaemoglobinaemia may be 
reversed by the administration of intravenous methyl-
thioninium chloride (methylene blue). It should only 
be given to symptomatic patients. When the cause is 
chlorate poisoning, methylene blue is unlikely to re-
verse the methaemoglobinaemia, although ascorbic acid 
can be given. In extreme cases, exchange transfusion 
can be used, though the transfused blood may also be-
come affected and prolong the methaemoglobinaemia. 
Hyperbaric oxygen, if available, may allow sufficient 
oxygen to be transported in solution in the plasma to 
maintain life.
Plant and fungal toxins
Most plants are non-toxic and most childhood inges-
tions of plant material do not lead to toxicity. However, 
many plants contain chemical agents that are potentially 
poisonous when accidentally ingested by children or 
taken as food by adults; in addition, suicidal or homi-
cidal ingestion may occur. Two examples have already 
been given in this chapter: Thevetia and oleander contain 
cardiac glycosides, and the seeds of a number of variet-
ies contain cyanogenic glycosides, which may cause cya-
nide poisoning if sufficient seeds or kernels are ingested. 
Other potentially serious plant poisons are included in 
Table 40.6.
Acute fungal poisoning most commonly arises from 
eating toxic species in mistake for edible species. Many 
mushrooms can cause gastrointestinal symptoms shortly 
after ingestion, but most of these are not associated with 
serious poisoning; a rule of thumb is that mushroom 
poisonings with symptoms starting <6 h after ingestion 
are unlikely to be due to highly toxic species. A few spe-
cies, especially Coprinus atramentarius, can produce an 
Antabuse
®-like reaction if ingested with alcohol, be-
cause they contain a chemical that inhibits aldehyde 
dehydrogenase.
The most important group of poisonous mushrooms 
includes those which contain cyclopeptides known as am-
anitins (Amanita phalloides, A. verna, A. virosa and some 
Galerina and Lepiota species). After an initial period of 
severe diarrhoea, beginning 6–12 h after ingestion, the 
patient may develop fulminant hepatic failure: a single 
mushroom can cause death and the mortality rate from 
ingestion is 20%. Another important and potentially fa-
tally poisonous mushroom species is Gyromitra esculenta, 
which contains gyromitrin. If this chemical is not previ-
ously removed by evaporation or boiling, severe toxicity 
may result from the metabolic conversion of gyromitrin 
to monomethylhydrazine, which is a competitive inhibi-
tor of pyridoxal phosphate. Symptoms start suddenly 
6–12 h after ingestion and consist of headache, vomiting, 
diarrhoea and convulsions. Liver damage may also oc-
cur. The mushroom species Cortinarius contain the toxin 
orellanine that causes acute kidney injury, which may 
require renal replacement therapy, after an initial latent, 
symptomless, phase of several days.
TABLE 40.6  Plants that cause potentially serious poisoning
Plant
Toxic principle
Possibly fatal amount (in an adult)
Ackee (unripe fruit)
Hypoglycin
One fruit
Apple or pear seeds(Malus, Pyrus spp.)
Amygdalin (cyanogenic glycoside)
100 seeds
Castor oil plant(Ricinus communis)
Ricin
Two beans
Death cap (Amanita phalloides)
Amanitin, phalloidin (cyclopeptides)
One mushroom
Galerina spp. mushrooms
Amanitin-type cyclopeptide
One mushroom
Gyromitra spp. mushrooms
Monomethylhydrazine
One mushroom
Holly (Ilex aquifolium)
Ilicin
30 berries
Jequirity (Abrus precatorius)
Abrin
One bean
Oleander (Nerium oleander)
Oleandrin (cardiac glycoside)
One leaf
Stone fruit kernels (Prunus spp.)
Amygdalin (cyanogenic glycoside)
30 kernels
Hemlock water dropwort(Oenanthe crocata)
Oenanthetoxin
Several leaves or one root
Yew (Taxus baccata)
Taxine A and B
50 needles
	
40  Poisoning	
807
CONCLUSION
This chapter outlines the causes, mechanisms and man-
agement of the more important types of human poisoning. 
Poisons – drugs, chemicals and plant and animal toxins – 
can disrupt the physiological and biochemical functions 
of the body in a remarkable variety of ways. Many in-
dividual toxins produce a characteristic clinical and bio-
chemical pattern of harm (‘toxidrome’), which sometimes 
provides the key to the diagnosis. Management involves 
supportive care, decontamination and, in some cases, 
the use of specific antidotes. The clinical biochemistry 
laboratory may become involved in the identification and 
quantification of poisons and also in the monitoring of 
biochemical responses following poisoning; close com-
munication between clinicians and biochemists is neces-
sary for the efficient diagnosis and management of many 
types of poisoning.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
I would like to acknowledge the contribution of the late 
John A. Henry, who wrote the chapter for previous edi-
tions of this book.
Further reading
Baselt RC. Disposition of toxic drugs and chemicals in man. 9th ed Seal 
Beach, CA: Biomedical Publications; 2011. 
Reference work on toxic and fatal levels of drugs and poisons.
Dart RC. Medical toxicology. 3rd ed. London: Lippincott Williams & 
Wilkins; 2004. 
Large, comprehensive text on human poisoning.
Hathaway GJ, Proctor NH. Proctor and Hughes’ chemical hazards of 
the workplace. 5th ed London: John Wiley; 2004. 
Useful and practical book on industrial toxins.
Vale A., Mucklow J., editors. Medicine 2012;40:41–104 and 40:105–66. 
These two issues of the Medicine journal are devoted to poisoning.
APPENDIX 40.1: POISONS CENTRES
TOXBASE, the primary clinical toxicology database of the 
National Poisons Information Service in the UK, is avail-
able on the internet to registered users at: www.toxbase.org. 
It provides information on routine diagnosis, treatment and 
management of patients exposed to drugs, household prod-
ucts and industrial and agricultural chemicals.
Specialist information and advice on the treatment 
of poisoning is available from the UK National Poisons 
Information Service by telephone day and night: Tel: 
0844 892 0111 (July 2013).
Help with identifying capsules or tablets may be avail-
able from a regional medicines information centre.
808
C H A P T E R  4 1
Metabolic effects of tumours
Wassif S. Wassif  •  James E. East
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  808
NEUROENDOCRINE TUMOURS  808
Carcinoid tumours  808
MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA  810
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1  810
Multiple endocrine neoplasia  
type 2  812
Other familial syndromes associated with 
multiple endocrine neoplasia  813
METABOLIC CHANGES IN MALIGNANCY  813
Introduction  813
Paraneoplastic syndromes  814
Cancer cachexia  816
ENDOCRINE SEQUELAE OF TUMOURS AND THEIR 
TREATMENT  818
Effects on somatic growth  818
Reproductive consequences of therapy  819
CONCLUSION  820
INTRODUCTION
Tumours may exert metabolic effects on the host via a 
wide range of mechanisms. Some of the metabolic de-
rangements related to tumours are directly related to a 
hormone or other substance that the tumour secretes. 
Such hormone secretion can be appropriate to the cell 
line from which the tumour originates or may be inappro-
priate or ‘ectopic’. In the last decade, molecular genetic 
techniques have helped characterize tumours and explain 
how neoplastic tissues can secrete hormones that are not 
typically associated with them. Metabolic derangements 
can also arise non-specifically, in the absence of hormone 
secretion or immunological phenomena, for example ow-
ing to tumour burden compromising host metabolism or 
the effects on the host of rapid cell turnover. Autoimmune 
reactions evoked by tumour antigens may also give rise to 
systemic effects and are increasingly being implicated in 
the causation of various tumour-related or paraneoplas-
tic, syndromes. The recognition and characterization of 
the antibodies to shared tumour and host antigens that 
play a prominent role in paraneoplastic syndromes have 
advanced their use in both diagnosis and treatment.
Scientific advances have rapidly opened up new pos-
sibilities for the management of tumours, even in their 
advanced stages, where formerly only observation and 
palliation was possible. Clinical biochemistry has a key 
role in both diagnosis and monitoring treatment.
NEUROENDOCRINE TUMOURS
Neuroendocrine cells can be identified by their pro-
duction of a neurotransmitter, neuromodulator or 
neuropeptide 
hormone. 
Neuroendocrine 
tumours 
(NETs) are distinguished by their ability to secrete 
peptides causing characteristic endocrine syndromes. 
The ­gastroenteropancreatic system has diffuse neu-
roendocrine components and NETs most commonly 
arise from these tissues, more than 50% being carcinoid 
tumours.
Carcinoid tumours
Carcinoids are NETs that arise from enterochromaffin 
cells, principally in the intestine (~80% in the ileum), the 
main bronchi and, rarely, other tissues including the ova-
ries, thymus, pancreas and thyroid. Carcinoid tumours all 
show a similar pattern of neuroendocrine expression and 
may contain or secrete amines, peptides or prostaglan-
dins. The carcinoid syndrome is the clinical result of sys-
temic release of these substances, particularly serotonin.
Clinical presentation
The incidence of carcinoid tumours found at post-mortem 
has been estimated to be as high as 1 in 150, whereas car-
cinoid syndrome only occurs in approximately 1 in every 
50 000 individuals, indicating that most tumours appear 
to be are non-secretory. The products of primary intesti-
nal carcinoids are metabolized in the liver prior to release 
into the systemic circulation: the development of carci-
noid syndrome in patients with a gastrointestinal tumour 
therefore indicates the presence of hepatic metastases. 
Carcinoid tumours at bronchial (~10% of the total) and 
other sites secrete products directly into the systemic cir-
culation and can be associated with carcinoid syndrome 
without the presence of metastases. The main clinical 
features of carcinoid syndrome are flushing and diarrhoea 
(Box 41.1). The diarrhoea tends to be secretory in type 
and weight loss is common. Patients who flush repeatedly 
may, in time, develop a cyanotic telangiectatic appearance, 
which persists. Wheezing may occur, caused by transient 
	
41  Metabolic effects of tumours	
809
bronchoconstriction, which is most commonly associated 
with bronchial carcinoids. Hypertension is not typically a 
feature of carcinoid syndrome: hypotension is more com-
mon. Carcinoid syndrome is also associated with fibrosis; 
the bowel, retroperitoneum (and hence ureters), lungs 
and heart can all be affected. Fibrosis is thought not to 
be linked directly to serotonin but to mitogenic growth 
factors that drive fibroblast proliferation. Tryptophan is a 
precursor of both serotonin and nicotinic acid. Thus, in 
carcinoid syndrome, excess production of serotonin may 
lead to nicotinamide deficiency, manifesting as pellagra 
with dermatitis of sun-exposed areas. Carcinoid crisis has 
been described in certain circumstances including induc-
tion of anaesthesia, liver biopsy and following combina-
tion chemotherapy. It is manifest as extreme flushing, 
explosive diarrhoea, labile blood pressure and cardiac 
rhythm irregularities, including asystole.
Metabolism of serotonin
The rate limiting step in the biosynthesis of serotonin 
is the hydroxylation, by tryptophan hydroxylase, of tryp-
tophan to 5-hydroxytryptophan (5HTP); this is subse-
quently decarboxylated to yield 5-hydroxytryptamine 
(serotonin, 5HT) (see Fig. 41.1). 5-Hydroxytryptamine 
is stored in neurosecretory ­granules or secreted into 
the bloodstream. After ­secretion, some is taken up into 
platelets. Oxidative deamination, catalysed by mono-
amine oxidase and aldehyde dehydrogenase, inactivates 
5HT to 5-­hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5HIAA), which is 
excreted in the urine.
The normal excretion of 5-HIAA is <50 μmol/24 h. In 
patients with typical carcinoids, 99% of metabolized 5HT 
and 5HTP are excreted as 5HIAA. Urinary 5HIAA excre-
tion is typically in the range 150–1500 μmol/24 h, gener-
ally exceeds 500 μmol/24 h and occasionally is as high as 
3000 μmol/24 h. Carcinoid tumours of the colon and rec-
tum do not contain the hydroxylase or decarboxylase en-
zymes and so do not form 5HTP or 5HT. A small number 
of patients have ‘atypical’ tumours. These patients excrete 
large amounts of 5HTP and 5HT in their urine. It is be-
lieved that these tumours, usually bronchial, are deficient 
in dopa decarboxylase and cannot convert 5HTP to 5HT 
so that the former is secreted into the bloodstream. Some 
of the 5HTP is converted to 5HT and subsequently to 
5HIAA in extrarenal sites; some is decarboxylated in the 
kidneys and excreted into the urine as 5HT, and some 
escapes decarboxylation and is excreted directly into the 
urine. Thus, patients with atypical carcinoid tumours have 
a marked increase in 5HTP and 5HT excretion and only a 
moderate increase in 5HIAA excretion.
Even in those patients whose tumours produce pre-
dominantly 5HTP, urinary 5HIAA constitutes 50–60% 
of total urinary 5-hydroxyindoles and increased values are 
found in almost all patients.
Laboratory investigation
The most sensitive indicator of the turnover of serotonin 
and its metabolites is measurement of 5HIAA in a 24 h 
urine sample. A number of dietary substances can inter-
fere in the measurement of 5HIAA and should be avoided 
for three days prior to and during the collection of the 
urine sample (see Box 41.2). The test is not completely 
specific and a negative result is to be expected in patients 
with non-secretory tumours and those of the hindgut that 
do not produce 5HT.
Chromogranin A (CgA) is a 48 kDa protein distributed 
in dense core granules of neuroendocrine cells, the high-
est plasma concentrations being found in patients with 
carcinoid tumours. It has been reported to have a sensi-
tivity of 75–85% and a specificity of 84–95% in the di-
agnosis of carcinoid syndrome. It is not dependent upon 
FIGURE  41.1  ■  Pathway of synthesis and metabolism of 
5-hydroxytryptamine.
BOX 41.1	
Clinical features of carcinoid 
syndrome
•	 Flushing 70% (usually without sweating)
•	 Diarrhoea 50%
•	 Intermittent abdominal pain 40%
•	 Valvular heart disease (~20% at presentation)
•	 Palpitations
•	 Wheezing
•	 Facial telangiectasis
•	 Pellagra-like skin lesions
810	
Clinical biochemistry
serotonin secretion and is therefore particularly useful in 
patients with non-secretory or atypical carcinoids and as 
its concentration reflects tumour burden, it can be used 
as a marker for assessing response to treatment. False 
positive results can be seen in hepatic and renal failure, 
atrophic gastritis, proton pump inhibitor therapy, and 
inflammatory bowel disease. Prostatic cancers, which 
may contain a significant neuroendocrine component, 
myeloma, exercise, trauma and hypertension may also in-
crease CgA concentrations.
Diagnostic imaging
In isolated carcinoid tumours, where surgical excision is a 
management option, anatomical localization may be useful. 
Conventional imaging modalities include computed tomog-
raphy (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and posi-
tron emission spectroscopy (PET). A more specific option 
is the use of somatostatin receptor scintography, e.g. using 
111In-DTPA-pentetreotide (Octreoscan™), which binds to 
somatostatin receptors on the tumour.
Treatment
Circumscribed tumours may be removable by surgical 
resection. For patients with significant hepatic metastatic 
disease, radiofrequency ablation or hepatic embolization, 
alone or in combination with intra-arterial chemotherapy 
(chemoembolization), while not curative, may provide 
significant palliation. Somatostatin analogues have been 
used effectively in the management of the symptoms of 
carcinoid syndrome.
MULTIPLE ENDOCRINE NEOPLASIA
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) syndromes are dis-
orders characterized by pathological hyperfunction of two 
or more endocrine organs. They have been classified into 
two distinct disorders: MEN type 1 (MEN1) and MEN 
type 2 (MEN2) with MEN2 further subdivided into three 
main variants (see Box 41.3).
Two distinct genetic defects contribute to tumouri-
genesis in MEN syndromes: in MEN1, inactivation (loss 
of function) of a tumour suppressor gene is thought 
to be responsible, while MEN2 is caused by overacti-
vation (gain of function or overexpression) of a proto-
oncogene. A tumour suppressor gene restrains cell 
proliferation and tumours are stimulated by inactivating 
mutations or deletions in such a gene, which render the 
gene product either absent or nonfunctional. In contrast, 
a proto-oncogene (the normal unmutated version of an 
oncogene) can be converted to an oncogene, which can 
cause cell proliferations or deregulated cell growth when 
overexpressed.
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) typically 
becomes manifest after the first decade of life, with most 
men and women developing symptoms in the fourth and 
third decades, respectively. Typically, MEN1 tumours 
appear two decades earlier than isolated endocrine 
tumours.
Parathyroid disease
Primary hyperparathyroidism (HPT) is the most fre-
quent endocrinopathy in MEN1 and is the most com-
mon reason for the disease to come to the attention of 
physicians. It occurs in 90% of affected individuals be-
tween 20 and 25 years of age, rising to nearly 100% by 
the age of 50 years. However, MEN1 itself is rare and 
accounts for only 2–4% of patients with HPT. There is 
no sex difference in MEN1 prevalence compared with a 
ratio of 3:1 females:males in sporadic hyperparathyroid-
ism. Hyperparathyroidism is often found during the sec-
ond decade of life during screening of immediate family 
members of an index patient with proven MEN1. The 
BOX 41.2	
Substances that can interfere 
with the measurement of 
5-­hydroxyindole acetic acid
Serotonin-rich foods
•	 Bananas, aubergine, plums, pineapples, kiwi fruit, wal-
nuts, hickory nuts, pecans, avocados
Artefactual increase in 5-HIAA
•	 Guafanesin (glycerol guaiacolate) contained in some 
cough medicines, paracetamol, fluorouracil, methyser-
gide, naproxen, caffeine
Artefactual decrease in 5-HIAA
•	 Salicylates, l-DOPA, methyldopa, aspirin, phenothi-
azines, adrenocorticotropic hormone
BOX 41.3	
Multiple endocrine neoplasia 
syndromes
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
•	 Parathyroid adenoma
•	 Gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine tumours
•	 Anterior pituitary tumours
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2
MEN 2A
•	 Medullary thyroid carcinoma
•	 Phaeochromocytoma
•	 Parathyroid disease
MEN 2B
•	 Medullary thyroid carcinoma
•	 Phaeochromocytoma
•	 Absence of parathyroid disease
•	 Mucosal neuromas and intestinal ganglioneuromatosis
•	 Marfanoid habitus
MEN2A variants
•	 MEN2A with cutaneous lichen amyloidosis or 
Hirschsprung disease
Medullary thyroid carcinoma only
	
41  Metabolic effects of tumours	
811
pathological features are those of diffuse or asymmetrical 
hyperplasia, with all four glands being involved (although 
perhaps not all to the same degree) or with multiple ad-
enomas. The investigation and management of HPT is 
discussed in Chapter 6.
Gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine  
tumours
Gastroenteropancreatic (GEP) neuroendocrine tumours 
are the second most common tumours in MEN1, with 
some 60% of patients being affected. They usually 
present between the second and fifth decades, unless 
diagnosed earlier by screening. Approximately half of 
the tumours are gastrinomas. The Zollinger–Ellison 
syndrome (ZES) is severe, intractable, multiple and re-
current peptic ulcer disease caused by a gastrin secret-
ing tumour, which can be located in the duodenum or 
pancreas. The majority of gastrinomas associated with 
MEN1 are in the duodenum, where they are often small 
(<0.5 cm in diameter) and multiple. Since gastrin secret-
ing cells are not normally found in the duodenum or 
pancreas, gastrinomas in these sites should be regarded 
as ectopic and potentially malignant, irrespective of 
their histological grade. The clinical syndrome does not 
differ from that seen with non-MEN1 gastrinomas. The 
extreme hypersecretion of gastric acid may be associated 
with inactivation of pancreatic lipase, resulting in fat 
malabsorption and steatorrhoea. Hyperparathyroidism 
in MEN1 can exacerbate hypergastrinaemia. The di-
agnosis can be made by demonstrating increased gas-
tric acid secretion with simultaneously elevated plasma 
gastrin concentrations. Secretin infusion (2 U/kg) may 
cause augmented gastrin production in those patients 
whose basal values are equivocal. Excellent treatments 
are now available for the medical management of peptic 
ulcer disease using histamine H2 receptor antagonists or 
proton pump inhibitors.
Other GEP NETs include insulinomas, vasoactive in-
testinal peptide secreting tumours (VIPomas) and gluca-
gonomas. Their clinical features are discussed further in 
Chapter 12.
Chromogranin A is useful, particularly as a marker 
of midgut tumours, in the investigation of GEP NETs. 
Cocaine- and amfetamine-regulated transcript (CART), 
is a 116 amino acid peptide widely distributed in nervous 
and endocrine tissues and its physiological roles may in-
clude regulation of feeding and response to psychologi-
cal stress. It is produced by various islet cell tumours and 
is of particular use as a marker in the investigation of 
NETs of pancreatic origin. Measurement of a screening 
panel of gut hormones may also be useful.
Pituitary tumours
The true prevalence of anterior pituitary tumours in 
MEN1 is unclear. Between 30% and 50% of patients 
with MEN1 develop anterior pituitary tumours. Whilst 
some are non-functional, approximately 60% secrete 
prolactin, 25% secrete growth hormone and 5% secrete 
ACTH. Occasionally, excess secretion of GH and cortisol 
in MEN1 is the result of ectopic secretion of GHRH and 
ACTH, respectively, e.g. by a pancreatic islet or carcinoid 
tumour. It is important to identify such patients in order 
to ensure appropriate therapy.
The investigation and management of pituitary tu-
mours in patients with MEN1 is similar to that for 
other pituitary tumours and is discussed in detail in 
Chapter 18.
Foregut carcinoid tumours
Carcinoid tumours occur more frequently with MEN1 
than in the general population; some 10% of MEN1 
patients are affected. In contrast to sporadic carcinoid 
tumours, which are predominantly derived from the 
midgut and hindgut, MEN1 carcinoid tumours are 
usually derived primarily from the foregut. Foregut 
carcinoids rarely secrete serotonin, peptide hormones 
or calcitonin and are usually considered as clinically 
non-functional.
Adrenal tumours
Adrenal cortical lesions are common in MEN1: 20–40% 
of patients are affected, mostly with bilateral tumours. 
However, the majority are non-functional, clinically si-
lent and rarely require treatment. Cushing and Conn 
syndromes are rare in MEN1.
Tumourigenesis in MEN1
MEN1 is the result of an inactivating mutation in the 
MEN-1 gene, a tumour suppressor gene located on 
chromosome 11q13. It consists of 10 exons and en-
codes a 610-amino acid nuclear protein termed menin. 
Menin interacts with diverse groups of transcription 
factors and coregulators, including JunD, suggesting 
a role in gene transcription, DNA replication and cell 
cycle control. Genetic mapping studies indicate so-
matic loss of heterozygosity in accord with the ‘two 
hit’ hypothesis. The first hit is a genetic mutation ren-
dering the subject heterozygous for the MEN-1 mutant 
gene and predisposed to tumour development. A so-
matic inactivation of the unaffected allele then occurs 
(second hit) leading to the development of MEN1-
associated tumours.
Diagnosis of MEN1
Occasionally, MEN1 may occur without a recognized 
family history. Some may be patients whose parents 
died before developing any manifestations of MEN1: a 
few may have MEN1 caused by two somatic mutations 
as described above. Sometimes it is difficult to make the 
distinction between sporadic tumours and MEN1, but an 
earlier onset and tumour multiplicity in the same organ 
increase the likelihood of MEN1. The dominant mode of 
inheritance, the occurrence of asymptomatic gene carri-
ers and the risk of developing malignant disease make it 
essential to establish carrier status in all relatives when-
ever the diagnosis of MEN1 has been made in one family 
member.
812	
Clinical biochemistry
Genetic screening. The identification of the MEN-1 gene 
(locus 11q13) has opened the possibility of genetic test-
ing. However, over 1300 distinct germline mutations have 
been identified and there is a lack of genotype–phenotype 
correlation. Thus, genetic testing can be time consuming, 
arduous and expensive and a definitive result does not ne-
gate the requirement for further biochemical screening of 
carriers. However, for those found not to be carrying the 
mutant gene, there is no further need for surveillance or 
family screening.
Biochemical screening. Biochemical screening con-
tinues to play an important role in carrier ascertainment 
whenever genetic testing is not possible or has failed to 
detect germline mutations (see below) and is important 
for tumour surveillance in those known to have the af-
fected gene.
The MEN1 syndrome rarely develops before the age 
of five or after the age of 70, and so screening should 
be performed every three years after the age of five 
until the age of 70 and at longer intervals thereafter. 
Over 95% of affected individuals will have been identi-
fied by the fourth decade. The measurement of serum 
calcium is a simple, cheap and reliable screening test; 
additional biochemical investigations include measure-
ment of serum prolactin, gastrin (fasting) and CgA. 
Screening of patients with apparently sporadic pancre-
atic endocrine tumours for evidence of MEN1 is prob-
ably justified, especially in those with gastrinomas or 
insulinomas.
Surveillance of MEN1 patients and carriers
Once mutant MEN1 gene carriers have been identi-
fied by biochemical or genetic testing, they should be 
monitored rigorously to detect the development of new 
tumours or tumour recurrence. The age-related pen-
etrance is ­virtually zero below the age of five years, rising 
to >50% by 20 years, and >95% by 40 years. Surveillance 
should include a regular history and examination focused 
on the clinical features of MEN1-associated tumours 
in ­combination with biochemical tests and imaging 
(Table 41.1). Although periodic screening for endocrine 
tumour expression in MEN1 appears to reduce morbidity 
and mortality as a result of early tumour recognition, this 
has not been proven.
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2
Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 (MEN2) involves two 
or more of medullary thyroid carcinoma (MTC), phaeo-
chromocytoma and parathyroid tumours (see Box 41.3). 
Medullary thyroid cancer is a universal feature of MEN2 
and is often the first tumour to present. MEN2A is the 
most common subtype, accounting for 80–90%. Patients 
with MEN2B, in addition to endocrine abnormalities, 
have a characteristic marfanoid habitus often with sco-
liosis and pes cavus. The presence of mucosal neuromas 
is characteristic (see Fig. 41.2). Some kindred appear to 
have a third form of MEN2, isolated familial MTC, but 
care should be taken that other features of MEN2 are not 
overlooked.
Germline activating mutations of the RET (rearranged 
during transfection) proto-oncogene, which is located on 
chromosome 10 (10q.11.2), have been identified in all 
three types of MEN2.
Diagnosis. RET germline mutation testing now forms 
the basis for carrier identification in MEN2 families. 
Medullary thyroid carcinomas secrete calcitonin, mea-
surement of which serves as a useful tumour marker to 
assist in assessment of the response to therapy and for 
the detection of persistent or recurrent disease. Plasma 
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) concentration may be 
raised in medullary thyroid cancer and prove a useful ad-
ditional tumour marker.
Before the establishment of DNA analysis for fam-
ily screening for MEN2, measurement of calcitonin 
was often performed for this purpose, either on a 
TABLE 41.1  Surveillance for multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1
Procedure
Condition screened for
Frequency
Age initiated (years)
Glucose (fasting) and insulin
Pancreatic NETs
Yearly
5
Insulin-like growth factor 1
Pituitary tumour
Yearly
5
Prolactin
Pituitary tumour
Yearly
5
Calcium and PTH
Parathyroid tumour
Yearly
8
Chromogranin A, CART
Pancreatic NETs
Yearly
<10
Gastrin
Pancreatic NETs
Yearly
20
Brain MRI
Pituitary tumour
Every 3–5 years (or guided by biochemistry 
results)
5
Abdominal CT/MRI
Pancreatic NETs
Every 3–5 years (or guided by biochemistry 
results)
20
NETs, neuroendocrine tumours; PTH, parathyroid hormone; CART, cocaine and amfetamine-related transcript; CT, computed tomography; 
MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
FIGURE  41.2  ■ Typical features of a patient with MEN2B. 
(Photograph courtesy of Professor A G McGregor)
	
41  Metabolic effects of tumours	
813
basal sample or in response to stimulation with pen-
tagastrin or calcium. Every effort should be made to 
identify gene carriers among the relatives of patients 
known to have MEN2 in order to offer prophylac-
tic thyroidectomy against MTC. Strong genotype–­
phenotype correlation exists in MEN2, which can 
guide the timing of surgery and the screening proto-
col for optimal detection of parathyroid tumours and 
phaeochromocytomas.
Imaging. Ultrasonography of the thyroid may be use-
ful. However, when invasion to surrounding structures 
or distant metastases are suspected, other imaging mo-
dalities such as MRI or CT scanning are necessary. 
99mTechnetium-sestamibi scan is a more sensitive tech-
nique for the localization of metastases within the neck 
and chest. Scintigraphic imaging using 
123I- or 
131I-­anti-
CEA monoclonal antibodies is a promising develop-
ment for the detection of occult disease and in selecting 
candidates for repeat neck exploration.
Treatment. If a mutation is found, surgical removal 
of the thyroid is recommended to prevent tumour de-
velopment. Postoperatively, patients should be treated 
with suppressive doses of l-thyroxine. Since calcitonin 
gene expression is activated in inflamed or septic tissue, 
calcitonin concentration may remain elevated for 3-6 
months after thyroid surgery. It is therefore prudent to 
delay calcitonin measurement for three months after 
thyroidectomy. Early and prophylactic total thyroidec-
tomy has probably lowered the mortality from MTC 
to <5%, well below the cancer-associated mortality 
in MEN1. RET tyrosine kinase inhibitor drugs are 
currently being developed and may have a role in the 
treatment of MEN2-related malignancies in the future. 
Follow-up of MTC is by measurement of calcitonin 
and CEA.
Surveillance. 
Genotype–phenotype 
correlation 
in 
MEN2 may be useful in guiding strategies for surveil-
lance. However, a suggested scheme is that after the age 
of eight years PTH and calcium should be measured for 
detection of parathyroid tumours and for detection of 
phaeochromocytoma plasma free metanephrines and/
or urinary fractionated metanephrines should be mea-
sured, with imaging using MRI or CT every 3–5 years or 
if biochemistry is abnormal. Patients with familial MTC 
require only periodic monitoring with imaging if bio-
chemistry is abnormal.
Other familial syndromes associated with 
multiple endocrine neoplasia
Patients presenting with an endocrine tumour should 
have a full family history taken, looking for evidence 
of an inherited syndrome. Single, unilateral and late 
onset tumours are more likely to be sporadic. In con-
trast, a familial cause is more is likely in a patient who 
presents early, particularly if there is a family history or 
if there are multiple tumours or associated cutaneous 
features.
A further type of MEN (MEN4) has been described 
caused by mutations in cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 
genes. The exact phenotype is, as yet, poorly defined but 
includes parathyroid, and sometimes pituitary, tumours 
and other endocrine features.
Phaeochromocytoma is predominately a sporadic dis-
order. However, in 25% of patients, phaeochromocytoma 
may be familial or associated with a number of autosomal 
dominant hereditary syndromes. Examples of such syn-
dromes are neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1), von Hippel–
Lindau syndrome and paraganglioma syndrome 1, 3 and 
4. The cardinal features of NF1 are neurofibromas and 
dermal café-au-lait skin pigmentation. Other features 
include skeletal manifestations, vascular stenoses and a 
variety of endocrine tumours including phaeochromo-
cytoma, ­somatostatin-producing carcinoid tumours and 
medullary thyroid cancer. The causative gene encodes 
a GTP-activating protein, neurofibromin. Von Hippel–
Lindau syndrome is a multisystem cancer syndrome 
­associated with retinal and cerebral haemangioblastomas, 
renal cysts and renal cell carcinomas, phaeochromocyto-
mas and islet cell tumours.
Paragangliomas (PGL) are tumours derived from 
the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous system. 
About half are familial. The ­sympathetic-associated PGL 
arise from the adrenal medulla or from the sympathetic 
ganglia. They are generally functional and secrete ex-
cess catecholamines. Hereditary PGL are character-
ized by the development of highly vascularized, slowly 
growing non-chromaffin tumours arising in the para-
sympathetic ganglia. Parasympathetic-derived PGL 
usually develop in the head and neck, most commonly 
at the bifurcation of the carotid artery, and are usually 
non-functional. Intraabdominal and thoracic catechol-
amine-secreting PGL are currently being reffered to as 
phaeochromocytomas.
Paragangliomas syndromes have been genetically 
characterized as PGL 1, 3 and 4 and are caused by muta-
tions in the succinate dehydrogenase (SDH) subunit D, 
C and B genes, respectively (SDHD, SDHC and SDHB); 
the fourth subunit coded by the SDHA gene is not as-
sociated with hereditary PGL.
METABOLIC CHANGES IN MALIGNANCY
Introduction
Metabolic changes may herald the clinical onset of ma-
lignant disease and are often the cause of considerable 
morbidity and mortality in patients with cancer. During 
the rapid growth phase of a neoplasm, the nutritional 
and metabolic state of the host may become modi-
fied in favour of the neoplasm. The tumour-­related 
metabolic changes may be a direct consequence of the 
presence of the tumour, or be secondary to secretory 
products of the tumour. These may either be normal 
secretory products of the cells of origin or substances 
not normally produced by them. Such metabolic al-
terations may, on occasions, be useful in the diagno-
sis and management of malignancy, that is, they act as 
814	
Clinical biochemistry
­tumour markers (see Chapter 42). In this section, some 
of the metabolic consequences of malignant disease are 
reviewed.
Paraneoplastic syndromes
A paraneoplastic syndrome is one that is attributable 
to a neoplasm, not as a direct result of local or meta-
static presence of the tumour cells, but owing to sub-
stances secreted from them or autoantibodies produced 
against them. Such disorders may broadly be divided 
into neurological, humoral and other paraneoplastic 
syndromes.
Neurological paraneoplastic syndromes
Various neurological paraneoplastic syndromes exist. 
Some have a classic presentation, e.g. Lambert–Eaton, 
syndrome, which resembles myasthenia gravis and is 
­associated with small cell carcinoma of the bronchus. 
Some paraneoplastic syndromes appear to have an autoim-
mune basis; thus Lambert–Eaton syndrome is associated 
with the presence of anti-voltage gated calcium channel 
(VGCC antibodies). The majority of neurological para-
neoplastic syndromes are thought to have an autoimmune 
basis, with an immune response being directed against an-
tigens expressed by the tumour. The resulting antibodies 
then cross react with components of the nervous system. 
These antibodies can be detected in blood. In a patient 
with a neurological presentation, the presence of certain 
well characterized onconeural antibodies (anti-Ho, Yo, 
Ma2, CRMP-5, amphiphysin and Ri) enables the diagno-
sis of a paraneoplastic syndrome to be made whether or 
not a neoplasm has been detected. Neurological paraneo-
plastic syndromes and associated tumours and antibodies 
are discussed further in Chapter 36.
Humoral paraneoplastic syndromes
Humoral paraneoplastic syndromes arise from the secre-
tion of substances from a tissue that does not normally 
produce them. The term ‘ectopic hormone production’ is 
used to refer to hormones secreted from sites that are not 
their physiological origin, in amounts sufficient to cause 
clinical effects. The ectopic secretion of such hormones 
tends not to be subject to the usual mechanisms of endo-
crine regulation and characteristic responses to dynamic 
function testing may be useful in diagnosis. The hormone 
itself may sometimes circulate in a molecular form distinct 
from that secreted from the eutopic source. Treatment of 
the tumour leads to resolution of the endocrine effects, 
but these reappear if the tumour recurs, accompanied by 
a demonstrable concentration of the hormone in serum. 
Some tumours are particularly associated with such ec-
topic hormone production, e.g. small cell lung cancer. 
Various theories have been developed in an attempt to 
explain the phenomenon of ectopic hormone production 
by tumours. One theory suggests that some fundamental 
change occurs at the genomic level that allows novel gene 
expression for that tissue. Thus, neoplastic change would 
cause certain genes to be switched on and others to be 
switched off. Another theory suggests that the neoplastic 
cell is derived from a stem cell that was capable of express-
ing the gene at an early developmental stage but is later 
suppressed, and that following neoplastic transformation, 
the cell undergoes dedifferentiation and regains some of 
its developmental properties. It has also been proposed 
that some widely expressed genes that are ­transcribed but 
not translated under normal conditions may, due to neo-
plastic transformation, be amplified and translated due to 
the action of different promoters.
Adrenocorticotropin
Ectopic secretion of adrenocorticotropin (ACTH) can 
occur with a variety of tumours, but is particularly associ-
ated with small cell carcinoma of the bronchus. Its clinical 
features and diagnosis are discussed in Chapter 18. The 
most common cause of ectopic ACTH production is the 
expression of the proopiomelanocortin (POMC) gene by 
tumour tissue. The POMC gene encodes for the 31-kDa 
precursor of ACTH, β-endorphin and melanocyte stimu-
lating hormone. The principal source of POMC-derived 
peptides in the body is the pituitary gland; however, 
POMC immunoreactivity and POMC mRNA can be 
found in almost all tissues. The mRNA species produced 
in non-pituitary tissue is shorter than that expressed in 
pituitary tissue, which is thought to be due to the action 
of different promoters. One theory is that many tumours 
express the POMC gene, but what determines whether 
the tumour becomes an ectopic ACTH-secreting tumour 
is the switching of activity to the more conventional pi-
tuitary promoter. Excessive ACTH secretion can also be 
the result of ectopic secretion of corticotrophin-releasing 
hormone.
Vasopressin
The synthesis of vasopressin, resulting in the paraneo-
plastic syndrome of inappropriate anti-diuresis is particu-
larly associated with small bronchial carcinoma, although 
can occur with other tumours (see Table  41.2). It may 
present acutely with severe symptomatic, hyponatraemia. 
This condition is discussed further in Chapter 4. Vaptans, 
agents which antagonize the action of vasopressin via 
blockade of the vasopressin receptor, have been used in 
management.
PTH-related peptide
Hypercalcaemia complicating malignancy is common. 
Mechanisms include prostaglandin-mediated bone re-
sorption, osteoclast activating factors, e.g. tumour ne-
crosis factors, and the action of PTH-related peptide 
(PTHrP), a protein with N-terminal amino acid homol-
ogy with PTH. PTH-related peptide is not detected by 
most modern PTH assays which measure ‘intact’ PTH, 
hence the finding of a low PTH with a low phosphate in 
a hypercalcaemic patient is suggestive of hypercalcaemia 
secondary to PTHrP. Hypercalcaemia as a feature of ma-
lignancy is discussed further in Chapter 6.
	
41  Metabolic effects of tumours	
815
TABLE 41.2  Hormones arising from tumours derived from tissue not classically associated  
with their secretion
Hormones
Associated tumour types
Adrenocorticotropic hormone, lipotrophin,  
melanocyte-stimulating hormone, endorphin, 
encephalin, other pro-opiomelanocortin fragments
Small cell carcinoma of bronchus
Adenocarcinoma of bronchus
Bronchial carcinoid tumour
Thymic carcinoid tumour
Medullary thyroid carcinoma
Islet cell carcinoma of pancreas
Phaeochromocytoma
Gut, prostate, neurogenic and parotid tumours
Atrial natriuretic peptide
Small cell carcinoma of bronchus
Arginine vasopressin
Small cell carcinoma of bronchus
Pancreatic carcinoma
Breast carcinoma
Thymic tumour
Calcitonin (clinically silent)
Small cell carcinoma of bronchus
Bronchial carcinoid tumour
Calcitonin gene-related peptide
Small cell carcinoma of bronchus
Corticotrophin releasing hormone
Bronchial carcinoid tumour
Erythropoietin
Small cell carcinoma of bronchus
Uterine fibroma
Cerebellar haemangioblastoma
Phaeochromocytoma
Ovarian tumour
Gastrin releasing peptide
Small cell carcinoma of bronchus
Medullary thyroid carcinoma
Glucagon
Non-β islet cell tumour
Anaplastic lung carcinoma
Renal adenocarcinoma
Growth hormone
Bronchial carcinoma
Gastric carcinoma
Growth hormone releasing hormone
Pancreatic islet cell tumour
Phaeochromocytoma
Human chorionic gonadotrophin
Renal and bladder carcinomas
Breast carcinoma
Prostatic carcinoma
Melanoma
Gynaecological carcinomas
Head and neck carcinomas
Lymphoma
Human placental lactogen
Lung and testicular tumours
Insulin-like growth factor 2
Mesodermal and mesenchymal tumours
Neurotensin
Pancreatic endocrine tumours
Carcinoid tumour
Parathyroid hormone-related peptide
Squamous cell carcinoma of head and neck, oesophagus 
cervix, bronchus
Breast and ovarian carcinomas
Carcinoma of pancreas
Renal and bladder carcinomas
Multiple myeloma
Histiocytic lymphoma
Prolactin
Anaplastic lung carcinoma
Small cell carcinoma of bronchus
Renal adenocarcinoma
Renin
Renal adenocarcinoma
Adenocarcinoma of pancreas
Small cell carcinoma of bronchus
Adenocarcinoma of lung
Ovarian carcinoma
Adrenocortical carcinoma
Somatostatin
Small cell carcinoma of bronchus
Duodenal somatostatinoma
Extra-adrenal paraganglionoma
Phaeochromocytoma
Medullary thyroid carcinoma
Vasoactive intestinal polypeptide
Bronchial carcinoid tumour
Ganglioneuroblastoma
Phaeochromocytoma
Non-β islet cell tumour
Small cell carcinoma of bronchus
816	
Clinical biochemistry
Tumour-induced osteomalacia
Tumour-induced osteomalacia (TIO) is a paraneoplas-
tic syndrome resulting from the secretion of fibroblast 
growth factor 23 (FGF-23) by mesenchymal tumours. 
There may be a relatively long history of musculoskeletal 
symptoms such as bone pain and muscle weakness and, 
in children, rickets and growth failure may be observed. 
Classic biochemical features are normal plasma calcium 
and PTH concentrations and hypophosphataemia with 
renal phosphate wasting. Plasma 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin 
D concentration is low and FGF-23 elevated. The only 
effective treatment for TIO is resection of the tumour. 
Medical management is with phosphate supplements and 
calcitriol.
Other paraneoplastic syndromes and features of 
malignant disease
Haematological sequelae. Anaemia is the most com-
mon haematological abnormality encountered in malig-
nant disease. It may have various causes with differing 
laboratory findings (Table 41.3). Clinical and laboratory 
features are discussed further in Chapter 27; examples 
include anaemia of chronic disease, and folate deficiency 
resulting from altered metabolism or requirements due 
to the presence of the tumour. Autoimmune haemolytic 
anaemia can occur, most commonly in patients with 
B cell lymphoproliferative disorder, and is thought to 
be caused by an immune response evoked to antigens 
common to both the tumour cells and red blood cells. 
In contrast to idiopathic autoimmune haemolytic anae-
mia, response to corticosteroid therapy is uncommon. 
Pure red cell aplasia has been described mainly with 
thymomas, but also in association with adenocarcino-
mas, squamous cell carcinomas, anaplastic tumours and, 
rarely, with lymphoproliferative diseases. The mecha-
nism is thought to be a T cell-mediated phenomenon. 
Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia is a serious com-
plication of certain malignancies and occurs when red 
cells are damaged by passage through blood vessels that 
have been distorted by either tumour or fibrin ­deposits. 
The blood film is characterized by the presence of 
schistocytes and polychromasia and there is biochemical 
­evidence of haemolysis (increased plasma LDH ­activity, 
reduced haptoglobin concentration and haemosider-
inuria). In contrast, some tumours, particularly of the 
kidneys, may be associated with erythrocytosis: this is 
thought to be the result of prostaglandin-mediated 
erythropoietin activity.
Hyperuricaemia. In certain patients with malignancy, 
predominantly those with leukaemia and lymphoma in 
whom there is a rapid turnover of cells, or massive cell 
lysis caused by cytotoxic agents (tumour lysis syndrome), 
hyperuricaemia can occur. Radiotherapy can produce a 
similar clinical scenario. Other features of the tumour ly-
sis syndrome include hyperkalaemia, hyperphosphataemia 
and hypocalcaemia.
The increased filtration of urate and the increas-
ing acidity and concentration of the tubular fluid leads 
to precipitation and renal obstruction. Adequate hydra-
tion is important prior to combination chemotherapy in 
those at risk and it is standard practice to administer al-
lopurinol, a xanthine oxidase inhibitor, to reduce urate 
formation. Rasburicase (recombinant urate oxidase) 
catalyses the conversion of urate to allantoin, which is 
five to ten times more soluble than urate, and is help-
ful in reducing plasma urate in severely affected patients. 
Rasburicase should be avoided in patients with glucose 
6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency as one of the ma-
jor by-products of the enzymatic reaction is hydrogen 
peroxide, which may precipitate haemolysis. Preservation 
of samples at 4°C, or stabilization with perchloric acid, 
has been recommended prior to analysis of urate in pa-
tients receiving rasburicase, as degradation of uric acid 
can continue in collection tubes, resulting in a spuriously 
low urate concentration.
A number of other characteristic paraneoplastic syn-
dromes exist. These include immune-mediated renal 
disease, thrombosis associated with antiphospholipid 
antibodies and finger clubbing and hypertrophic pulmo-
nary osteoarthropathy attributed to the action of platelet-­
derived growth factor.
Cancer cachexia
Weight loss is common in cancer patients and in many, 
is the presenting feature. Cancer cachexia is a hypercata-
bolic state characterized by loss of body weight associated 
TABLE 41.3  Haematological indices of anaemia in malignant disease
Cause
Hb
Mean cell 
volume
Mean 
cell Hb
Mean cell 
Hb conc.
Reticulocytes
Film
Marrow
Iron deficiency
↓
↓
↓
↓
Normal/↑
Hypochromic 
microcytic
Reduced iron 
stores
Folate and/or 
vitamin B12 
deficiency
↓
↑
↑
Normal
Normal/↑
Macrocytic
Megaloblastic
Anaemia of 
chronic disease
↓
Normal
Normal
Normal
↓
Normocytic
Sideroblastic
Marrow infiltration
↓
Normal/↑
Normal/↑
Normal/↑
Normal/↓
Normocytic ±  
malignant 
cells
Leukoerythroblastic
Hb, haemoglobin.
	
41  Metabolic effects of tumours	
817
with a reduction in adipose tissue and muscle mass and 
loss of appetite. Weight loss can cause severe morbidity 
and decrease in quality of life and may be associated with 
an adverse prognosis and increased susceptibility to side-
effects during treatment of the malignancy itself. The ae-
tiology of the weight loss is complex: it appears to involve 
a combination of increased catabolism and decreased 
anabolism. The physical presence of the tumour may also 
contribute to weight loss, e.g. by causing obstruction in 
the gastrointestinal tract.
The regulation of appetite involves both central and 
peripheral mechanisms, which are integrated in the hy-
pothalamus. There is no evidence that hypothalamic dys-
function per se is responsible for the cachexia of malignant 
disease. However, it has been suggested that malignant 
tissue causes anorexia by the secretion of biologically ac-
tive molecules that depress feeding by interfering with 
central control mechanisms, e.g. serotonin from carcinoid 
tumours and bombesin from small cell bronchial cancers. 
Cytokines, particularly TNFα and IL-6, are thought to 
be important in the loss of appetite. They arise from tu-
mour cells and as part of the host immune response; they 
are able to cross the blood–brain barrier and interact with 
mechanisms affecting appetite. Iatrogenic factors related 
to the treatment of cancer can also contribute to weight 
loss. Chemotherapy often causes nausea and vomiting, 
and radiotherapy can have short-term effects on the gut 
(e.g. mucositis) and cause long-term complications, e.g. 
enteritis that lead to malabsorption.
Changes in metabolism
Although reduced energy intake is common to both star-
vation and cancer cachexia, there are marked differences 
between the metabolic changes seen in the two states (see 
Table 41.4).
Many patients with cancer are mildly hypermetabolic 
with a resting energy expenditure greater than normal. 
However, only a fraction of the increased metabolic rate 
can be accounted for by the tumour tissue itself. Suggested 
mechanisms for cancer cachexia are shown in Figure 41.3.
TABLE 41.4  Metabolic changes in cancer 
­cachexia and starvation
 
Starvation
Cachexia
Acute phase response
No
Yes
Appetite
Increased
Decreased
Metabolic rate
Decreased
Increased
Skeletal muscle mass
Maintained
Decreased
Adipose tissue
Decreased
Decreased
Liver size
Decreased
Increased
Cancer cell
Activated T cell
INF
IL-1
IL-6
Macrophage
Antibodies
Hormones
Other peptides
Liver
Increased
gluconeogenesis
Impaired glucose
metabolism
Glucose
Skeletal muscle
Adipose tissue
Decreased
intestinal motility
Stomach
Anorexia
Reduced
gastric
emptying
Death
Cachexia
Compositional
depletion; weakness
Inhibition of lipprotein lipase
Disturbed lipid mechanism
Proteolysis
Insulin
resistance
Paraneoplastic
syndrome
IFNγ
IFNγ
Brain
FIGURE 41.3  ■  Possible mechanisms of cancer cachexia.
818	
Clinical biochemistry
Many tumours produce energy via anaerobic glycol-
ysis, which results in a net loss of ATP, there is partial 
uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation and futile cycles 
may be activated leading to further energy wastage, e.g. 
nonesterified fatty acids released from adipose tissue are 
immediately re-esterified. Free fatty acids are oxidized, 
even when other energy sources are available, and there 
is increased protein turnover.
Marked derangements of carbohydrate metabolism 
are a feature of malignancy. They include abnormal 
glucose tolerance and hyperglycaemia, hypoglycae-
mia, lactic acidosis, increased glucose turnover and in-
creased glucose transport into tumour cells. Tumour 
cells have an increased rate of glucose transport, which 
may be related to an increase in the number of mem-
brane bound glucose transporters. The main energy 
source for many tumour cells is anaerobic metabolism 
of glucose, which results in the production of lactic 
acid. The lactic acid is then reconverted to glucose 
in the liver via the Cori cycle. This process also con-
sumes energy, since glycolysis produces only two moles 
of ATP per mole of glucose, whereas gluconeogenesis 
consumes six moles of ATP. However, decreased he-
patic capacity to utilize lactic acid may lead to its ac-
cumulation (lactic acidosis).
Glucose intolerance is a common feature of ma-
lignancy, affecting some 60% of cancer patients. 
Occasionally, frank hyperglycaemia is present. There 
is insulin resistance (at least with respect to effects on 
carbohydrate metabolism), although insulin receptor 
binding appears normal. Fasting insulin concentrations 
are also normal or slightly decreased but there is a de-
creased response to both endogenous and exogenous 
insulin. The picture is further complicated by other fac-
tors that may be present in cancer patients, i.e. starva-
tion and malnutrition, sepsis, bed rest, dietary effects 
and drugs.
Abnormal lipid metabolism is a feature of some ma-
lignancies. Some tumours utilize lipids in preference to 
glucose as a major energy source, with mobilization of 
free fatty acids from the body’s fat stores and a conse-
quent rise in their plasma concentration. Malignant cells 
may show abnormal lipid composition, particularly with 
respect to the cholesterol and phospholipid contents of 
their cell membranes and may synthesize unusual lip-
ids. For example, hepatocellular carcinomas may pro-
duce 2-methyloleate. Loss of fat mass is facilitated by 
a tumour-produced lipid mobilizing factor. This ap-
pears to be a proteoglycan similar in structure to zinc 
α2-glycoprotein, which acts to sensitize adipose tissue to 
lipolytic stimuli by increasing production of cyclic AMP 
within adipocytes.
Patients with malignancy often have a wasting syn-
drome, where both adipose tissue and lean tissue are lost. 
The muscle wasting is due to increased protein catabo-
lism as well as decreased synthesis. Proteolysis in cachexia 
is brought about via increased activity of a number of pro-
teolytic pathways. The major mechanism for proteolysis 
in cancer cachexia is the ATP ubiquitin-dependent pro-
teolytic pathway initiated in response to cytokines such 
as TNFα. Lysosomal cathepsins and the calcium/calpain 
pathway are also involved in proteolysis.
Treatment
Although giving nutrition support to patients with can-
cer cachexia would seem logical, there is little evidence 
that provision of energy to patients, via either enteral or 
parenteral routes, results in weight gain or significant 
improvement in outcome. Pharmacological manage-
ment of cachexia has included use of appetite stimu-
lants and drugs intended to counteract catabolism or 
stimulate anabolism. Corticosteroids have been used to 
stimulate appetite. Their effect is short lived and is not 
usually accompanied by weight gain. The progesterone 
analogue megestrol acetate has been shown to be more 
effective as an appetite stimulant. Various anabolic 
agents have been tried in cachexia. Growth hormone 
has proven efficacy in animal models but its use in 
clinical settings is associated with increased mortality, 
possibly owing to diversion of amino acids and energy 
to skeletal muscle away from the acute phase response. 
Examples of the use of drugs intended to treat cancer 
cachexia by modification of the immune response, in-
clude thalidomide and pentoxifylline, which both in-
hibit production of TNFα, and eicosapentaenoic acid, 
found in fish oil, which can reduce lipolysis produced 
by lipid mobilizing factor. None of these has been 
shown to be consistently effective.
ENDOCRINE SEQUELAE OF TUMOURS  
AND THEIR TREATMENT
With the development of successful therapies for spe-
cific malignancies, populations of treated patients are 
surviving for near-normal life spans. Long-term sequelae 
are becoming more evident as these survivors are being 
­followed-up (Table 41.5). This section focuses on effects 
on somatic growth and reproductive capacity.
Effects on somatic growth
Somatic growth may be profoundly suppressed in a 
child affected with, for example, acute lymphoblas-
tic leukaemia. This effect may be mediated by therapy 
aimed at destroying the malignant cells, including cra-
nial irradiation with subsequent hypopituitarism, direct 
radiotherapy to bony structures that determine final 
height, for example the spine, or the administration of 
pharmacological doses of glucocorticoids and intensive 
chemotherapy.
The hypothalamus is more susceptible to radiation 
damage than the pituitary. Growth hormone secretion 
appears to be particularly vulnerable to the effects of 
radiation, and, while doses of 18–50 Gy may lead to de-
creased growth hormone secretion alone, higher doses 
(>60 Gy) can cause panhypopituitarism through dam-
age to both the hypothalamus and pituitary. Effects of 
chemotherapy and glucocorticoids can have significant 
effects on skeletal development, affecting both final 
height and bone mineral density. The effects of chemo-
therapeutic agents on chondrocytes, the extracellular 
matrix and osteocytes are wide ranging, but evidence 
for direct effects on chondrocytes’ proliferation and 
	
41  Metabolic effects of tumours	
819
ossification is limited; however, disruption of growth 
plate activity will result in skeletal growth disturbance. 
Chemotherapy seems to enhance the growth-suppress-
ing effects of radiotherapy when they are given in com-
bination, possibly by enhancing the effects of radiation 
on the hypothalamo–pituitary axis. It has been hypoth-
esized that chemotherapy effects may relate to suppres-
sion of IGF1 synthesis in the liver and/or its effects on 
growth plates.
For growth hormone to effect growth optimally, 
normal rhythms of secretion must be maintained. 
This will only occur if there is normal hypothalamo–­
pituitary ­function. The secretion of growth hormone 
may be ­affected directly as a result of radiation-induced 
­damage to the hypothalamus or pituitary, or secondarily, 
for ­example, by depression, which can accompany any 
severe illness and is associated with impaired growth 
hormone secretion. Thyroid hormone and glucocor-
ticoids are ­necessary for the efficient biological activ-
ity of growth hormone; the secretion of either may be 
decreased ­following radiotherapy to the hypothalamo–­
pituitary unit and lead indirectly to impairment of 
growth. Pharmacological doses of glucocorticoids sup-
press growth hormone secretion. Additionally, they 
cause a degree of functional hypogonadism (hypogo-
nadotrophic hypogonadism). If gonadal steroidogenesis 
is suppressed, the pubertal growth spurt will not occur 
and final height will be compromised. Glucocorticoids 
and gonadal steroids ultimately bring about long bone 
epiphyseal fusion. Their pharmacological use may has-
ten this fusion and so prevent the attainment of the 
genetic potential for final height. Low-dose cranial ir-
radiation can also result in early puberty with long bone 
fusion before attainment of final height.
Strategies to promote growth in these patients can be 
divided into two groups: either the use of growth hor-
mone replacement in growth hormone deficient individ-
uals, or the use of GnRH analogues to delay puberty in 
those in whom it is occurring early. Earlier and more ag-
gressive use of growth hormone in those who are growth 
hormone deficient has resulted in improvements in fi-
nal height, with safety data suggesting that this does not 
lead to an increased risk of tumour recurrence. Caution 
should be exercised, however, as longer term follow-up 
data are not yet available to determine whether there is 
an increase in secondary neoplasms. The use of GnRH 
analogues in combination with growth hormone therapy 
is more controversial: only some of the few studies sug-
gest an improvement in final height.
Reproductive consequences of therapy
Disease itself, or radiotherapy or chemotherapy directed 
against populations of actively dividing cells, may influ-
ence reproductive potential. This effect may be mediated 
by a direct action on the germ cell population or be an 
indirect effect mediated by suppression of hypothalamic 
GnRH or pituitary gonadotrophin secretion. Specific 
guidelines are available that may help to predict doses of 
radiotherapy that may be tolerated, or drug combinations 
that are less likely to cause depletion of the germ cell 
pool. Thus, a chemotherapeutic regimen of adriamycin, 
TABLE 41.5  Endocrine sequelae of treatment of malignant disease
Organ affected
Endocrine sequelae
Hypothalamo–pituitary
Combination chemotherapy: cyclophosphamide, vinca 
alkaloids, melphalan, cisplatin
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuresis (SIADH)
Radiation therapy
Panhypopituitarism
Glucocorticoids (pharmacological doses)
Suppression of hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal axis
Suppression of growth hormone secretion
Sick euthyroid syndrome
GnRH analogues
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
Somatostatin
Suppression of growth hormone secretion
Antiemetics (dopaminergic antagonists)
Hyperprolactinaemia
Thyroid
Systemic illness
Sick euthyroid syndrome
Radiation therapy
Hypothyroidism
Bleomycin, vinblastine, cisplatin (BVP)
Retarded thyroid hormone clearance
Glucocorticoids (pharmacological doses)
Sick euthyroid syndrome
Pancreas
Combination chemotherapy: vincristine, l-asparaginase, 
streptozotocin, cyclophosphamide, mitomycin C, 
5-fluorouracil
Reduced insulin secretion
Adrenals
5-Fluorouracil, enzyme inhibitors
Decreased steroidogenesis and hypoadrenalism
Gonads
Chemotherapy
 
Definite: l-phenylalanine mustard, busulphan 
cyclophosphamide
Reduced spermatogenesis and suppressed Leydig cell function 
in the male
Probable: methotrexate, 5-fluorouracil, 6-mercaptopurine
Suppression of ovarian cyclicity and ovarian steroidogenesis in 
the female
Radiation therapy
Hypergonadotrophic hypogonadism (primary ovarian or 
testicular failure)
GnRH analogues
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
820	
Clinical biochemistry
bleomycin, vinblastine and dacarbazine (ABVD) is less 
likely to cause infertility than the alternative regimen of 
nitrogen mustard, oncovin, procarbazine and prednisone 
(MOPP) in the treatment of Hodgkin disease, a fact that 
may influence the choice in a young patient who is anx-
ious to subsequently have a family. As the germ cell pool 
is greater in younger than older women, the risk of ovar-
ian failure as a result of treatment increases with age. Use 
of GnRH analogues to suppress oocyte maturation via 
the hypothalamo–­pituitary axis and to make the germi-
nal epithelium quiescent (a premenarche state) has shown 
some success in protecting ovarian function against che-
motherapy in human and animal studies. Other strategies 
that may be used include oophoropexy (an operation to 
relocate the ovaries anatomically so that they are shielded 
from the radiotherapy field) or sperm banking prior to 
therapy. Freezing ovarian tissue pre-chemotherapy with 
­transplant post-chemotherapy has been shown to be suc-
cessful at restoring function, including fertility, ­although 
this process carries with it the potential risk of the re-
introduction of tumour cells.
Radiotherapy can affect the uterus, with a decrease in 
its volume and changes in its musculature and vascular 
supply. Embryos or oocytes can be frozen prior to ther-
apy, but success rates for subsequent viable pregnancy 
are limited by the freeze–thaw process. Furthermore, 
the time factor involved in stimulating a population of 
oocytes for retrieval prior to commencement of ther-
apy often militates against this, and ovarian stimulation 
itself has the potential to increase tumour growth in 
­oestrogen-sensitive tumours.
Some tumours, such as prostatic or breast cancers, 
are actively stimulated by a particular endocrine milieu. 
Thus, androgens stimulate the growth of prostatic can-
cer, while oestrogens may encourage the growth of breast 
cancer. Direct modulation of the endocrine axis may, in 
itself, constitute therapy for these particular malignan-
cies. Thus growth of prostatic cancer may be suppressed 
by orchidectomy or by suppression of the hypothalamo–
pituitary–­testicular axis by a depot injection of a GnRH 
analogue. This seeming paradox may be explained by 
the fact that chronic stimulation with GnRH is associ-
ated with downregulation of pituitary receptors and 
inhibition of gonadotrophin release. Alternatively, the 
target organ effect of androgens may be blocked by the 
administration of an anti-androgen such as cyproterone 
acetate or flutamide. In women, oestrogen effects may be 
­opposed by the administration of an anti-oestrogen, such 
as tamoxifen, or the use of an aromatase inhibitor such 
as 4-­hydroxyandrostenedione, which blocks the penulti-
mate step in oestrogen biosynthesis.
These patients have specific concerns not just about 
their reproductive capacity, but also about the likelihood 
of transmission of the malignancy to their offspring or 
the risk of damage to their germ cells, making fetal mal-
formation more likely than in the normal population. 
With the exception of the heritable syndromes, there 
is no evidence of an increased likelihood of malignancy 
or an increased risk of fetal malformation in progeny of 
treated patients at the present time.
CONCLUSION
Tumours can have profound metabolic effects, even when 
very small. These can be due to the physical presence of 
the tumour, to the products of its secretion (whether ex-
pected on the basis of its tissue of origin or not) or to the 
body’s response to the presence of the tumour. Metabolic 
derangements can also occur as a side-effect of treat-
ment, whether this be surgical or with radiotherapy or 
chemotherapy.
Further reading
Chong WH, Molinolo AA, Chen CC. Tumour-induced osteomalacia. 
Endocr Relat Cancer 2011;18:1253–77.
Gozzard P, Maddison P. Which antibody and which cancer in which 
paraneoplastic syndrome? Postgrad Med J 2011;87:60–70.
Melmed S, Polonsky KS, Larsen PR et al. editors. Williams’ textbook of 
endocrinology. 12 ed. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier; 2011.
Ramage JK, Ahmed A, Ardill J et al. Guidelines for the management of 
gastroenteropancreatic (including carcinoid) tumours (NETS). Gut 
2012;61:6–32.
Tisdale 
MJ. 
Mechanism 
of 
cancer 
cachexia. 
Physiol 
Rev 
2009;89:381–410.
Wassif WS, Moniz CF, Friedman E et  al. Familial isolated 
hyperparathyroidism: a distinct genetic entity with an increased risk 
of parathyroid cancer. J Clin Endocrinol Metab 1993;77:1485–89.
Wassif WS, Farnebo F, Teh BT et  al. Genetic studies of a family 
with hereditary hyperparathyroidism-jaw tumour syndrome. Clin 
Endocrinol 1999;50:191–96.
821
C H A P T E R  4 2
Tumour markers
Catharine M. Sturgeon
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  821
Evaluation of the clinical utility of tumour 
markers  821
Tumour marker requests and the  
responsibilities of the clinical 
laboratory  825
TUMOUR MARKERS IN THE MANAGEMENT  
OF SPECIFIC CANCERS  827
Bladder cancer  827
Breast cancer  827
Cervical cancer  829
Choriocarcinoma  829
Colorectal cancer  829
Gastric cancer  831
Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST)  831
Germ cell tumours  832
Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia  834
Hepatocellular carcinoma (primary liver 
cancer)  835
Lung cancer  836
Melanoma  837
Neonatal and paediatric tumours  837
Ovarian cancer  838
Pancreatic cancer  840
Prostate cancer  840
Testicular cancer  841
Thyroid cancer  842
Cancers of unknown primary  842
SUMMARY  842
INTRODUCTION
Tumour markers are substances (often proteins, enzymes 
or hormones) that are present in body fluids or tissues 
and whose measurement provides information about the 
presence, progression or remission of tumours. They 
may be tumour-derived (produced within the tumour by 
­malignant or stromal cells) or tumour-associated (pro-
duced by non-malignant cells as a metabolic consequence 
of ­tumour presence). Some are tumour-specific (pro-
duced by cancerous but not normal tissue), while others 
are present in normal tissue but are produced at higher 
concentrations in body fluids or malignant tissue from 
cancer patients. A few are organ-specific but many are 
produced by a variety of different cancers.
Histopathological identification of tumour markers 
expressed at the tumour cell surface and detectable in 
­biopsy specimens can provide both diagnostic and prog-
nostic information, with genetic tests becoming increas-
ingly important in predicting which patients are most 
likely to respond to costly new therapies. Secreted tu-
mour markers, present in blood or other body fluids, are 
measured quantitatively, often by immunoassay. While 
knowledge of circulating marker concentrations may 
assist in diagnosis and prognosis, their most important 
clinical use is in monitoring the success of treatment.
This chapter focuses primarily on the properties and 
clinical applications of the tumour marker tests that usu-
ally fall within the remit of clinical biochemistry labora-
tories (Tables 42.1 and 42.2), with the aim of enabling 
readers to provide advice about which tumour marker tests 
are most likely to be helpful, to recognize which results 
require immediate action, and to develop a high-quality 
interpretative tumour marker service. Before considering 
these aspects, however, it is useful to review some recent 
developments relevant to the introduction of tumour 
markers into routine clinical practice. Abbreviations used 
in the chapter for the names of individual tumour mark-
ers are explained in Tables 42.1 and 42.2.
Evaluation of the clinical utility of 
tumour markers
Although hundreds of potential tumour markers have 
been investigated, with more than 200 000 papers de-
scribing them, the number that contribute significantly 
to the management of cancer patients is remarkably 
small, as is evident in Tables 42.1 and 42.2. Historically, 
over-enthusiastic reporting of small, poorly designed 
studies of new markers has led to disillusionment when 
the results have not been confirmed in larger studies or 
in other centres. Together with the difficulties inherent 
in comparing different studies reported in non-standard 
form, this has made objective assessment of the utility of 
many tumour markers very difficult and has meant that 
the recommendations made by expert panels about their 
clinical use tend to be conservative.
The three critical factors that should be considered 
when evaluating a tumour marker are its clinical utility, 
822	
Clinical biochemistry
TABLE 42.1  Characteristics of commonly requested tumour markers
Tumour 
marker
Biochemical 
properties
Molecular 
weight
Main clinical applications
Limitations of use
Alkaline 
phos­
phatase
Phosphohydrolase
Variable
Raised activities associated 
with the presence 
of liver and or bone 
metastases
Raised in pregnancy and in children, 
and in non-malignant liver and bone 
disease
α-Fetoprotein 
(AFP)
Glycoprotein, 4% 
carbohydrate; 
considerable 
homology with 
albumin
~70 kDa
Diagnosis and monitoring 
of hepatocellular 
carcinoma, 
hepatoblastoma and 
germ cell tumours
Prognosis of germ cell 
tumours
Raised in pregnancy and neonates, 
and in benign liver disease, gastric 
and other gastrointestinal (GI) tract 
tumours, e.g. oesophageal and 
pancreatic
Cancer 
antigen 125 
(CA125)
Mucin identified 
by monoclonal 
antibodies OC125 
and M11
Developed 
from serous 
cystadenocarcinoma 
cell line OVCA 433
~200 kD
Monitoring ovarian 
carcinoma
Determination of the 
risk of malignancy 
index (RMI) for ovarian 
carcinoma
Raised in patients with pleural 
effusions, ascites or free fluid in the 
pelvis, and congestive cardiac failure
Also raised in benign renal and liver 
disease, and in other adenocarcinomas
Mildly raised during menstruation and in 
the first two trimesters of pregnancy
Variably raised in endometriosis.
May be increased by peritoneal 
trauma, e.g. postoperatively
Carcino­
embryonic 
antigen 
(CEA)
Family of 
glycoproteins,  
45–60% 
carbohydrate
~180 kD
Monitoring colorectal 
adenocarcinomas
Absent or low concentrations in 
poorly-differentiated tumours, poor 
sensitivity for malignancy in early 
disease, slightly raised in benign 
renal, liver, lung and GI disease
Also raised in other malignancies, including 
breast, gastric, lung, mesothelioma, 
oesophageal and pancreatic
Smokers may have higher 
concentrations than non-smokers
Contamination with saliva may markedly 
increase concentrations
Human 
chorionic 
gonado­
trophin 
(hCG)
Glycoprotein hormone 
consisting of two 
non-covalently 
bound subunits  
(α and β); α-subunit 
similar to LH, FSH, 
TSH; β-subunit 
considerable 
homology with LH
~36 kD
Diagnosis, prognosis 
and monitoring of 
germ cell tumours 
and gestational 
trophoblastic neoplasia
Raised in pregnancy and in other 
tumours, e.g. lung
Use of cannabis can transiently elevate 
serum concentrations in patients 
with germ cell tumours
Lactate 
dehydro­
genase 
(LDH)
Enzyme of the 
glycolytic pathway
Variable
Diagnosis, prognosis and 
monitoring of germ cell 
tumours
To monitor a wide range of 
malignancies, including 
haematological
Elevated in cardiac and benign liver 
disease and some anaemias of non-
malignant cause
Paraproteins
Monoclonal 
immunoglobulins
Variable
See Chapter 30
Prolactin
Pituitary hormone.
~22 kD but 
high 
molecular 
forms 
also exist
See Chapter 18
Prostate-
specific 
antigen 
(PSA)
Glycoprotein; member 
of the kallikrein 
family with serine 
protease activity
Circulates as 
free enzyme or 
complexed to α1-
antichymotrypsin 
(measurable) or α2-
macroglobulin (not 
detected by most 
immunoassays)
~30 kD (free 
enzyme)
Diagnosis, risk 
assessment and 
monitoring of prostatic 
carcinoma
Lower concentrations 
of free PSA relative to 
complexed PSA (i.e. 
free: total ratio) found 
in prostatic cancer as 
compared with benign 
prostatic hypertrophy
Essentially organ-specific but elevated in 
both benign and malignant prostatic 
disease, serum concentrations 
increase with age
Transiently elevated in urinary 
tract infections, prostatitis, 
acute retention and following 
catheterization or other 
manipulation of the prostate (e.g. 
prostatic biopsy, transurethral 
resection of the prostate)
Specimens for free PSA should be 
analysed within 4 h of sampling or 
stored frozen until assayed
	
42  Tumour markers	
823
TABLE 42.2  Characteristics of less readily available tumour markers
Tumour marker
Biochemical properties
Molecular 
weight
Main clinical 
applications
Limitations of use
Calcitonin
32 amino acid peptide
~3.5 kD
See Chapter 19
Cancer antigen 15-3 
(CA15-3), BR 27.29
Mucin (MUC-1 
glycoprotein 
peptide) identified by 
monoclonal antibodies
>250 kD
Monitoring breast 
cancer
Raised in benign liver, 
breast and ovarian 
disease and in other 
malignancies, e.g. lung, 
colon, ovary
Cancer antigen 19-9 
(CA19-9)
Glycolipid carrying the 
Lewis blood group 
determinant
~1000 kD
Monitoring pancreatic 
carcinoma following 
curative resection
Not detected in subjects 
negative for the 
Lewis blood group 
determinant
Raised in obstructive 
jaundice, cholestasis, 
cirrhosis, hepatitis, 
pancreatitis and non-
malignant GI disease
Contamination with saliva 
may markedly increase 
concentrations
Catecholamines
Biogenic amines
~0.2 D
See Chapter 38
Chromogranin A
Member of the granin 
family of acid secretory 
glycoproteins
~49 kD
Monitoring 
neuroendocrine 
tumours
Raised in renal, liver and 
cardiac failure
CYFRA 21-1
Fragments of 
cytokeratin 19
~30 kD
Monitoring lung 
carcinoma
Contamination with saliva 
may markedly increase 
concentrations
Gut hormones, 
e.g. vasoactive 
intestinal peptide 
(VIP), pancreatic 
polypeptide (PP), 
somatostatin, gastrin
Small peptide hormones
Variable
See Chapter 12
Human epidermal 
growth factor 
receptor-2 (HER-2 or 
c-erb2)
Transmembrane 
glycoprotein encoded 
from HER-2/neu 
oncogene
185 kDa
Predicting response 
to trastuzumab 
(Herceptin
®)
 
Human epididymis 
protein 4 (HE4)
Product of the WFDC2 
(HE4) gene that is over-
expressed in patients 
with ovarian carcinoma
~25 kD
Monitoring ovarian 
cancer. Potentially 
an aid in diagnosis 
as part of the risk 
of malignancy 
algorithm (ROMA)
Under evaluation
Higher concentrations in 
postmenopausal women
Inhibin A (α-βA)
Inhibin B (α-βB)
Heterodimeric 
glycoproteins 
composed of an α- and 
a β-subunit. There are 
several forms of the 
β-subunit
32 kDa
Monitoring of 
ovarian granulosa 
cell tumours and 
testicular Sertoli and 
Leydig tumours
 
β2-Microglobulin
Component polypeptide 
chain of the HLA 
antigen complex
~11 kD
See Chapter 30
Neuron specific enolase 
(NSE)
Dimer of the enzyme 
enolase
~87 kD
Monitoring small cell 
lung carcinoma, 
neuroblastoma and 
neuroendocrine 
tumours
Haemolysis must be 
avoided
Specimens should be 
separated within 1 h
Oestrogen receptor (ER)
Nuclear transcription 
factor
~5 kD
Predicting response to 
endocrine therapy in 
breast cancer
Part of the histological 
assessment of tissue 
specimens
 
Prostate cancer gene 3 
protein (PCA3)
Protein product of 
PCA3 gene in urine 
of prostate cancer 
patients
~86 kD
Potentially an aid to 
diagnosis of prostate 
cancer particularly in 
biopsy-negative men
Under evaluation
 
Placental alkaline 
phosphatase (PLAP)
Heat-stable isoenzyme of 
alkaline phosphatase
~86 kD
Monitoring of germ 
cell tumours 
(seminomas)
Raised in smokers
(Continued)
824	
Clinical biochemistry
the magnitude of the benefit of its use and its reliability. 
Tumour marker measurement can provide information at 
multiple stages of diagnosis and treatment (Table 42.3) 
but, until appropriate studies have been performed, it can 
be difficult to know how best to use a tumour marker in 
particular circumstances. Having identified a specific use 
(i.e. utility), the clinical value (i.e. magnitude) of using 
the tumour marker for that application needs to be as-
sessed, by evaluating the difference in outcome between 
marker-positive patients and marker-negative patients, 
ideally in a randomized controlled trial designed for the 
purpose. Clinical precision and accuracy (i.e. reliability) 
then need to be established, since the marker will only 
be useful if results are reproducible. In this context, it is 
important to note that, although it is necessary to dem-
onstrate a statistically significant difference in tumour 
marker concentrations between patient groups to show 
that a marker may have potential utility, this is not in 
­itself sufficient evidence that a marker is of clinical ben-
efit (i.e. that it should be used), but merely suggests that 
the differences observed are not likely to occur by chance. 
It is also ­essential to ensure that biochemical analysis of 
the marker is reliable and reproducible, that assays are 
standardized and that their analytical and clinical perfor-
mance is tested objectively in appropriately designed and 
well-conducted studies.
The Tumor Marker Utility Grading System (TMUGS), 
developed some years ago, provides a useful framework 
for such evaluation and it is encouraging that the recom-
mendations made therein have been implemented for 
some analytes, e.g. by improvements in the standardiza-
tion of immunohistochemical assays for HER-2 and in 
TABLE 42.2  Characteristics of less readily available tumour markers (Continued)
Tumour marker
Biochemical properties
Molecular 
weight
Main clinical 
applications
Limitations of use
Progesterone receptor
Nuclear transcription 
factor
A form: 
~4 kD
B form: 
~120 kD
Predicting response to 
endocrine therapy in 
breast cancer
Part of the histological 
assessment of tissue 
specimens
 
Squamous cell carcinoma 
antigen (SCC)
Glycoprotein sub-fraction 
of tumour antigen T4
48 kD
Monitoring squamous 
cell carcinomas 
Contamination with saliva 
or skin may markedly 
increase concentrations
S-100
Polypeptide homodimer
Melanoma
Thyroglobulin (Tg)
Glycoprotein dimer of 
two identical subunits
670 kDa
Monitoring 
differentiated thyroid 
cancer
Raised in benign thyroid 
disease
Potential assay interference 
from autoantibodies
Tissue polypeptide 
antigen (TPA)
Fragments of cytokeratin 
8, 18 and 19
~22 kD
Monitoring bladder 
and lung carcinoma
Contamination with saliva 
may markedly increase 
concentrations
TABLE 42.3  Examples of applications of tumour marker measurements at different stages  
of diagnosis and treatment
Application
Examples
Assessment of risk
PSA: used with or without digital rectal examination to assess risk of 
prostate cancer and determine the need for biopsy
Screening
HCG: screening of women who have had a previous molar pregnancy and 
who are at high risk of developing choriocarcinoma
Differential diagnosis
CA125: together with menopausal status and ultrasound findings, 
contributes to calculation of the risk of malignancy index in the differential 
diagnosis of women with pelvic masses
Prognosis: prediction of relapse or 
progression:
  in primary disease
  in metastatic disease
CEA: measurement at three-monthly intervals following curative surgery in 
patients to assess need for further treatment
Thyroglobulin: following ablation of the thyroid, increasing serum 
concentrations suggest an alternative site of production
Prognosis: prediction of response to therapy:
  in primary disease
  in metastatic disease
Oestrogen and progesterone receptors: their presence or absence in breast 
cancer tissue determines whether endocrine therapy is likely to be effective
AFP, hCG and LDH: in patients with germ cell tumours, concentrations of 
these markers are used to assess prognosis
Monitoring course of disease
To detect relapse in patient with no evidence of 
disease post-therapy
To follow detectable disease
AFP, hCG and LDH used in the follow-up of patients treated for germ cell 
tumours
CA125 used to monitor ovarian cancer patients
	
42  Tumour markers	
825
the analytical accuracy and equimolarity of serum as-
says for PSA. The TMUGS also describes levels of evi-
dence for grading the clinical utility of tumour markers, 
an approach that has been adopted by the US National 
Academy of Clinical Biochemistry (NACB), which has 
developed Laboratory Medicine Practice Guidelines for 
the use of tumour markers in the clinic. Other initiatives 
include development of Reporting Recommendations for 
Tumor Marker Prognostic Studies (REMARK), which 
provide guidance about study design, pre-planned hy-
potheses, patient and specimen characteristics, assay 
methods and statistical analysis methods and comple-
ment the broader statements on Consolidated Standards 
of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) and Standards for 
Reporting of Diagnostic Accuracy (STARD). These 
should help to encourage improved design and publica-
tion of tumour marker studies in the future.
Tumour marker requests and the  
responsibilities of the clinical laboratory
Reasons for requesting tumour markers
Knowledge of tumour marker results can contribute use-
ful clinical information relating to different aspects of pa-
tient management (Table 42.3). For use in screening and 
diagnosis, the ‘perfect’ tumour marker would be absent in 
all healthy subjects (100% specificity), would be raised 
in all patients with a single tumour type (100% sensitiv-
ity) and its serum concentration would accurately reflect 
tumour size. Unfortunately, the ‘perfect’ marker does not 
exist and the extent to which currently available markers 
meet this ideal is very variable. Consequently, the predic-
tive value of a positive or negative result also varies and 
is highly dependent on the population considered (see 
Chapter 2 for detailed discussion).
There is increasing interest in improving the speci-
ficity of some markers (e.g. AFP, CA125 and PSA) by 
using serial measurements to assess the rate of change in 
the concentration of the marker with time in individual 
patients. Such measurements may contribute to diagno-
sis, but in practice, are more likely to aid post-treatment 
monitoring, which is the most established clinical role 
for tumour markers. Whether such monitoring im-
proves patient outcome depends on the availability of 
further treatment options, should increases in marker 
concentrations indicate progressive disease. If poten-
tially curative treatment is available, as for example is 
frequently the case for patients with recurrent germ cell 
tumours, it is essential to identify patients with rising 
tumour marker concentrations promptly; failure to do 
so may constitute a critical clinical error. However, if 
alternative therapy is not ­available, knowledge of pro-
gressive disease before it is clinically evident may not 
benefit the patient and can have adverse psychological 
consequences, in which case it may be advisable to dis-
continue tumour marker monitoring. Serial monitoring 
is also desirable for ­patients with cancers that are un-
likely to progress and for which ­treatment is not neces-
sary or can be delayed: active surveillance (sometimes 
called ‘watchful waiting’) programmes, including serial 
PSA measurements, are appropriate for some men with 
indolent prostate cancers.
Choice of tumour marker test
In practice, the clinical biochemistry laboratory ­receives 
three types of tumour marker requests: those for ­patients 
with diagnosed malignancy who have already been re-
ferred to specialist centres; those for patients being inves-
tigated for suspected malignancy in secondary care, and 
those for patients presenting to their general practitio-
ners. Requests in the first group are the most likely to be 
appropriate and are usually made to clarify the patient’s 
diagnosis or to monitor response to treatment and/or de-
tect recurrence.
Non-specialist users, whether in hospital or general 
practice, should be encouraged to consider carefully 
whether knowledge of a tumour marker result is likely to 
be helpful before requesting it. Requests such as ‘tumour 
marker screen’ or ‘?malignancy’, particularly from emer-
gency departments and other receiving units, should be 
actively discouraged. Since it is not usually practicable for 
requests to be scrutinized prior to analysis, laboratories 
should provide comprehensive advice about appropriate 
choice of tumour markers, as well as reminders of their 
limitations. Most tumour markers do not have sufficient 
sensitivity or specificity, particularly for early stage dis-
ease, to be regarded as diagnostic tests, although they 
may contribute to diagnosis. Importantly, whatever the 
malignancy or tumour marker, a result within the refer-
ence interval never excludes malignancy or progressive 
disease.
Requestors should be aware that the converse is 
also true. Raised tumour marker concentrations do 
not necessarily indicate malignancy, as they may be 
increased in a number of benign conditions. Increased 
concentrations may be associated with more than 
one tumour type, since, with few exceptions, tumour 
markers are not organ-­specific. Clinical biochem-
ists themselves should also think carefully before re-
questing any additional testing which may lead to a 
diagnosis of malignancy and before doing so should 
seek the agreement of the doctor managing the pa-
tient. General advice that can be readily disseminated 
to non-specialist users has recently been prepared by 
Pathology Harmony UK.
Pre-analytical requirements
Although the timing of blood sampling is not usually 
critical, a pre-treatment specimen is helpful when in-
terpreting subsequent results. Specimens should always 
be taken before any investigative procedure, since some 
of these may cause transient releases of tumour mark-
ers into the circulation (e.g. increases of PSA following 
insertion of a urinary catheter or prostatic biopsy, of 
CA125 following abdominal surgery, and of CEA follow-
ing colonoscopy). Possible conditions, which can tran-
siently affect tumour marker concentrations (e.g. marked 
increases of PSA in men with active urinary tract infec-
tions or of CA19.9 in patients with cholestasis) should 
be excluded. Failure to recognize that misleadingly high 
results can be obtained if sampling times are inappropri-
ate may cause undue distress to the patient, as well as 
decreasing confidence in laboratory testing. Some addi-
tional examples are listed in Tables 42.1 and 42.2.
826	
Clinical biochemistry
Analytical requirements
Manufacturers’ instructions should always be followed when 
performing tumour marker measurements, with carefully 
defined internal quality control (IQC) and external quality 
assessment (EQA) procedures in place to monitor perfor-
mance. Internal quality control and EQA specimens should 
closely resemble patient sera and be of clinically relevant 
concentrations, including those near important decision 
limits. Regular assessment of reproducibility and stability 
of results with time is particularly important for all tumour 
markers, as these are often monitored over long periods. 
Ensuring good reproducibility at low concentrations is criti-
cal where treatment may be instituted solely on the basis of 
a relatively small increase in tumour marker concentration, 
as is the case for AFP and hCG in germ cell tumours and for 
PSA following prostatectomy for prostate cancer.
Major international efforts are being directed towards 
improved comparability of tumour marker methods by 
encouraging accurate calibration against the relevant in-
ternational standards where these exist (Table  42.4), by 
producing reference reagents to enable improved charac-
terization of assays, by organizing collaborative workshops 
to identify the most clinically appropriate antibody speci-
ficities and by encouraging use of equimolar assays where 
relevant (e.g. PSA assays that recognize free and complexed 
PSA equally well). Nevertheless, the molecular heteroge-
neity of most tumour markers (as illustrated by the number 
of hCG-related molecules in Table 42.4) means that results 
obtained with different methods are not interchangeable. 
Clinical biochemists should be aware of the characteristics 
of the methods used in their own laboratory. They should 
also be familiar with the vulnerability of their methods to 
potential interferences such as the high-dose hook effect, 
specimen carry-over and interference from heterophilic or 
human anti-mouse antibodies (Box 42.1).
BOX 42.1	
Potential causes of misleading 
results that are particularly 
relevant to tumour markers
High-dose hook effect
•	 Possible tumour marker concentrations range over 
several orders of magnitude. Protocols permitting 
identification of high-dose ‘hooking’ are essential 
to avoid reporting misleadingly low results, par-
ticularly in patients for whom markers are being 
measured for the first time. (Hook effects can be 
minimized by using solid-phase antibodies of higher 
binding capacity, by assaying specimens at two dilu-
tions, or by using sequential assays that include a 
wash step.)
Specimen carry-over
•	 Potentially a problem whenever very high concentra-
tion specimens are assayed, so should occasionally be 
checked
Interference from heterophilic or human anti-mouse 
antibodies (HAMA)
•	 Falsely high or low results may be obtained for patient 
specimens containing anti-immunoglobulin G (IgG) 
antibodies capable of reacting with antibodies used in 
the assay. Presence of HAMA, frequently induced in 
cancer patients who have undergone treatment with 
mouse monoclonal antibodies for imaging or thera-
peutic purposes, may also give erroneous results. Such 
interference can be detected by re-assaying the speci-
men after treatment with a blocking agent (which is 
commercially available immobilized on tubes), by 
adding further non-immune mouse serum to the re-
action mixture, or by re-assaying the specimen by a 
different method. An example of such interference is 
given in Table 42.8.
TABLE 42.4  International standards (IS), reference preparations (IRP) and reference reagents (IRR)  
for tumour markers
Tumour marker
Code
Year established
Description
International standards and reference preparations
AFP
IS 72/225
1972
Crude cord serum (50%): mass units
CA125
 
CA15-3
No International Standards yet available
CA19-9
 
CEA
IRP 73/601
1973
CEA purified from liver metastases of primary colorectal cancer: 
arbitrary units
hCG
IS 07/634
2007
Highly purified urinary hCG: arbitrary units and molar units
hCGα
IS 75/569
1975
Arbitrary units
hCGβ
IS 75/551
1975
Arbitrary units
International reference reagents
hCG
IRR 99/688
2001
Highly purified: molar units
hCGn
IRR 99/642
2001
Nicked form of hCG: molar units
hCGα
IRR 99/720
2001
Highly purified urinary hCGα, dissociated from hCG: molar units
hCGβ
IRR 99/650
2001
Highly purified, free from intact dimer: molar units
hCGβn
IRR 99/692
2001
Partially degraded hCGβ: molar units
hCGβcf
IRR 99/708
2001
Molar units
PSA
IRR 96/670
2001
90:10 ratio of bound to free PSA: mass units
fPSA
IRR 96/668
2001
Purified free PSA: mass units
Thyroglobulin
CRM 457
1996
Purified thyroglobulin: mass units
Most currently available immunoassays are calibrated against the relevant standards where they exist. The lack of international standards  
for the CA antigens is a major hindrance to improved between-method comparability.
hCGα, hCG α-subunit; hCGβ, hCG β-subunit; hCGn, nicked hCG; hCGβn, nicked hCG β-subunit, hCGβcf, hCG β-core fragment.
International Standards and Reference Reagents are available from the National Institute for Biological Standards and Control, Potters Bar, 
Herts, UK: http://www.nibsc.ac.uk/catalog/standards/preps/sub_endo.html
	
42  Tumour markers	
827
Reporting of tumour marker results
Cumulative and/or graphical reporting of serial results 
can identify trends in marker concentrations, which are 
generally more informative than single values, and may 
alert the laboratory to unexpected results (e.g. sudden 
changes) that require further investigation. Recording 
brief clinical information (e.g. ‘postoperative’), prefer-
ably both in the laboratory computer and on any printed 
reports, can be helpful both in identifying results that are 
out-of-accord and when interpreting results.
In view of method-related differences in tumour marker 
results, it is recommended that the method used is stated on 
the clinical report. If there has been an intervening method 
change, it is highly desirable that the laboratory also indicates 
whether this is likely to have affected interpretation of the 
trend in results. Reference intervals specific to the method 
used should be provided, although for serial monitoring, the 
patient’s own baseline provides the most important refer-
ence point for future results. Laboratory and clinical staff 
should engage in active dialogue about appropriate clinical 
decision points (e.g. when using PSA measurements to se-
lect patients for biopsy) and should know how these limits 
were derived. Laboratories can increase the value of their 
reports by adding short interpretative comments relating 
to the analytical results and preferably individually tailored 
to the requestor (e.g. omitting these for specialist users). 
Tumour marker half-lives, which are defined as the time 
to 50% reduction of circulating tumour marker concentra-
tions following complete removal of tumour tissue, provide 
an important measure of the efficacy of therapy, particularly 
for germ cell tumours, and it may be helpful for the labora-
tory to calculate these for AFP and hCG (see p. 833 for fur-
ther information). Providing advice about whether a change 
in marker concentration is likely to be significant or not is 
also helpful and should take into account both biological 
and analytical variation. A confirmed increase of 30%, or 
two serial increases of 20–25%, are often considered to be 
of clinical significance. Recommendations about the need 
for confirmatory specimens and the ­desirable frequency of 
tumour marker measurements are also helpful.
The clinical biochemist should identify urgent results 
that may be required for immediate patient management 
and ensure that these reach the relevant clinician promptly, 
telephoning results when appropriate. Results in this cate-
gory include those which can be used to diagnose advanced 
disease in critically ill but treatable patients (e.g. AFP in 
hepatoblastoma; hCG in choriocarcinoma; AFP and hCG 
in non-­seminomatous germ cell tumours; PSA in men with 
advanced prostate cancer that may respond to endocrine 
therapy). Provision of a proactive and high-quality tumour 
marker service helps to encourage good communication 
between laboratory and clinical staff, and is likely to facili-
tate both appropriate use of tumour marker tests and early 
identification of any results that are not in accord with the 
clinical picture. An example of a laboratory report meeting 
many of these requirements is shown in Figure 42.1.
TUMOUR MARKERS IN THE MANAGEMENT  
OF SPECIFIC CANCERS
Regularly updated national guidelines on the man-
agement of the majority of tumours are now widely 
­available, often provided electronically on the world-
wide web. Regional cancer networks are also a valuable 
source of information and have often developed modi-
fied versions of national guidelines tailored for local 
use. The optimal use of tumour markers for ­assessment 
of prognosis, monitoring treatment and ­detecting 
­recurrent disease has been studied in most detail for 
choriocarcinoma and germ cell tumours, relatively rare 
diseases for which tumour marker measurements are 
mandatory for clinical management. Measurements 
of serum tumour markers also contribute significantly 
to the management of some of the more common 
­malignancies (e.g. ovarian, colorectal and prostate), 
while they are less widely used in others (e.g. bladder, 
breast and lung). In the following sections, the extent 
to which tumour markers currently contribute to the 
clinical management of a number of important malig-
nancies is briefly reviewed.
Bladder cancer
The most common symptom of bladder cancer is in-
termittent haematuria, which is present in 80–85% of 
patients. The majority of bladder cancers are transi-
tional cell carcinomas but adenocarcinomas, squa-
mous cell carcinomas and sarcomas also occur. In 
some patients, urine cytology is positive for tumour 
cells, but the diagnosis is usually established by cysto-
scopic evaluation.
Urine cytology is very effective in detecting high-
grade bladder cancers but will miss the majority 
of ­papillary urothelial neoplasms of low malignant 
­potential. Commercially available assays for two tu-
mour markers present in urine have been approved 
by the United States Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA) for the ­detection of recurrent bladder can-
cer. The BTA (bladder tumour associated antigen) 
-Trak™ and -Stat™ tests detect complement fac-
tor H and ­related proteins, which are involved in 
the regulation of the alternative pathway of comple-
ment activation to prevent complement-­mediated 
damage to healthy cells. A point of care version of 
this test is also available. The nuclear matrix protein 22 
(NMP22™) test is a quantitative measure of the nuclear 
mitotic apparatus protein, a component of the nuclear 
matrix which is over-­expressed in bladder cancer. Both 
these tests are more sensitive than cytology in detect-
ing low grade bladder cancers but are less specific, and 
their high false positive rates limit their clinical ap-
plication. Better specificity has been achieved with a 
fluorescence in situ hybridization assay (UroVysion™), 
which detects bladder cancer-associated aneuploidy of 
selected chromosomes and which has been approved 
by the FDA for screening patients for recurrent blad-
der cancer.
Breast cancer
Breast cancer is by far the most common cancer affecting 
women worldwide with approximately one million new 
cases diagnosed each year. The main presenting features 
in women with symptomatic breast cancer include a lump 
in the breast, nipple change or discharge and skin contour 
changes.
828	
Clinical biochemistry
Screening and diagnosis
Currently available blood-based biomarkers are of no 
value in the early diagnosis of symptomatic or asymptom-
atic breast cancer, the latter being addressed by national 
screening programmes using mammography. Individuals 
who are at increased risk of breast cancer because they 
are carriers of the BRCA1, BRCA2 or TP53 genetic mu-
tations and those with a strong family history of breast 
cancer (e.g. close relatives diagnosed with breast cancer 
at a young age) may be eligible for screening with mag-
netic resonance imaging (MRI), as is recommended in 
the UK by the National Institute for Health and Care 
Excellence (NICE). Definitive diagnosis requires biopsy 
and histopathology.
Prognosis
Measurement of oestrogen-binding receptors (ER) and 
progesterone-binding receptors (PR) in tumour biopsy 
tissue obtained at diagnosis is mandatory in order to de-
termine the likely response to endocrine therapy of both 
early and advanced (metastatic) breast cancer. Early ligand-
binding and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay methods 
for measuring ER and PR have been superseded by immu-
nohistochemical assessment, which can be performed on 
paraffin-fixed tissue sections of the smaller tumours now 
detected by screening. Immunohistochemical or fluores-
cence in-situ hybridization tissue measurement of HER-2 
(or its gene), a glycoprotein that controls cell growth and 
is amplified in ~30% of early-stage breast cancers, is now 
essential in all newly diagnosed patients with breast cancer. 
Patients with tumours that do not produce HER-2 are 
not likely to benefit from treatment with trastuzumab 
(Herceptin®), a humanized monoclonal antibody against 
HER-2, either administered on its own or in addition to 
other chemotherapy treatment. An assay is available for 
the measurement of the soluble shed form of HER-2 in 
serum and has potential value, both for prognosis and for 
monitoring trastuzumab therapy in patients with advanced 
breast cancer. However, the serum assay is not widely used.
Monitoring
CA15-3, a high molecular weight mucin, and similar 
MUC-1 based glycoprotein markers (e.g. BR27-29) may 
be used to monitor response to treatment, rising serum 
concentrations providing early indication of progression 
Standard patient
demographics including
patient number
Space for recording
relevant information
Relevant clinical
decision limit
Lab A 244347 Method 1
03/03/1999
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140 Pretreatment
Test Patient
Department of Clinical Biochemistry
Tel:
Dr John Smith
01/02/03
123456789Z
Medical Centre 1
Tumour marker (units)
Treatment 3
Treatment 2
Test Patient
05/08/2000
01/01/2002
16/06/2003
03.03.1999
Post-surgery
Lab A 578221    "
04.05.2000
2.5 units
Lab B 613365 Method 2
15.06.2000
For change of treatment?
Continued....
Confirms recent increase. [Report copied to Urology and Oncology, as requested.]
Cumulated results across
hospitals and including
method and clinical details
Comments - selected from
presented choices depending
on marker, concentration and
age of patient
COMMENTS:
LAB/SPECIMEN/METHOD
ADDITIONAL DETAILS:
PATIENT:
PATIENT No:
ST ELSEWHERE HOSPITAL
CONSULTANT/GP:
HOSPITAL:
DOB:
WARD/PRACTICE:
DATE
CLINICAL DETAIL
TUMOUR
MARKER
(<4.0 units)
Possibility of graphical
reporting - log scale or not
FIGURE 42.1  ■  Possible template for a clinical laboratory report for tumour markers that fulfil current reporting recommendations.
	
42  Tumour markers	
829
in some patients. Their routine use is not currently rec-
ommended, since there is as yet no evidence that ther-
apeutic intervention prior to radiological or clinical 
detection of recurrent tumour is beneficial. However, in 
individual patients, measurement of CA15-3 may help to 
determine whether bone symptoms are due to benign or 
malignant disease, as high concentrations are frequently 
associated with metastatic disease. CA15-3 may also be 
useful in monitoring response to therapy in advanced dis-
ease if there are no other indicators of response and if 
rising concentrations would be an indication to stop all 
but palliative treatment. As with other tumour markers, 
the low sensitivity of CA15-3 means that results within 
the reference interval do not exclude active disease or 
progression.
Cervical cancer
Worldwide, cervical cancer is the major cause of death 
from gynaecological cancer, with reported incidence 
rates in developing countries much higher than those 
in developed countries. Since cervical cancer progresses 
slowly from pre-invasive cervical intraepithelial neoplasia 
to invasive cancer, screening asymptomatic women with 
regular smears provides an effective means of early de-
tection. The addition of human papilloma virus (HPV) 
testing appears to improve the effectiveness of screening 
as certain types of HPV are involved in the development 
of cervical cancer.
Women who have not been screened may present with 
symptoms of abnormal vaginal bleeding and, in advanced 
cases, pelvic pain and pressure symptoms relating to the 
bowel or bladder. Treatment of early stage disease usually 
requires radical hysterectomy and pelvic lymphadenec-
tomy, with adjuvant radiation therapy if disease has spread 
to the lymph nodes. Surgery and concomitant chemora-
diation or neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by radi-
cal surgery are options for bulky disease. Measurement 
of plasma CEA and CA125 may have clinical utility in 
patients with cervical adenocarcinomas, which constitute 
10–15% of all cervical cancers. The majority of cervical 
cancer patients (~85%), however, have squamous cell cer-
vical carcinomas, for which the potentially most useful 
serum tumour marker is squamous cell carcinoma anti-
gen (SCC), a serine protease inhibitor.
Screening and diagnosis
The low sensitivity and specificity of SCC, particularly 
for early stage disease, preclude its use in screening or 
diagnosis, which requires immunohistological evidence. 
Although 60% of patients with cervical cancer will have 
elevated concentrations of SCC at diagnosis, raised ­values 
are also found in other squamous cell carcinomas (e.g. 
lung, oesophagus and head and neck) as well as in benign 
diseases (e.g. psoriasis, eczema, sarcoidosis).
Prognosis
Some studies suggest that a raised concentration of 
SCC is an independent risk factor for poor survival but 
other studies contradict this. It has also been suggested 
that pre-treatment SCC concentrations may be helpful 
in stratifying patients at greater risk of recurrence and 
therefore requiring more intensive therapy, but formal 
trials will be necessary to confirm this.
Monitoring
Various studies have confirmed that SCC shows a strong 
correlation with the clinical course of cervical cancer, 
with a lead time of up to 14 months in detecting progres-
sion prior to the onset of clinical symptoms, but whether 
earlier detection improves treatment outcome is not 
known. As only 10% of patients with recurrent disease can 
be cured and most patients with recurrent disease have 
clinical symptoms, until treatment options improve it is 
unlikely that SCC measurement will be widely adopted.
Choriocarcinoma
See Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia, below.
Colorectal cancer
Worldwide, colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most 
common cancer, with more cases in the developed world 
than in Africa and Asia. Its incidence increases as popula-
tions adopt a western style diet. The risk of recurrence 
and subsequent death from CRC is closely related to the 
stage of the disease at the time of the primary operation. 
Although the treatment of colon and rectal cancer dif-
fer, they can be considered together in terms of tumour 
marker measurement.
Screening
Individuals at high risk of developing CRC (e.g. those 
with hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer (HNPCC, 
Lynch syndrome), familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) 
or a strong family history of CRC (e.g. first degree relative 
with CRC diagnosed before age 45) should be referred to 
a clinical genetics unit for risk assessment and endoscopic 
screening. Mismatch repair gene mutations (e.g. MLH1, 
MSH2) predispose individuals to additional tumours, in-
cluding those of the endometrium, ovary, genitourinary 
tract, small bowel and biliary tract. Individuals with FAP 
are at increased risk of developing duodenal tumours and 
thyroid tumours.
Early detection of CRC using faecal occult blood 
testing (FOBT) has been shown to reduce mortality in 
several randomized controlled trials. A number of coun-
tries now provide screening programmes for defined 
age groups (often >60  years old in the general popu-
lation and at younger ages in high-risk groups) based 
on FOBT. Such screening is undertaken biannually in 
the UK, ­currently using a guaiac test, which detects the 
pseudoperoxidase activity of either intact or free haemo-
globin. The test has many limitations, including rela-
tively low clinical sensitivity and specificity for CRC; 
lack of specificity for human haemoglobin; vulnerability 
to interference from some foodstuffs and medications 
and difficulties associated with automating it. Screening 
using guaiac-based methods is therefore gradually being 
830	
Clinical biochemistry
replaced by faecal immunochemical tests, which detect 
the globin component of haemoglobin, can be used 
quantitatively with an adjustable cut-off concentration 
and are generally superior. All FOBTs lack specificity, 
and positive screens must be followed-up with colonos-
copy. Markers based on DNA detection are potentially 
more specific than FOBT and may ultimately replace 
them, provided a clinically cost-effective panel of mark-
ers can be identified. At present, however, the cost and 
technical difficulties associated with these assays pre-
clude their adoption.
Diagnosis
Although CEA is the most frequently used marker for 
CRC, depending on the cut-off point chosen, serum CEA 
will be raised in only 30–50% of CRC patients at the time 
of diagnosis. Its specificity is also low, since CEA concen-
trations can be raised in benign liver and kidney disease 
as well as in other malignancies (e.g. breast, gastric, lung, 
mesothelioma, oesophageal and pancreatic cancers), and 
may also be raised in smokers. Therefore, CEA cannot 
be used in isolation to diagnose even advanced CRC. 
However, raised concentrations can aid in diagnosis 
in certain clinical circumstances (e.g. indicating a high 
probability of malignancy in a frail elderly patient who 
cannot undergo invasive investigations) and confirmed 
markedly raised concentrations (serum CEA >40 μg/L) 
are suggestive of metastatic disease.
Prognosis and staging
The strongest predictor of recurrence of CRC is the 
histopathological stage of disease, as assessed using the 
Dukes staging system or one of its modified versions 
(Table 42.5), which take into account local tumour inva-
sion, involvement of regional lymph nodes and presence 
of distant metastases. The five-year survival for patients 
with Dukes Stage A disease is >90% but that for those 
with Stage D disease is <10%.
High preoperative CEA concentrations are associated 
with poorer prognosis, while those within the reference 
interval are generally associated with better outcomes. An 
Expert Panel of the American Joint Committee on Cancer 
has suggested that CEA concentrations should be incor-
porated in the TNM staging system for CRC, but this 
proposal has not yet been formally adopted. Supporting 
this, a College of American Pathologists Expert Panel has 
ranked preoperative serum CEA as a Category I prognos-
tic marker for CRC. In practice, pathological examination 
of resected tumour currently determines prognosis and 
the need for adjuvant therapy but preoperative CEA con-
centrations may provide additional prognostic informa-
tion complementing histopathology in newly diagnosed 
CRC patients. Further information may also be obtained 
from new prognostic markers, e.g. microsatellite instabil-
ity and gene expression profiling. Further evaluation of 
these is required prior to their routine implementation 
but it is likely that measurement of CEA will continue to 
be both simpler and cheaper.
Monitoring
Serum CEA is a reliable and validated marker for the 
surveillance and detection of disease recurrence in CRC. 
However, it is important to consider whether this would 
be likely to benefit the individual patient. Monitoring of 
the disease should be undertaken only if it were likely to 
lead to clinical action that would either improve the sur-
vival or quality of life of the patient, e.g. by early detec-
tion of recurrence that is amenable to treatment.
Meta-analyses of a number of trials confirm that in-
tensive follow-up results in 20–30% reduction in all cause 
mortality, but variation in follow-up strategies and report-
ing makes it difficult to draw conclusions about the best 
combination of tests and their timing. Nevertheless, re-
sults suggest that inclusion of regular CEA measurements 
in intensive follow-up regimens is necessary to achieve 
significant improvement in survival. Intensive follow-up 
is a cost-effective strategy, with measurement of CEA be-
ing one of the least expensive tests performed, estimated 
to be approximately half the cost of a chest X-ray and less 
than one-tenth the cost of a colonoscopy in the USA.
A number of expert panels have issued broadly similar 
recommendations stating that CEA should be measured 
in patients with Dukes stage B or C CRC who may be 
eligible for further intervention (e.g. resection of liver 
metastases or systemic treatment) if their disease re-
curs. It should be measured at baseline and then every 
2–3 months for at least three years after diagnosis and 
approximately every six months for a further five years. 
Measurement of CEA following resection of solitary liver 
metastases provides helpful information, with CEA fall-
ing rapidly following successful resection. Unfortunately, 
while CEA is a relatively sensitive marker for liver metas-
tases, this is not the case for lung metastases.
Increasing CEA concentrations in an asympto­
matic patient pose a difficult dilemma. The National 
Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) recommends 
that if CEA is increasing in the presence of normal im-
aging, computed tomography (CT) scans should be re-
peated every three months until disease is detected or 
TABLE 42.5  Pathological staging systems used 
for colorectal cancer
Extent of spread of malignancy
Pathological stage
Dukes
UICC/AJCC
Tumour found in the innermost 
lining of the colon only 
(carcinoma in situ)
–
0
Tumour beginning to spread 
but confined to the inner 
lining of the colon or rectum
A
I
Tumour extending more 
deeply into and/or through 
the colon or rectum, possibly 
invading nearby tissue
B
II
Invasion of tumour to regional 
lymph nodes
C
III
Metastasis to distant sites (most 
frequently lungs and liver)
D
IV
UICC, International Union Against Cancer; AJCC, American Joint 
Committee on Cancer.
	
42  Tumour markers	
831
CEA concentrations stabilize or decrease. Exploratory 
surgery based solely on an increase in CEA is not rec-
ommended by the NCCN; neither is the use of CEA-
radiolabelled scintigraphy in patients with negative 
imaging. It is important to note that low serum CEA 
results do not necessarily exclude progression and other 
confirmatory tests (e.g. CT scan, X-ray, colonoscopy or 
possibly CA19-9 measurement) may be required if this is 
clinically suspected.
Monitoring of advanced disease
Patients with metastatic CRC are likely to receive a fluoro­
pyrimidine (e.g. fluorouracil) in combination with ox-
aliplatin and/or irinotecan. Biological treatment with 
therapeutic antibodies (e.g. bevacizumab, cetuximab and 
panitumumab) is also increasingly used. While radiol-
ogy remains the ‘gold standard’ method for evaluating 
­response, studies have demonstrated good concordance 
between radiological response and CEA response in 
>90% of patients being treated for isolated CRC liver me-
tastasis, leading to the conclusion that CEA is as ­accurate 
as CT imaging for assessing response to chemotherapy. 
Caution in interpretation is, however, required, particu-
larly in the first few weeks following chemotherapy, as 
transient rises in CEA may occur in 10–15% of patients. 
Interestingly, these increases appear to be associated with 
a favourable outcome and are thought to be due to ne-
crosis and/or apoptosis caused by the cytotoxic therapy. 
A confirmed increase during treatment may lead to a 
change of treatment or withdrawal of ineffective therapy.
Cautions and caveats
It is essential that, whenever possible, CEA concentra-
tions in individual patients are monitored using the same 
method, since method-related differences in recognition 
of CEA mean that results may differ sufficiently to influ-
ence the interpretation of serial measurements. As for all 
serum tumour markers, when a change of method is un-
avoidable, the laboratory should establish a new baseline 
value for each patient.
An increase of >30% from the previous value of CEA 
is considered to be significant and should be confirmed 
by a second sample taken within a month. Smaller in-
creases (e.g. 15–20%) demonstrated over at least three 
consecutive assays at minimum intervals of two weeks, 
may also prompt intervention. Patients with symptoms 
of recurrence require additional investigation such as CT 
scanning. CEA results within the reference interval do 
not exclude recurrence. Conversely, increasing CEA con-
centrations following curative surgery may reflect factors 
that are not associated with the primary tumour (e.g. lung 
nodules, liver lesions, ovarian masses and mediastinal 
lymphadenopathy).
Genetic pre-screening for hereditary  
non-polyposis colon cancer
Considerable progress has been made in understanding 
genetic influences on the development of CRC, and ge-
netic testing is likely to become increasingly important. 
Pre-screening for HNPCC, which accounts for approxi-
mately 3% of all CRC patients and which predisposes to 
development of other cancers, is currently performed by 
testing for microsatellite instability (MSI), a surrogate 
marker for DNA mismatch repair (dMMR) gene dys-
function, which is present in >90% of affected patients. 
Further testing for mutations in the BRAF gene (proto-
oncogene B-Raf) may be desirable in some cases, as it 
may determine sensitivity to specific anti-tumour drugs 
(see p. 837). Studies have suggested that cancer rates and 
mortality are both decreased by close surveillance of pa-
tients with HNPCC, but there is still much debate about 
whether routine measurement of MSI/dMMR is desir-
able in all patients with CRC. Reports also suggest that 
MSI/dMMR status may have prognostic relevance in 
CRC, with the presence of MSI or defective MMR activ-
ity associated with favourable outcomes.
K-RAS mutation detection
Colorectal cancer patients with specific activating muta-
tions in either codon 12 or 13 of K-RAS rarely respond 
to treatment with anti-epidermal growth factor receptor 
(EGFR) antibodies, which include cetuximab and panitu-
mumab, both of which bind to the extracellular domain 
of EGFR. Expert groups have therefore recommended 
that patients should be tested for K-RAS mutations be-
fore treatment, to identify individuals unlikely to benefit 
from these relatively expensive drugs.
Gastric cancer
The second most common gastrointestinal cancer world-
wide, gastric cancer, is frequently diagnosed only when 
it is at an advanced stage. Plasma concentrations of CEA 
and CA19-9 are raised in 20–50% of patients with ad-
vanced disease and AFP in 20–25%, but these markers 
are increased in <20% of patients with early stage disease. 
None of these has the sensitivity or specificity required 
for screening or diagnosis of gastric cancer, although 
some studies suggest that post-treatment monitoring 
of patients using serum CEA or CA19-9 may provide 
early detection of recurrence in a proportion of patients. 
Further data are required, together with evidence that 
early detection improves clinical outcome, before moni-
toring with either can be recommended.
Results of a recent phase III trial suggest that trastu-
zumab (Herceptin
®), in combination with chemotherapy, 
should be implemented as standard treatment for the 
15–20% of patients with HER-2-positive advanced gas-
tric cancers. Testing for HER-2 to identify gastric can-
cer patients who over-express HER-2 is likely to become 
increasingly important, particularly as there are newer 
forms of anti-HER-2 therapy (e.g. lapatinib, pertu-
zumab and trastuzumab-TM1), which may prove more 
efficacious.
Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST)
Gastrointestinal stromal tumours (GIST) are rare 
­tumours that occur in the stomach, small bowel, large 
bowel, ­oesophagus or omentum. At a molecular level, 
832	
Clinical biochemistry
they are characterized by the presence of KIT protein 
(also known as CD117 antigen), whose measurement in 
serum is recommended by a number of expert panels. 
The mutational status of the KIT proto-oncogene is also 
important in predicting which patients will benefit from 
imatinib, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, whose availabil-
ity has dramatically improved the treatment of patients 
with GIST.
Germ cell tumours
Germ cell tumours are more common in males than 
­females and can be benign or malignant. Although most 
frequent in young adults, they can occur at any age. 
They may be seminomatous germ cell tumours, non-
seminomatous germ cell tumours (NSGCT) or com-
bined tumours (tumours with both seminomatous and 
non-seminomatous elements). Germ cell tumours often 
originate in the gonads, but they also occur elsewhere, 
particularly in the mediastinum, retroperitoneum or pi-
neal gland (i.e. along the ‘midline’). Testicular germ cell 
tumours are increasing in incidence and ~1500 new cases 
are diagnosed each year in the UK. Plasma concentra-
tions of AFP and/or hCG are elevated in 80–85% of men 
with NSGCT, whereas <25% of those with seminomas 
have raised hCG and none have raised AFP. Methods 
used in oncology for the measurement of hCG should 
recognize both intact hCG and its free ­β-subunit (‘to-
tal βhCG’ assay) since a significant proportion of hCG 
in patients with seminomas may be present as the free 
subunit rather than the intact molecule. Placental alka-
line phosphatase (PLAP) is another promising tumour 
marker in seminoma, but lack of commercially available 
assays and the significantly increased concentrations 
of PLAP observed in smokers have thus far limited its 
application.
Although germ cell tumours are usually aggressive 
neoplasms, they are highly sensitive to treatment with 
surgery and, when appropriate, chemotherapy and/or ra-
diotherapy. The anticipated cure rate is >90%, although 
patients presenting with advanced disease have a lower 
five-year survival of 50–60%.
There are well-accepted clinical guidelines relating 
to the management of patients with germ cell tumours, 
for which measurements of AFP, hCG and LDH are 
an ­integral part. In the UK, patients are referred to 
a regional centre serving a population of two to four 
million for ­further assessment and chemotherapy. All 
patients should be discussed at multidisciplinary team 
meetings attended by a clinical biochemist. Tumour 
marker results should be reviewed along with histo-
logical immunostaining and radiological results and 
any inconsistencies noted when treatment decisions are 
considered.
Screening
The relatively low sensitivity and specificity of AFP, 
hCG and LDH for germ cell tumours, together with 
the low prevalence of these cancers in the general popu-
lation, means that tumour markers cannot be used for 
screening.
Diagnosis
The possibility of a germ cell tumour should be consid-
ered in any patient with a poorly defined epithelial ma-
lignancy, particularly young individuals with mid-line 
masses. Plasma concentrations of AFP and hCG should 
be measured in any male with a suspicious lump in the 
testis and in any patient under 50 years of age with a ma-
lignancy of unknown origin. Young patients with germ 
cell tumours and very high serum hCG concentrations 
may present with thyrotoxicosis as hCG shares structural 
similarities with TSH. Patients with markedly elevated 
concentrations of AFP and/or hCG and clinical findings 
consistent with a germ cell tumour (e.g. testicular lump, 
lung metastases, abdominal mass) should be discussed ur-
gently with the consultant responsible for managing germ 
cell tumours at the regional cancer centre. Immediate re-
ferral for chemotherapy may be appropriate if surgery is 
likely to be required later to remove residual tumour.
Distinguishing teratomas from seminomas is essential, 
as their treatments differ. Production of AFP is associated 
with yolk sac elements in germ cell tumours and there-
fore AFP is not found in pure seminomas (which never 
contain yolk sac elements), while the presence of hCG is 
associated with syncytiotrophoblast tissue. Differentiated 
teratoma tissue does not produce either AFP or hCG. 
Marker measurements can sometimes modify histopath-
ological diagnoses, e.g. raised AFP in a patient diagnosed 
with pure seminoma suggests that yolk sac elements may 
have been overlooked or that the AFP is not related to 
the tumour (e.g. may be of liver origin). Before surgery 
for a suspected germ cell tumour, measurement of both 
AFP and hCG is essential to allow the rate of fall of the 
markers to be monitored post treatment. Some patients 
with pure seminoma histologically may have a preopera-
tive AFP of 5–30 kU/L (6–36 μg/L) that remains stable 
following surgery. Provided that the AFP concentration 
remains unchanged before and after orchidectomy and is 
stable when re-checked four weeks after surgery, the AFP 
may be considered to be ‘normal’ for that individual and 
not related to the tumour.
Rarely, if primary or secondary (metastatic) disease 
of the central nervous system (CNS) is suspected, mea-
surement of hCG in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) may con-
tribute both to diagnosis and to treatment monitoring. 
A CSF:serum hCG ratio of >2% is predictive of CNS 
involvement. In practice, measurement of tumour mark-
ers in the CSF has been largely superseded by radiologi-
cal investigations.
It is important to remember that tumour marker con-
centrations within reference intervals do not exclude 
malignancy since up to 25% of NSGCT do not produce 
AFP or hCG, and only a small proportion of seminomas 
or dysgerminomas (the female equivalent of seminomas) 
produce hCG. The possibility of false positive results 
must also be considered and account should always be 
taken of clinical and radiological findings. Plasma AFP 
can be increased in benign liver disease and primary he-
patocellular carcinoma as well as in other cancers, includ-
ing gastric and oesophageal tumours. Similarly, hCG can 
be increased in other non-germ cell tumours (e.g. blad-
der, lung) and both AFP and hCG are significantly raised 
in pregnancy.
	
42  Tumour markers	
833
Prognosis
Tumour marker measurements contribute significantly to 
the prognostic assessment of germ cell tumours. Criteria 
developed by the International Germ Cell Cancer 
Collaborative Group (IGCCCG) classify patients with 
metastatic NSGCT as belonging to one of three prog-
nostic groups (Table  42.6). The lowest tumour marker 
concentration reached post surgery, the primary tumour 
site, and the sites of metastatic disease all contribute to 
this prognostic classification.
Whether AFP and hCG measurements made prior 
to primary surgery are prognostically useful is less clear, 
since patients with large primary tumours but without 
metastases may have very high AFP and hCG concentra-
tions that return to normal following surgery.
Monitoring
Tumour markers should be measured before and after 
surgical excision of germ cell tumours. Ideally, if disease 
is limited to the testis or ovary, serum AFP and/or hCG 
should decrease to normal with an apparent half-life of 
5–6 days for AFP and 1–2 days for hCG. This is illus-
trated in Figure 42.2, which shows the decrease in AFP 
observed in Patient A, a patient with good prognosis fol-
lowing surgical treatment of a malignant teratoma. The 
apparent half-life (t1/2) of the tumour marker can be cal-
culated using the equation:
where [M]T and [M]T0 are tumour marker concentrations 
at time T and T0, respectively and t is the difference in 
days between T and T0. As indicated in Figure 42.2, in 
which AFP concentration is plotted on a logarithmic 
t
0.3t
log
M
M
1/2
10
T
T0
=
−
[
]
[
]
TABLE 42.6  International germ cell cancer 
­collaborative group prognostic classification 
­for metastatic testicular germ cell tumours
Non-seminoma
Seminoma
Good prognosis
Testis/retroperitoneal primary
Any primary site
No non-pulmonary visceral 
metastases
No non-pulmonary 
visceral metastases
Good markers – all of:
  AFP <1000 μg/L
  hCG <5000 U/L (1000 μg/L)
  LDH <1.5 × ULN
Normal AFP, any hCG, 
any LDH
56% of non-seminomas
90% of seminomas
5-year progression-free 
survival 89%
5-year progression-free 
survival 82%
5-year survival 92%
5-year survival 86%
Intermediate prognosis
Testis/retroperitoneal primary
Any primary site
No non-pulmonary visceral 
metastases
Non-pulmonary visceral 
metastases
Intermediate markers –  
any of:
  AFP ≥1000 and ≤10 000 μg/L
  hCG ≥5000 U/L and 
≤50 000 U/L
  LDH ≥1.5 × ULN and 
≤10 × ULN
Normal AFP, any hCG, 
any LDH
28% of non-seminomas
10% of seminomas
5-year progression-free 
survival 75%
5-year progression-free 
survival 67%
5-year survival 80%
5-year survival 72%
Poor prognosis
Mediastinal primary
 
  or
 
Non-pulmonary visceral 
metastases
 
  or
 
Poor markers – any of:
  AFP >10 000 μg/L
  hCG >50 000 U/L 
(10 000 μg/L)
  LDH >10 × ULN
No patients classified as 
poor prognosis
16% of non-seminomas
 
5-year progression-free 
survival 41%
 
5-year survival 48%
 
ULN, upper limit of normal. Note that AFP is expressed in ng/mL 
rather than kU/L, the units in which many laboratories report AFP 
results. For most methods, results in ng/mL can be multiplied 
by 0.83 to obtain kU/L but laboratories should check that this 
conversion factor is valid for the assay used and ensure that 
their clinicians are aware of it. Tumour markers refer to plasma 
concentrations.
FIGURE  42.2  ■  Serum α-fetoprotein (AFP) concentrations in a 
­patient treated by surgery for malignant teratoma.
834	
Clinical biochemistry
scale against time on a linear scale, the apparent t1/2  
of AFP for Patient A is six days, i.e. at the upper limit 
of the expected half-life of AFP in normal subjects. This 
suggests possibly complete tumour removal. If AFP or 
hCG remains elevated post surgery or if metastatic dis-
ease is identified radiologically, further treatment with 
chemotherapy or radiation is required.
The importance of continued monitoring with tumour 
markers following surgery is also illustrated in Figure 42.2, 
where, although the measured AFP became undetectable 
by day 65, the concentration subsequently increased, 
first becoming detectable on day 151 (AFP 7 kU/L or 
8.4 μg/L). Such findings should be confirmed within two 
weeks, after which further clinical investigations should be 
instituted immediately. In the absence of residual tumour 
or scan evidence, other causes of raised AFP and/or hCG, 
including the possibility of analytical interference, must 
be excluded, but provided this is done, Patient A would 
be a candidate for chemotherapy to combat progressive 
disease. Patients with very high marker concentrations 
before chemotherapy are more likely to have undetected 
micrometastases, as was probably the case for Patient A.
All chemotherapy regimens for germ cell tumours in-
clude platinum-based drugs, but the regimen selected will 
depend both on prognosis and on the results of clinical 
trials appropriate to that prognostic category. Following 
chemotherapy, AFP and/or hCG concentrations should 
decrease linearly when plotted as described above, but 
their apparent half-lives will usually be somewhat lon-
ger, i.e. up to seven days for hCG and ten days for AFP. 
A somewhat different pattern of AFP results is seen for 
Patient B (Fig. 42.3), a patient with a metastatic teratoma 
that did not respond to initial surgery. In some patients, 
AFP and/or hCG may continue to rise for up to three 
weeks following the start of chemotherapy, although con-
centrations usually start to decrease by ten days (as for 
Patient B). They should then fall linearly with time when 
plotted as described above. However, if marker concen-
trations plateau, as is also illustrated in Figure 42.3 (at 
about day 130) this is cause for concern, suggesting either 
that the chemotherapy used is failing to penetrate the tar-
get tissue (which may be a large mass) or that the patient 
has developed drug resistance. A change in chemotherapy 
may then be implemented or further surgery undertaken 
if the tumour is considered resectable, as was the case 
for Patient B. Timing of surgery is important, since the 
outcome is likely to be most favourable if surgery is per-
formed when the tumour marker concentration is at its 
nadir (i.e. the lowest concentration that can be achieved 
with chemotherapy).
It is estimated that with an hCG concentration of only 
1 U/L, up to 100 000 tumour cells may persist. Chemotherapy 
should therefore be continued for some time after AFP and 
hCG both become undetectable, so that as many tumour 
cells as possible are eradicated. In some patients, results may 
be difficult to interpret, since chemotherapy may damage 
the liver (e.g. causing increased serum AFP concentrations 
in patients with purely hCG-producing tumours). This is 
particularly relevant in children.
The availability of serum tumour markers for the ma-
jority of NSGCT patients has facilitated clinical trials 
designed to minimize treatment toxicity for patients with 
good prognosis disease. By considering the rate of change 
of tumour marker concentrations it is possible to identify 
subtle differences in the effects of treatment within days, 
much more rapidly than the weeks it may take for signifi-
cant radiological changes to become apparent.
Long-term surveillance
Tumour markers should be measured regularly following 
treatment, according to defined clinical protocols. Time 
intervals will depend on prognostic category and treat-
ment. As is clear from Figure 42.2, any analytically sig-
nificant increases in tumour markers should be reported 
immediately to the relevant clinical team.
Seminoma patients at low risk of recurrence who have 
remained well for five years can be discharged from fol-
low-up, as can those with NSGCT who have remained 
well for ten years. Separate monitoring of cardiovascular 
risk in these patients may, however, be desirable as there is 
increasing evidence of an excess of cardiovascular events 
following chemotherapy with platinum-based drugs.
Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia
Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN) form a group 
of several diseases associated with pregnancy, usually in-
volving abnormal growth of cells within the uterus. Rare 
and once fatal, these now highly curable tumours de-
velop in the trophoblast cells that surround the embryo 
immediately after conception. Gestational trophoblastic 
neoplasia may develop after a molar pregnancy, a non-
molar pregnancy or a live birth and should be considered 
in any woman developing acute respiratory or neuro-
logical symptoms or persistent abnormal vaginal bleed-
ing after any pregnancy. In the UK, the Royal College 
of Obstetrics and Gynaecology has developed guidelines 
for management of GTN (available at: www.rcog.org.uk).
FIGURE 42.3  ■  Serum α-fetoprotein (AFP) concentrations in a pa­
tient with metastatic teratoma that was initially unresponsive 
to surgery.
	
42  Tumour markers	
835
Since measurement of hCG and related molecules is 
fundamental to the successful management of these dis-
eases, it is useful briefly to review their characteristics.
Hydatidiform moles
The most common type of GTN is hydatidiform mole 
(also termed molar ‘pregnancy’, although a normal baby 
cannot be produced), which is not cancerous. The moles 
are villi that have become swollen with fluid and then grow 
in clusters resembling bunches of grapes. Hydatidiform 
moles may develop when a sperm fertilizes an ‘empty’ egg 
containing no nucleus or DNA (‘complete’ mole) or when 
two sperm fertilize a normal egg (‘partial’ mole). There is 
no fetal tissue present in complete moles, as all the genetic 
material comes from the father’s sperm. Relatively few pa-
tients with partial moles need further treatment after ini-
tial surgery and these moles rarely become malignant. Up 
to 20% of patients with complete moles will need further 
surgery or chemotherapy; a small percentage develop into 
choriocarcinoma, a malignant form of GTN.
Invasive moles
Invasive moles develop in about 20% of women who have 
had a complete mole removed by curettage of the lining of 
the uterus. Invasive moles penetrate the muscular wall of 
the uterus (the myometrium) sometimes leading to heavy 
bleeding. In about 15% of patients, the tumour metasta-
sizes to other sites, most frequently the lungs. The risk of 
developing invasive mole is increased if more than four 
months elapse between cessation of periods and treat-
ment, if the uterus has become very large, if the woman is 
over 39 years old or if she has had a previous GTN.
Choriocarcinoma
Choriocarcinoma is a malignant form of GTN that most 
often develops from a complete hydatidiform mole but 
can occur after normal pregnancy or after early fetal loss 
in pregnancy. Choriocarcinomas are more likely to me-
tastasize to distant organs than invasive moles, but treat-
ment with chemotherapy is highly effective.
Placental site trophoblastic tumours
These are rare forms of GTN that develop where the pla-
centa remains attached to the uterus, often after a normal 
pregnancy or abortion. They do not usually metastasize 
but are not sensitive to chemotherapy and must be com-
pletely removed surgically.
Screening
All patients in the UK who have had a previous molar 
pregnancy are automatically registered with the National 
Hydatidiform Mole Registry. Screening for choriocarci-
noma using hCG in this highly selected group of women 
provides the single best example of a successful screen-
ing programme using a tumour marker, since ~8% of 
these women will develop the disease (i.e. the prevalence 
in the population studied is high) and early detection 
and treatment improves outcome. The logistics are also 
convenient as hCG, which has approximately 99% sen-
sitivity and specificity for choriocarcinoma, can be mea-
sured reliably in urine specimens that are sent by post by 
the patient to laboratories in specialist referral centres, 
thereby facilitating early detection of disease and prompt 
treatment. These laboratories use broad-spectrum hCG 
methods that are designed to detect hCG and its major 
isoforms.
Diagnosis
Increasing use of ultrasound in early pregnancy has prob-
ably led to earlier diagnosis of molar pregnancy, but mea-
surements of hCG may also contribute as concentrations 
may be higher than in normal pregnancy.
Prognosis
Prognosis is assessed according to the International 
Federation of Gynaecology and Oncology staging for 
GTN, the hCG concentration prior to treatment being 
one of a number of factors scored. Low risk patients re-
ceive different treatment from those classified as high risk.
Monitoring
Women with persistent GTN are treated with appro-
priate chemotherapy at specialist centres. About 15% of 
patients with complete moles require chemotherapy and 
0.5% after partial moles. Treatment is continued until the 
hCG concentration has returned to normal and then for 
a further six weeks. Women should be advised not to at-
tempt to conceive until the hCG concentration has been 
normal for six months. After any further pregnancy, hCG 
should again be measured to exclude disease recurrence.
Hepatocellular carcinoma  
(primary liver cancer)
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is rare in the developed 
world but is common in China, South-east Asia and sub-
Saharan Africa, and is the fifth most common cause of 
cancer death worldwide. In most parts of Africa and Asia, 
infection with hepatitis B virus is a major causative fac-
tor, as is ingestion of the fungal toxin, aflatoxin B1, from 
contaminated food. The higher incidence observed in 
Europe during the last decade probably reflects the in-
creased frequency of hepatitis C infection and alcoholic 
liver cirrhosis, both of which are strongly associated with 
development of HCC.
Although many potential tissue and serum tumour 
markers are increased in HCC, AFP is at present the most 
clinically useful. Normally produced during gestation by 
the fetal liver and yolk sac, AFP is increased in the ma-
ternal circulation during pregnancy and is also markedly 
elevated in newborns, with concentrations declining over 
the first year of life. An oncofetal antigen, AFP appears in-
appropriately in adults with malignancy, most frequently 
in hepatocellular carcinoma and germ cell cancers, and 
also in some benign conditions, particularly those associ-
ated with liver damage and/or regeneration. Circulating 
836	
Clinical biochemistry
AFP concentrations range from within the reference in-
terval to as high as 8.3 × 10
6 kU/L (10 × 10
6 μg/L), but in 
the UK, up to 50% of patients with HCC may have nor-
mal concentrations of AFP.
Screening of high-risk groups
Screening by six-monthly measurement of serum AFP 
together with abdominal ultrasound, is now recom-
mended for early detection of HCC in high-risk popu-
lations. There is increasing evidence that such screening 
(when compared with no surveillance) detects HCC of 
smaller size and enables a greater proportion of patients 
to be cured, thereby leading to improved long-term sur-
vival and cost-savings. In the UK, it is suggested that 
such screening be restricted to patients with liver cir-
rhosis secondary to hepatitis B or C or genetic haemo-
chromatosis, and to men with primary biliary cirrhosis 
(PBC) and alcoholic cirrhosis (if abstinent). (Available 
data suggest that women with PBC or alcoholic cirrho-
sis have a lower risk of developing HCC.) Validation 
of optimal follow-up protocols, when AFP is raised or 
when suspicious nodules are detected, is now in prog-
ress. Sequential measurement of serum AFP provides 
useful information and is undergoing validation for rou-
tine clinical practice. An elevated AFP concentration 
detected by a single measurement may be transient (e.g. 
arising from an inflammatory flare of underlying viral 
hepatitis). Elevated but stable concentrations decrease 
the likelihood that HCC is the causative agent, while a 
steadily rising AFP concentration should always be rig-
orously investigated.
Diagnosis
Plasma concentrations of AFP up to 1245 kU/L 
(1500 μg/L) may occasionally be associated with benign 
conditions, with 20–40% of adult patients with hepati-
tis or liver cirrhosis having AFP >8.3 kU/L (10 μg/L). An 
AFP result within the reference interval does not exclude 
a diagnosis of HCC. Rapid increases (a doubling time of 
<5 days) are suggestive of acute liver damage rather than 
malignancy. As with screening, a steady rise in AFP is sug-
gestive of HCC, while stable or decreasing results make 
HCC less likely. Histopathology of appropriate biopsy 
material is essential for definitive diagnosis of HCC since 
AFP may be raised in malignancies other than HCC, in-
cluding germ cell tumours and stomach, biliary tract and 
pancreatic cancers.
Prognosis
Large multivariate analyses confirm that raised AFP 
concentrations predict poor prognosis when compared 
with AFP-negative patients, some studies indicating that 
patients with larger tumours tend to have higher AFP 
concentrations. Together with tumour size and extent, 
AFP appears to be an independent predictor of survival, 
patients with serum AFP >8300 kU/L (10 000 μg/L) do-
ing less well than those with AFP <166 kU/L (200 μg/L). 
α-Fetoprotein doubling time may also be an important 
prognostic factor.
Monitoring
Following complete surgical removal of HCC, AFP 
concentrations typically decrease with a half-life of 
3.5–4 days, incomplete resection being associated with a 
longer half-life and poorer outcome. α-Fetoprotein con-
centrations that fail to return to normal suggest incom-
plete resection or severe liver damage.
Serum AFP measurements can also be used to moni-
tor HCC patients following treatment with chemother-
apy or radiotherapy. Decreases in tumour markers may 
in some cases reflect tumour regression more accurately 
than CT scans, since interpretation of the latter may be 
complicated by residual fibrosis and other factors. It is 
important to note that recurrence is possible even when 
AFP is stable or within reference limits, presumably from 
micrometastases too small to produce measurable AFP 
concentrations in serum, and that recurrent tumour may 
not secrete AFP even if the original tumour did so.
Lung cancer
Lung cancer is the cancer with both the highest incidence 
and the highest number of deaths in the world. There are 
two major histological types: non-small cell lung cancer 
(NSCLC) and small cell lung cancer (SCLC). Non-small 
cell lung cancer, which accounts for 75–85% of lung can-
cers, consists of several subtypes, predominantly squamous 
cell carcinoma, adenocarcinoma and large cell carcinoma. 
Surgery is the only curative treatment for NSCLC. Small 
cell lung cancer accounts for 15–25% of lung cancers, of-
ten has neuroendocrine elements and is primarily treated 
with chemotherapy and/or radiotherapy. Small cell lung 
cancer is an aggressive tumour characterized by a short 
doubling time and early development of metastatic dis-
ease. Many lung cancers are mixed tumours containing 
both small cell and non-small cell components.
A large number of tumour markers have been tested 
in lung cancer, different markers being required to iden-
tify the response to treatment of the different cell types 
present. Some of the more promising markers and their 
associated cell types are listed in Table 42.7.
TABLE 42.7  Tumour markers of potential utility 
in different types of lung cancer
Tumour marker
Type of 
cancer
Cell type
Cyfra 21-1
NSCLC
Squamous cell
Carcinoembryonic 
antigen (CEA)
NSCLC
Adenocarcinoma
Large cell
Squamous cell 
carcinoma antigen 
(SCC)
NSCLC
Squamous cell
Neuron specific 
enolase (NSE)
SCLC
Small cell 
(neuroendocrine)
Progastrin releasing 
peptide (ProGRP)
SCLC
Small cell 
(neuroendocrine)
NSCLC, non-small cell lung cancer; SCLC, small cell lung cancer.
	
42  Tumour markers	
837
Screening
No markers are suitable, either singly or in combination, 
for screening either in the general population or in spe-
cific high-risk groups, such as smokers.
Differential diagnosis
The pattern of elevated serum concentrations of CEA, 
Cyfra 21-1, NSE, SCC and ProGRP may suggest which 
histological subtype of lung cancer is present but further 
work is required before measurement of tumour mark-
ers in this situation becomes standard practice. Where 
inoperable lung cancer is suspected but no histology 
is available, raised serum NSE and especially ProGRP 
concentrations are highly suggestive of small cell lung 
cancer, while raised serum SCC concentration is sugges-
tive of squamous cell cancer.
Prognosis
Studies have suggested that Cyfra 21-1, CEA, NSE and 
LDH (lactate dehydrogenase) may all provide prognostic 
information in NSCLC, whereas only NSE and LDH act 
as prognostic indicators in SCLC.
Monitoring
Although tumour markers can be used in individual lung 
cancer patients to monitor their response to therapy (us-
ing NSE and/or ProGRP for SCLC, and CEA and/or 
Cyfra 21-1 for NSCLC), in view of the limited range of 
treatment options currently available, this is controver-
sial. However, serial determinations of the appropriate 
marker following surgery may help to assess the com-
pleteness of tumour removal and provide early indication 
of recurrence.
In patients receiving systemic treatment, measure-
ments of tumour markers may assist in assessing re-
sponse to therapy and to document progressive disease, 
although reliable criteria for ‘biochemical progression’ 
have yet to be developed. There is currently no evidence 
that monitoring with tumour markers improves patient 
outcome.
Epidermal growth factor receptor and K-RAS  
mutation analysis
A number of expert panels recommend determin-
ing EGFR mutation status in patients with advanced 
NSCLC prior to administration of the tyrosine kinase 
inhibitors (TKI) gefitinib or erlotinib. Patients lacking 
the mutation are unlikely to benefit, while 65–70% of 
those with specific activating mutations in the EGFR 
gene respond to these therapies. Similarly, there is a 
significant correlation between the presence of K-RAS 
mutations and an absence of response to the TKIs. 
Combining the tumour mutation status of K-RAS with 
that of EGFR can therefore be helpful both in identify-
ing patients with advanced NSCLC who are likely to 
respond to treatment with TKIs and the likelihood of 
resistance to specific TKIs.
Melanoma
Melanoma is a malignant tumour of melanocytes (cells 
that are derived from the neural crest), with a rising inci-
dence worldwide. Most melanomas occur in the skin, but 
they may also develop at mucosal surfaces or other sites 
to which neural crest cells migrate. Early stage disease 
can be cured by surgery but the prognosis associated with 
metastasis to distant sites is poor.
Immunohistochemical staining with antibodies to 
S100 is the method of choice for diagnosing malignant 
melanoma in pathological specimens, but further studies 
are required to define the role of S100 measurement in 
serum. Measurement of S100B lacks sensitivity in early 
disease. Rising concentrations of S100B are specific and 
sensitive for tumour progression in patients with ad-
vanced disease, but measurement is only appropriate if 
further treatment options are available. Measurement 
of a tumour-associated glycoprotein antigen (TA90-IC) 
shows promise as a prognostic indicator and for monitor-
ing patients but requires further evaluation. Lactate de-
hydrogenase, although a very non-specific marker, can be 
useful for monitoring patients with melanoma and may 
have prognostic value in patients with advanced disease.
BRAF mutation analysis
About 40–50% of patients with disseminated disease, but 
without brain metastases, may respond to treatment with 
the BRAF gene inhibitor vemurafenib, provided they have 
a V600 mutated BRAF gene. BRAF gene status therefore 
needs to be confirmed prior to treatment.
Neonatal and paediatric tumours
Cancer is the second leading cause of death in children 
<15  years old, but major advances in treatment mean 
that >70% of children diagnosed with cancer are now 
cured. Most childhood solid tumours are of ­mesenchymal 
or embryonal origin. Tumour markers can contribute 
­significantly to the management of childhood neuro-
blastomas, malignant hepatic tumours and germ cell 
tumours. While the general principles of marker use 
in these cancers are the same as for adult malignancies, 
some ­additional points should be noted.
When interpreting AFP, it is important to remember 
that plasma AFP is markedly raised at birth and then de-
clines steadily to adult concentrations by 6–12 months. 
α-Fetoprotein is higher in children born prematurely and 
may remain elevated for longer in children with delayed 
development. Appropriate gestational and age-related 
reference intervals therefore need to be used for infants. 
Serial concentrations are often more useful than iso-
lated results. This is particularly relevant in neonates, in 
whom acute hepatocellular damage may result in marked 
increases in AFP concentrations. As with adults, other 
possible causes of raised AFP need to be considered, in-
cluding hereditary tyrosinaemia and ataxia telangiectasia. 
The very high concentrations of tumour markers that 
may be seen in some childhood cancers mean that partic-
ular care must be taken to minimize the risk of the high-
dose hook effect (Box 42.1). Since AFP and hCG requests 
838	
Clinical biochemistry
for young children are relatively infrequent, it would be 
eminently feasible, and highly desirable, to assay all such 
samples at more than one dilution.
Germ cell tumours in childhood
As in adults, AFP and hCG are often elevated at the time 
of diagnosis and their measurement is mandatory. Yolk 
sac tumours are the most common pure malignant germ 
cell tumours in children. Seminomas rarely occur in in-
fants or young boys, but dysgerminomas are the most 
common pure malignant germ cell tumour occurring in 
the ovary and central nervous system in girls, who may 
present with precocious puberty.
Hepatoblastoma
Hepatoblastoma and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 
are the most frequent malignant hepatic tumours of 
childhood. More than 80% of hepatoblastomas, which 
are embryonal tumours, are diagnosed in children aged 
<3  years, with 45% of patients diagnosed during the 
first year of life. Most patients (98%) have a raised AFP 
at presentation, often to extremely high concentrations 
(e.g. 10
6 kU/L or 1.21 × 10
6 μg/L), which can assist in di-
agnosis. Thereafter, serum AFP can be used to monitor 
therapy and follow-up. Children with hepatoblastomas 
that secrete hCG may develop isosexual precocious pu-
berty. Complete surgical resection is the treatment of 
choice, with chemotherapy also playing an important 
role. Overall survival rates are >60%, or >80% if com-
plete resection is achieved.
Hepatoblastomas must be differentiated from HCCs, 
50% of which also produce AFP. Positive hepatitis B se-
rology is present in some children with HCC, with other 
laboratory abnormalities including anaemia and hyper-
bilirubinaemia. Complete surgical resection is the treat-
ment of choice for HCC. Aggressive chemotherapy has 
not significantly improved outcome and most children 
with HCC die within 12 months of diagnosis.
Neuroblastoma
Neuroblastoma is a malignant embryonal tumour that ac-
counts for 8–10% of all childhood cancers, with 80% of 
cases occurring before the age of four years. The clinical 
behaviour is varied, some tumours undergoing spontane-
ous regression and others exhibiting extremely malignant 
behaviour. Treatment includes surgery, chemotherapy 
and radiotherapy. Urinary catecholamine metabolites are 
increased in >90% of patients and are helpful to confirm 
the diagnosis and monitor progress (see Chapter  38). 
Significant elevations of serum NSE, LDH and/or fer-
ritin tend to be associated with a poorer outcome.
Ovarian cancer
Ovarian cancer is the fourth most common cause of death 
from cancer in women in the UK. Early diagnosis is key to 
successful treatment, but the absence of symptoms in early 
stage disease means that many ovarian cancers present late. 
Standard treatment for ovarian cancer is surgical, involving 
bilateral oophorectomy and pelvic clearance, usually fol-
lowed by chemotherapy. New chemotherapeutic agents 
have significantly improved the five-year survival rate.
About 15% of malignant ovarian tumours are germ cell 
tumours, for which AFP, hCG and LDH are the markers 
of choice as previously described, or sex cord stromal tu-
mours, two-thirds of which are granulosa cell tumours. 
Inhibin is the marker of choice for granulosa cell tumours 
of the ovary. An inhibin method, which detects all forms 
of inhibin, including A, B and pro-αC, is required.
However, most malignant ovarian tumours (80–85%) 
are surface epithelial carcinomas. These occur in five 
histologically distinct subtypes: serous, mucinous, en-
dometrioid, clear cell and transitional. They exhibit 
different clinical behaviours, tumorigenesis and pattern 
of gene expression, which should be taken into account 
when evaluating the clinical utility of tumour markers 
in ovarian cancer. The most widely used tumour marker 
for epithelial ovarian cancer is CA125. Most sensitive 
in serous adenocarcinomas, it is also used in other his-
tological types of epithelial cancer despite its poorer 
sensitivity.
Interpretation of CA125 results is particularly chal-
lenging, and it is essential to be aware of the many be-
nign conditions in which the marker can be significantly 
elevated, sometimes transiently (Table 42.1). These con-
ditions include during menstruation and the first two 
trimesters of pregnancy. Serum CA125 may be raised in 
any patient with ascites (occasionally to >5000 kU/L) or 
pleural effusion (usually 200–300 kU/L) and is also raised 
in patients with a wide variety of tumours, especially ad-
enocarcinomas. Method-related differences in results can 
also be problematic and some methods are more vulner-
able to interference, such as from heterophilic antibodies, 
as illustrated in Table 42.8.
Screening
In view of the absence of early symptoms, a reliable 
screening test for ovarian carcinoma would be highly 
desirable. Variations in results in premenopausal women 
(including increases during menstruation) mean that 
TABLE 42.8  Misleading results for CA125 owing 
to presumed antibody interference in an  
automated immunoassay method
CA125 (kU/L)
Day
Method 1
Method 2
Treatment
Undiluted 
specimen
Diluted 
specimen
0
–
–
–
Laparotomy
20
130
346
578
41
39
420
566
Carboplatin
49
–
–
–
 
76
22
>500
708
Carboplatin
104
19
>500
1040
Carboplatin
132
21
302
417
Carboplatin
160
16
166
267
Carboplatin
202
16
274
336
Carboplatin
278
16
35
47
Follow-up
	
42  Tumour markers	
839
single CA125 measurements lack the sensitivity and 
specificity essential in a screening setting. However, use 
of CA125 for screening in postmenopausal women is the 
subject of several trials. In a large controlled trial (the 
UK Collaborative Trial of Ovarian Cancer Screening), 
patients have been randomized into three groups: an 
unscreened control arm; a group screened annually with 
CA125, with repeat CA125 and ultrasound follow-up if 
positive, and a group screened annually with ultrasound, 
with repeat ultrasound in 6–8 weeks if positive. Until this 
trial has reported in 2015, screening of the general popu-
lation cannot be recommended.
There is, as yet, no evidence that using CA125 to 
screen women at high risk of ovarian cancer (e.g. those 
with a strong family history) is effective. However, a US 
National Cancer Institute Panel has recommended an-
nual CA125 determinations, in addition to pelvic and 
ultrasound examinations, in women with a history of he-
reditary ovarian cancer, who have an estimated lifetime 
risk of 40%. Such investigations should always be carried 
out in specialist units.
Diagnosis
Ultrasound assessment is essential in women with sus-
pected ovarian cancer. This is likely to identify a pelvic 
mass and may suggest the presence of metastatic disease. 
If no obvious source is identified, determining whether 
the pelvic mass is likely to be malignant can be problem-
atical but is important, as it will influence plans for sur-
gery. Prognosis in ovarian cancer correlates strongly with 
the extent of surgical clearance of malignant tissue.
Cut-off concentrations (e.g. CA125 >95 or >65 kU/L) 
have been used with some success in postmenopausal 
women to distinguish between malignant and benign 
pelvic masses. However, a risk of malignancy index 
(RMI) scoring system, incorporating CA125, ultra-
sound findings and menopausal status, is more widely 
used (Table 42.9). The two scoring systems (RMI 1 and 
RMI 2) are similar but RMI 2 gives greater weight to 
­ultrasound findings and menopausal status than does 
RMI 1. A positive predictive value for malignancy of 
about 80% is obtained using the RMI 2 scoring system 
and a cut-off value of 200.
It is clear from Table 42.9 that whichever score is used, 
the result depends critically on the numerical CA125 
value and therefore also on the reliability of the assay, 
particularly in the range of 10–25 kU/L. If there is a 
change in method the cut-off value used may need to be 
reviewed.
In the UK, NICE has published clinical guidelines on 
the recognition and initial management of ovarian cancer 
with the aim of increasing awareness of the disease among 
general practitioners and decreasing the frequency of late 
diagnosis, which is thought to account for the lower sur-
vival rates observed in the UK and Ireland compared with 
other European countries. The NICE guidelines state 
that general practitioners should measure serum CA125 
concentrations in women presenting with persistent and 
continuous symptoms (>12 times a month) suggestive 
of ovarian cancer (e.g. abdominal pain, early satiety and 
loss of appetite or pelvic pain). If CA125 concentration is 
≥35 kU/L, an ultrasound scan of the abdomen and pel-
vis should be arranged to enable calculation of the RMI. 
Women with an RMI score ≥250 should be referred to 
a specialist multidisciplinary team. Women with CA125 
<35 kU/L should be reviewed at six weeks if symptoms 
persist.
Prognosis
During primary treatment, CA125 concentrations both 
before and after surgery may be of prognostic signifi-
cance. Patients with a preoperative CA125 concentration 
>65 kU/L have a poorer five-year survival than patients 
with lower CA125 concentrations. A concentration of 
<250 kU/L before chemotherapy, a fall of CA125 of 
greater than seven-fold during the first month of chemo-
therapy, an apparent CA125 half-life of <20 days during 
chemotherapy and a CA125 concentration of <35 kU/L 
before the third course of chemotherapy are all thought 
to indicate a good prognosis.
Detection of residual disease
Measurement of serum CA125 following surgery is only 
relevant in the small number of patients with disease 
limited to the ovary (Stage I) who would not automati-
cally receive further treatment. It is essential that these 
patients have CA125 measurements at least once a week 
initially so that the rate of fall can be checked. The appar-
ent half-life of CA125 in patients with no residual disease 
is five days.
Monitoring
Serum CA125 concentrations correlate well with the re-
sponse to treatment in ~90% of patients. A rising or sta-
ble CA125 at the beginning of the second or third course 
of chemotherapy, together with an apparently poor 
clinical response, may be used as an indication either 
to change the treatment or to institute appropriate pal-
liative therapy. While an increased CA125 concentration 
(>35 kU/L) at the end of treatment is always associated 
TABLE 42.9  The risk of malignancy index (RMI) 
scoring system for ovarian cancer
Feature
RMI 1 score
RMI 2 score
Ultrasound features:
 
 
  multilocular cyst
  solid areas
  bilateral lesions
  ascites
  intra-abdominal 
metastases
0 = no 
abnormalities
1 = one 
abnormality
3 = two or more 
abnormalities
0 = no 
abnormalities
1 = one 
abnormality
4 = two or more 
abnormalities
Premenopausal 
status
1
1
Postmenopausal 
status
3
4
Plasma CA125 (kU/L) 
concentration
Pre-treatment 
value
Pre-treatment 
value
RMI score = (ultrasound score) × (menopausal score) × (CA125 
concentration in kU/L).
840	
Clinical biochemistry
with disease, the reverse is not true, as a low CA125 con-
centration does not exclude active disease.
Long-term surveillance
A confirmed rise in CA125 to more than twice the up-
per reference limit accurately predicts relapse with a sen-
sitivity of 86% and a positive predictive value of 95%. 
Whether early treatment for relapse in patients who 
are asymptomatic improves outcome, is still unclear. 
Results of a Medical Research Council and European 
Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer ran-
domized control trial (MRC OV05 and EORTC 55955) 
addressing this question suggests that instituting early 
chemotherapy based on a rising CA125 does not improve 
either survival or quality of life, and that it is appropri-
ate to delay treatment until signs and symptoms of re-
currence develop. Whether this would also be the case 
with the improved treatment regimens now available is 
not clear. However, the recommendation from the trial 
investigators is that it is appropriate to offer women with 
ovarian cancer two informed choices for follow-up, i.e. 
no routine CA125 measurements but rapid access to 
CA125 testing if there are symptoms or signs of relapse, 
or, alternatively, regular CA125 measurements.
Pancreatic cancer
In pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas (i.e. non-endocrine 
tumours of pancreas), CA19-9 is the only tumour marker 
for which there is sufficient evidence to support its clini-
cal use. It can be used as an adjunct to diagnosis in asso-
ciation with appropriate imaging but it is not suitable for 
screening even in high-risk populations. Measurements 
can provide independent prognostic information with 
regard to resectability and survival but should only be 
used in conjunction with other clinical information. The 
American Society of Clinical Oncology recommends 
­serial measurements of CA19-9 every 1–3  months for 
pancreatic cancer patients with locally advanced or meta-
static disease who are receiving active therapy. Increases 
in ­serial CA19-9 measurements suggest progressive dis-
ease, but confirmation by other means should be sought. 
It is important to note that there are significant method-
related differences in CA19-9 results and particular 
care should be taken if changing methods. Many non-­
malignant conditions, including any that cause cholesta-
sis, can cause elevated plasma concentrations of CA19-9 
(see Table 42.2).
Prostate cancer
Prostate cancer is one of the most common malignancies 
in men, autopsy data indicating the presence of histologi-
cally apparent cancer in the prostates of ~42% of men 
aged >50 years who have died from other causes. Recent 
increases in the apparent incidence of prostate cancer al-
most certainly reflect widespread measurement of serum 
PSA, elevations of which can identify disease long before 
it is symptomatic. Since many men have indolent prostatic 
cancers that pose little threat to their life or health, there 
is increasing concern that the use of PSA measurements, 
which cannot differentiate slow-growing cancers from 
aggressive cancers that require treatment, is causing over-
diagnosis and over-treatment of some men. A further dif-
ficulty is that, while PSA is essentially organ-specific, it 
is not cancer-specific, and men with non-malignant con-
ditions, such as benign prostatic hypertrophy, may also 
have raised PSA concentrations. This lack of specificity 
complicates the interpretation of results, as well as hav-
ing major implications for use of PSA in screening. Many 
uncertainties also remain concerning optimal treatment 
of early stage disease, even when clinically localized to 
the prostate.
Screening and diagnosis
Screening men for prostate cancer using PSA is contro-
versial, as is evident from the disparate recommendations, 
both for and against screening, that have been made by 
different professional organizations. Consensus is unlikely 
to be achieved until publication of the final conclusions of 
a number of major national and international prospective 
screening trials using PSA (with or without digital rectal 
examination). Results from the European Randomized 
Study of Screening for Prostate Cancer, which involved 
182 160 men age 50–74  years at entry, showed that, at 
11 years of follow-up, PSA-based screening significantly 
reduced mortality from prostate cancer but did not affect 
all-cause mortality. To prevent one death from prostate 
cancer at 11 years of follow-up, 1055 men would need 
to be invited for screening and 37 cancers would need to 
be detected. In contrast, after 13 years of follow-up, re-
sults from the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal and Ovarian 
Cancer Screening Trial in the USA showed no evidence 
of a mortality benefit for organized annual screening as 
compared with opportunistic screening. Various explana-
tions for these apparently contradictory results have been 
put forward.
However, whatever the final outcome of the ongoing 
trials, men will continue to request ad hoc screening for 
prostate cancer, whether or not an official programme is 
established. There is therefore general agreement that 
men should be informed of the benefits and limitations of 
PSA measurement before deciding whether to have the 
test performed, particularly if asymptomatic. In the UK, 
the NHS Cancer Screening Committee’s Prostate Cancer 
Risk Management Programme provides helpful informa-
tion about the test (Informed Choice Programme, see 
Further reading).
Early detection is likely to be most effective in younger 
men (in their 50s and 60s) who are at high risk of devel-
oping prostate cancer, African American men and men 
with a family history of prostate cancer. It is unlikely to 
benefit men with a life expectancy of less than ten years. 
Men with a strong family history (e.g. a first-degree rela-
tive diagnosed before the age of 60) may have a 3–4-fold 
higher than average risk of developing prostate cancer 
and should be carefully investigated.
Considerable effort has been made to improve the 
specificity of PSA assays, for example by considering the 
ratio of free to total PSA (the proportion of circulating 
free PSA is higher in benign disease), by assessing the 
rate of doubling of PSA (doubling time is more rapid in 
	
42  Tumour markers	
841
malignant than benign disease) or by implementing age-
related reference intervals (PSA may increase with age as 
the size of the prostate gland increases). Promising data 
are also emerging regarding proPSA, a proenzyme mo-
lecular form of free PSA, and a few truncated proPSA 
isoforms, but these tests are still under evaluation and are 
not widely used.
While each of these measures improves the differenti-
ation of benign and malignant prostatic disease, whatever 
PSA decision limit is selected and however the marker is 
used, a significant number of men with benign prostatic 
disease will still be recommended for biopsy on the basis 
of a high PSA result. Conversely, a significant number of 
men with malignancy but with PSA below the decision 
point will be missed. It is estimated that up to 20% of 
men with a clinically significant prostate cancer will have 
a normal serum PSA concentration, and as many as two in 
every three men with an elevated PSA do not have pros-
tate cancer detectable at biopsy. Nevertheless, PSA is cur-
rently the best routinely available serum tumour marker 
for screening or diagnosis of prostate cancer. It has been 
suggested that screening might be made more effective 
by starting screening earlier and referring patients with 
screen-detected cancers for treatment at specialist cen-
tres, and be made less harmful by avoiding screening in 
older men and promoting active surveillance with well-
organized follow-up programmes for those with disease 
that is of low risk of progression.
Management
Once a diagnosis of prostatic cancer has been confirmed 
by finding malignant cells in a biopsy specimen, the treat-
ment selected depends on whether disease is confined to 
the prostate gland or has spread to other organs. Using 
predictive tables combining the pre-treatment PSA con-
centration with information on clinical stage and the 
immunohistochemical Gleason score (which provides a 
measure of the degree of differentiation in biopsy tissue 
and ranges from 2 in well-differentiated tumours to 10 in 
completely anaplastic cancers), a reasonable prediction of 
the stage of localized prostate cancer can be made. For 
example, patients with a Gleason score of ≤6 and a PSA 
of <10 μg/L are unlikely to have bone metastases.
Such information can then be used to select the most 
appropriate treatment option. If the disease has not 
spread beyond the prostatic capsule, possibilities include 
radical prostatectomy (complete removal of the prostate), 
brachytherapy (insertion of radioactive needles to ablate 
the prostate) and external beam irradiation. Active moni-
toring, i.e. regular clinical assessment together with mea-
surement of PSA, is as appropriate as active intervention 
in some patients with localized tumours. The benefit of 
treatment is not yet proven, except in men with local-
ized disease who are candidates for radical prostatectomy. 
In these men, the absolute reduction in the risk of death 
after ten years is small, but the reduction in the risks of 
metastasis and local tumour progression is substantial.
Following radical treatment, PSA should decrease to 
undetectable concentrations, with measurable concentra-
tions providing evidence of residual disease. However, 
undetectable PSA concentrations do not necessarily 
indicate cure. Similarly, while rising PSA concentrations 
following radical treatment provide biochemical indica-
tion of recurrent disease, clinical symptoms may never 
occur or may appear many years later. The use of ultra-
sensitive PSA methods with low detection limits (usually 
<0.005 μg/L), which permit very early identification of 
rising PSA concentrations, therefore remains controver-
sial and is probably most appropriate within the context 
of clinical trials.
Treatment options for patients with prostatic cancer 
that has spread beyond the prostate (most frequently to 
local lymph nodes and bone) include endocrine ­therapy 
(usually by androgen blockade as prostate cancer is 
­hormone-sensitive), radiotherapy and chemotherapy. 
Men with serum PSA >100 μg/L and clinical, biochemi-
cal or radiological evidence of metastatic disease may, in 
some cases, be treated without histopathological confir-
mation of the diagnosis, while in other patients, active 
monitoring may be appropriate.
A major clinical application of PSA is in evaluating 
the efficacy of therapy, sustained increases providing evi-
dence of disease progression, usually earlier than other 
diagnostic procedures. An increase in PSA should al-
ways be confirmed, and intraindividual variation in PSA 
of up to 20–30% taken into account before any increase 
is considered to be clinically significant. The doubling 
time of PSA can give some indication of the likely time 
to clinical progression. A stable PSA concentration does 
not necessarily exclude progression if clinically suspected. 
In patients with advanced, androgen-independent pros-
tate cancer, measurement of alkaline phosphatase may 
be helpful to detect bone involvement. As knowledge of 
increasing PSA concentrations may have adverse psy-
chological consequences, it may be desirable to stop 
measuring PSA in some patients, particularly if effective 
alternative therapy is not available.
Analytical and reporting requirements
Rigorous adherence to the quality control measures de-
scribed at the beginning of this chapter is essential. The 
NHS Prostate Risk Management Programme formally 
requires that PSA assays used in the Informed Choice 
programme be accurately calibrated in terms of the 
International Standard for PSA (Table  42.4) and that 
they recognize free and complexed PSA equivalently (i.e. 
are equimolar). Screening programmes place particularly 
high demands on analytical performance, since relatively 
minor differences in performance have a major influence 
on outcome, i.e. whether or not a prostatic biopsy is ad-
vised. Even when PSA assays are accurately calibrated 
and equimolar, results for individual patients obtained 
using different methods are not necessarily interchange-
able. It is therefore strongly recommended that labora-
tory reports for PSA state both the name of the assay used 
and the appropriate clinical decision limits.
Testicular cancer
More than 90% of testicular tumours in adults are germ cell 
tumours: these are discussed above. Leydig and Sertoli 
cell tumours, which are rare, develop in the supportive 
842	
Clinical biochemistry
hormone-producing tissue of the testicles (the stroma). 
These tumours represent 4% of adult testicular tumours 
and 20% of childhood tumours. Tumours of the Leydig 
cells (which normally produce androgens) do not usually 
spread beyond the testicle and can be cured by surgical 
removal. Those that do spread are resistant to chemo-
therapy or radiation. Tumours of the Sertoli cells (which 
normally support sperm-producing cells) are similar to 
Leydig cell tumours and are also difficult to treat if they 
spread beyond the testes. Inhibin is the marker of choice 
for Sertoli and Leydig cell tumours and the same analyti-
cal issues apply as for granulosa cell tumours of the ovary.
Thyroid cancer
Thyroid cancer is a relatively rare tumour, accounting 
for approximately 2% of cancers in all age groups and 
4% of cancers in those <20  years old. There are four 
major types: papillary, follicular and anaplastic thyroid 
cancer and medullary carcinoma of the thyroid (MCT). 
Calcitonin is an excellent marker for MCT, which can 
be associated with multiple endocrine neoplasia (see 
Chapter 41). Papillary and follicular cancers are differ-
entiated epithelial thyroid cancers and can be monitored 
using thyroglobulin, a large glycoprotein synthesized 
by the follicular cells and stored in the colloid space. 
Thyroglobulin is present in benign and malignant thy-
roid tissue.
Screening, diagnosis and prognosis
Serum thyroglobulin measurement has no role in the 
screening for, or diagnosis of, thyroid cancer and is of 
no value as a prognostic indicator. However, immuno-
histochemical detection of thyroglobulin can be useful in 
identifying the thyroid as the site of primary tumour 
in individuals presenting with metastatic disease from an 
unknown primary.
Monitoring
Thyroglobulin has an important role in monitoring 
­patients with follicular or papillary thyroid carcinoma 
after treatment with surgery and/or radioiodine. Since 
thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) stimulates thyroid 
follicular cells to produce thyroglobulin, serum thyro-
globulin concentrations will be higher in patients with 
a raised TSH if there is remaining thyroid tissue or in 
the presence of recurrent tumour. TSH should therefore 
­always be measured at the same time as thyroglobulin.
Detectable concentrations of thyroglobulin may be 
appropriate in patients treated by surgery alone, provided 
they are stable, but not in patients who have been treated 
with radioiodine to ensure total ablation of any remain-
ing thyroid tissue. In these patients, serum thyroglobu-
lin concentrations should decrease to <2 μg/L following 
ablation. In an individual with suppressed TSH, a rising 
thyroglobulin suggests recurrent tumour.
Historically, the difference in thyroglobulin values on 
and off thyroxine replacement was used to assess the pres-
ence of residual or recurrent tumour. This can now be 
done more effectively by measuring plasma thyroglobulin 
concentration after administering recombinant TSH 
(rhTSH).
Analytical and reporting requirements
It is important to be aware of several potential pitfalls in 
thyroglobulin measurement. As for other tumour mark-
ers, it is highly desirable that specimens for thyroglobulin 
measurement should be taken prior to any invasive pro-
cedure. A common cause of very high serum thyroglobu-
lin results is inappropriate specimen collection following 
fine needle aspiration biopsy of the thyroid.
Analytically, radioimmunoassay (RIA) and immu-
nometric methods for thyroglobulin are particularly 
vulnerable to interference from anti-thyroglobulin auto-
antibodies (TgAb), which may be present in some patient 
sera. Results obtained may be falsely low or falsely high, 
with immunometric methods being particularly prone to 
giving falsely low thyroglobulin results. Thyroglobulin 
antibodies should be measured in the same sample as thy-
roglobulin, using a sensitive immunoassay method. The 
presence of antibodies usually invalidates the thyroglobu-
lin result. Comparison of results with RIA results avail-
able from specialist laboratories is informative. When 
interference is present, RIA results may be more reliable. 
It is important to note that interference may be absent 
even in the presence of antibodies or conversely present 
in their absence. Appropriate cautions should be added to 
patient reports.
Cancers of unknown primary
Cancers of unknown primary origin account for ~3% of 
all new cancer diagnoses and generally have a poor out-
look, with median survival of less than a year. Although 
it is not clear to what extent tumour marker measure-
ments may influence the clinical management of cancers 
of unknown primary, for a few patients the benefit may 
be considerable, enabling identification of appropriate 
treatment. Diagnoses for which this is most likely to 
be the case, together with the tumour marker measure-
ments of relevance, are gestational trophoblastic neo-
plasm (hCG), germ cell tumours of the testis or ovary 
(hCG and AFP) and prostate cancer (PSA). These are 
potentially curable malignancies, which, once diag-
nosed, can rapidly respond to appropriate treatment. 
The NICE guidelines for metastatic malignant disease 
of unknown primary origin recommend measurement 
of serum AFP and hCG (particularly in the presence of 
midline nodal disease), PSA in men, CA125 in women 
with peritoneal malignancy or ascites, and a myeloma 
screen when there are isolated or multiple lytic bone 
lesions.
SUMMARY
Measurements of tumour markers already make an im-
portant contribution to the management of cancer 
patients. Maximizing their clinical usefulness and cost-
effectiveness provides an excellent opportunity for close 
liaison between laboratory and clinical staff. Tumour 
	
42  Tumour markers	
843
marker requests should be made only when the results 
are likely to be of benefit; pre-analytical and analytical 
requirements should be met and those using ­tumour 
markers clinically should be familiar with the key points 
summarized in Box 42.2.
It is likely that over the next decade, new analytical 
techniques such as proteomic profiling and novel genetic 
tests will lead to the development of more targeted tu-
mour markers. Their introduction into routine practice 
will provide new challenges, which clinical biochemists 
are well positioned to meet.
Further reading
Cancer Research UK website. http://www.cancerresearchuk.org/
cancer-help/; [Accessed October 2013].
Patient-oriented source of helpful information about most cancers.
Diamandis EP, Fritsche HA, Lilja H et  al. editors. Tumor markers. 
Physiology, pathobiology, technology, and clinical applications. 
Washington: AACC Press; 2002. 
Textbook providing in-depth coverage of the general principles of tumour 
marker use, organ-specific tumour markers, genomic and proteomic 
approaches for biomarker discovery and emerging tumour markers.
National Academy of Clinical Biochemistry website. http://www.aacc.org/
members/nacb/lmpg/pages/default.aspx# [Accessed October 2013].
The NACB’s Laboratory Medicine Practice Guidelines (LMPG) for Use 
of Tumour Markers in the Clinic, focus particularly on laboratory aspects 
of tumour marker use in 16 major malignancies, with separate sections on 
quality requirements and new technologies.
National Cancer Institute (United States National Institutes of Health) 
website. http://www.cancer.gov/ [Accessed October 2013].
Information about most cancers for patients and for health professionals.
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) website. http://
www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/default.asp [Accessed 
October 2013].
The NCCN is an alliance of 20 of the world’s foremost cancer centres. 
Detailed Clinical Practice Guidelines for most major malignancies are 
available on the website.
National Health Service (NHS) Cancer Screening Programmes website. 
http://www.cancerscreening.nhs.uk [Accessed October 2013].
Source of current information about NHS screening policy with respect to 
established and pilot screening programmes, including those for breast cancer 
(mammography), cervical cancer, (smear testing) colorectal cancer (FOB 
testing) and prostate cancer (Informed Choice Programme).
National Institute of Health and Care Excellence (NICE) website: http://
www.nice.org.uk/ [Accessed October 2013].
Evidence-based guidelines on the management of a number of cancers, 
including breast cancer, ovarian cancer, prostate cancer and metastatic 
malignant disease of unknown primary origin.
Royal College of Obstetrics and Gynaecologists. Green-top 38: the 
management of gestational trophoblastic disease 2010, http://www.
rcog.org.uk [Accessed October 2013].
Evidence-based guidelines on the treatment of gestational trophoblastic 
neoplasia.
Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network (SIGN) website. http:// 
www.sign.ac.uk/guidelines/published/numlist.html [Accessed October 
2013].
Evidence-based guidelines for more than 12 cancer sites (including breast, 
colorectal, lung and testicular cancers), are available on the SIGN website, 
together with guidelines relating to other aspects of medicine.
BOX 42.2	
Key points for using tumour 
markers in the clinic
•	 A negative result for a serum tumour marker, either prior 
to diagnosis or following treatment, does not exclude ac-
tive disease.
•	 A pre-treatment result is essential and provides the base-
line against which subsequent results can be assessed.
•	 Serial results are nearly always more useful than single 
isolated results and frequency of marker measurement 
should follow guidelines where these exist.
•	 If decisions about proceeding to surgery or chemother-
apy depend on a single tumour marker result, the result 
should be confirmed.
•	 Results that are not in accord with the clinical picture 
should be investigated and if necessary re-checked by an-
other method.
•	 Tumour markers are seldom tissue-specific and therapy 
may result in a transient increase in the serum concen-
tration because of release of tumour marker from normal 
tissue.
•	 Tumour markers should always be interpreted in the con-
text of all available information, including clinical find-
ings, imaging investigations and other blood tests. The 
possible influence of other factors (e.g. abnormal renal or 
liver function) should be carefully considered.
844
C H A P T E R  4 3
Molecular clinical biochemistry
Roberta Goodall
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  844
GENES AND GENE EXPRESSION  844
What is a gene?  844
Gene expression   846
Mutation, the source of diversity and 
disease  846
Genesis of an individual: the formation of 
gametes  849
Genes in families and populations  850
The variable expression of genetic 
disease  851
THE TECHNIQUES OF GENETIC ANALYSIS  852
Detection of specific sequences in DNA  852
Detection of mutations  855
THE APPLICATIONS OF DNA ANALYSIS  860
Diagnosis of index cases   860
Prenatal diagnosis  860
Screening  861
Pharmacogenetics  861
Inherited diseases – some  
examples   862
Multifactorial and polygenic disease  866
Cancer genetics  867
GENE THERAPY  869
Stem cells in gene therapy  870
Gene therapy in cancer  871
CONCLUSION  871
INTRODUCTION
If we distinguish the actual combination of genes pos-
sessed by an individual, that is the genotype, from the 
observable activity of those genes, the phenotype, then 
study of inherited disease in clinical biochemistry labo-
ratories has traditionally been concerned exclusively with 
analysis of phenotypes. The last two decades have wit-
nessed a dramatic change in this situation: molecular bio-
logical techniques are now a much more common part 
of the repertoire of clinical biochemistry laboratories. 
Initially, the identification of genes responsible for inher-
ited diseases involved heroic efforts, requiring expensive, 
complex and extremely time-consuming procedures plus 
a few strokes of luck. Once a gene has been identified, 
however, modern analytical techniques make detection of 
mutations more straightforward than before.
Although each nucleated human cell contains about 
two metres of deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) (around 3 
billion bases), it is the fundamental simplicity of DNA – 
its building blocks comprise just four nucleotides – that 
favours its automated analysis. With a few exceptions, 
every cell in the body of an individual contains a complete 
copy of their DNA (or genome). For this reason, genetic 
analysis can be carried out on almost any nucleated cell 
type (such as lymphocytes or buccal mucosal cells) that 
can conveniently be collected. The application of DNA 
analysis now extends well beyond diagnosis of the classic 
inherited diseases to include, for example, the diagnosis 
and prognosis of cancer.
This chapter provides a general background to clini-
cal laboratory applications of molecular genetic analysis. 
The emphasis is on diagnostic techniques with the po-
tential for automation, utilizing polymerase chain reac-
tions (PCRs), since classic techniques such as Southern 
blot analysis are not widely used in hospital biochemistry 
laboratories, but tend to be restricted to specialist mo-
lecular genetics departments. As far as possible, only a 
very basic knowledge of molecular biology has been as-
sumed, but several excellent introductions to the topic are 
available (see Further reading) and a glossary is provided 
on page 872.
GENES AND GENE EXPRESSION
What is a gene?
A common working definition is that a gene is a sequence 
of nucleotide bases in DNA that codes for a single poly-
peptide, but the complexity of genomic organization is 
such that it is probably unwise to adhere rigidly to any 
one definition of the gene. Towards the end of the 19th 
century, it was already accepted that linear groups of 
‘invisible self-propagating vital units’ were present in 
chromosomes. Mendel’s discovery (1865) that inheri-
tance is particulate was rediscovered and publicized at 
the beginning of the 20th century, and the term gene was 
introduced to describe Mendel’s ‘particulate elements’ in 
1909. By 1911, a specific gene (for colour blindness) had 
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
845
already been assigned to a particular chromosome (the X 
chromosome). With the work of Garrod, who first pre-
sented his studies on alkaptonuria in 1902, the associa-
tion of specific diseases with inherited Mendelian traits 
became established.
Certain stains produce clearly defined bands on chro-
mosomes, so the location of genes is described accord-
ing to the number of the chromosome on which they are 
found, whether they are on the long (q) or short (p) arm, 
and the band number. For example, the location of the α1-
antitrypsin gene is described as 14q31–32.3, meaning that 
it is found on the long arm of chromosome 14 in the re-
gion of bands 31–32.3. The locations of some of the genes 
that have been mapped to the X chromosome are shown 
in Figure 43.1.
After the double helical structure of DNA had been 
discovered in 1953, the rather abstract concept of a gene 
became more tangibly associated with a physical struc-
ture. Nucleic acids consist of two complementary poly-
mers of nucleotides. Each nucleotide consists of a purine 
or pyrimidine base, linked to a phosphorylated pentose. 
In DNA, the pentose is deoxyribose and the bases are 
adenine (A), guanine (G), cytosine (C) and thymine (T). 
In ribonucleic acid (RNA), the pentose is ribose and the 
pyrimidine uracil (U) replaces thymine. Protein coding 
sequences (exons) are interrupted by non-coding se-
quences (introns), which are variable in number (up to 
50 in collagen genes, for example) and size (up to sev-
eral thousand base pairs). As a consequence, although 
the knowledge that three bases code for an amino acid 
allows us to predict that the coding sequence for an av-
erage protein of 400 amino acids will be 1200 nucleo-
tides, the complete gene could be an order of magnitude 
larger. The boundaries between exons and introns are 
critically dependent on the GT-AG rule: that is, introns 
almost invariably begin with GT (or GU in RNA) and 
end with AG. The structure of a hypothetical gene is 
shown in Figure 43.2. The promoter region of DNA, 
which precedes the coding region (‘upstream’ from the 
5′ end of the gene, that is, in the opposite direction to 
transcription) is intimately involved in permitting and 
regulating expression. Some genes code for RNA (e.g. 
ribosomal and transfer RNA) that is not translated into 
protein, and modifications in the process of intron re-
moval can result in one sequence of DNA participating 
in synthesis of different proteins, so that certain genes 
can be considered to overlap.
The Human Genome Project
The Human Genome Project (HGP) represents an out-
standing piece of multinational cooperation to map the 
entire human DNA sequence. The project, started in 
1990, had several aims, the first of which was to deter-
mine the entire base pair sequence. The sequence of 3 
billion base pairs was announced in draft form in 2000 
and the complete sequence in 2003. It was thought ini-
tially that the human genome would consist of approxi-
mately 100 000 different coding genes. As the HGP 
neared completion, it emerged that the actual number 
would be closer to 30 000.
The ‘Encode’ project
Protein coding sequences and introns account for about 
20% of DNA. The function of the remainder is being 
elucidated but in 2012, the initial findings of the ‘Encode’ 
project, which had been examining what had previously 
been called ‘junk’ DNA, were published. It appears that the 
remaining 80% does have a function within the genome, 
with much of the non-protein coding DNA appearing to 
code for RNA transcripts that may have other regulatory 
functions alongside those of gene enhancers and promoters.
FIGURE 43.1  ■ The mapping of genes to specific sites on the X 
chromosome. The regions in the X chromosome where the 
genes associated with Duchenne and Becker muscular dystro-
phy (the dystrophin gene at p21.2), Lesch–Nyhan disease (the 
hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase or HGPRT 
gene at q26.1-q26.2), fragile X syndrome (the FRAXA gene at 
q27.3) and glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase (the G6PD gene 
at q28) deficiency are located are shown.
846	
Clinical biochemistry
That the number of genes is much lower than expected 
appears to be because many genes can perform multiple 
functions, and it now appears that these functions may be 
regulated by the remainder of the genome. These discov-
eries have implications for the investigation and diagnosis 
of genetic disease, and issues concerned with gene expres-
sion will have a growing role in clinical genetics.
Gene expression
The differentiated properties of each cell are determined 
by the pattern of genes in the cell that are active or dor-
mant. In any one cell, only a small percentage of genes 
are likely to be actively engaged in directing synthesis 
of RNA at any one time. Many of these are ‘housekeep-
ing’ genes, which are expressed in virtually all cell types. 
Much remains to be learned concerning the factors that 
determine whether or not a gene is expressed, but regula-
tion of gene expression is clearly determined by proteins 
that interact with DNA.
In higher (eukaryotic) organisms, DNA is found within 
the nucleus and the mitochondria, although the mito-
chondria have a very small percentage of the total DNA 
within the cell and a very small number of genes. Nuclear 
DNA is complexed with basic proteins (histones) to form 
chromatin. At regular intervals, DNA is wrapped around 
complexes of eight histones to form nucleosomes. The 
copying of DNA into RNA (transcription) is ­performed by 
RNA polymerase, which initiates transcription by inter-
acting with the promoter region of a gene. Gene expres-
sion is inhibited if nucleosomes cover a promoter region 
and many factors that regulate transcription probably do 
so by competing with histones for binding to the promoter 
region. Within each promoter region, there are several el-
ements that bind specific proteins capable of interacting 
with RNA polymerase and associated proteins. One of the 
key proteins in this group binds to the so-called ‘TATA 
box’ element (actually a TATAAAA or related sequence), 
which is found in most eukaryotic promoters and is usu-
ally located around 30 base pairs (bp) upstream from the 
transcription start site. Other conserved sequences, such 
as CAAT, also bind transcription factors and are found 
within the promoter region. Another class of regulatory 
sequence in DNA, the enhancer region, binds regulatory 
molecules, which include the steroid hormone receptors. 
Enhancer sequences may be some distance from the gene 
that they regulate, but the proteins that bind to them may 
nevertheless interact with the transcriptional apparatus as 
a result of looping in the DNA molecule.
The initial RNA transcript (pre-mRNA) is modified in 
several ways before it leaves the nucleus (Fig. 43.3). First, 
a ‘cap’ structure (7-methylguanosine) is attached to the 5′ 
end and a sequence of about 200 adenylic residues (poly A) 
is added at the 3′ end. The non-coding introns are then 
removed by a two-step splicing mechanism to form a 
mature messenger RNA (mRNA). Splicing, which takes 
place within ‘spliceosomes’ (complexes of RNA and pro-
teins), requires cleavage at the 5′ and 3′ ends of the intron 
and ligation (joining) of the exons. The specific boundary 
sequences found at splice junctions (see above) act as sig-
nals for splicing. Comparison of large numbers of splice 
junctions reveals these ‘consensus sequences’ to be of the 
general form AGgta at the 5′ junction and cagG at the 3′ 
junction (where bases in the intron sequence are in lower 
case). Given that pre-mRNA molecules can contain up to 
65 exons and an intron may consist of thousands of nucle-
otides, it is remarkable that the correct sites for splicing 
can be chosen.
Finally, the process of translation involves the activity 
of ribosomes, transfer RNA and a variety of other mole-
cules which synthesize a protein using the mRNA code as 
a template. A group of three nucleotides (a codon) speci-
fies an amino acid and most amino acids are coded for by 
more than one codon (i.e. the genetic code is degenerate). 
In principle, each RNA sequence can be decoded in three 
different reading frames, depending on which triplet is 
chosen as the first codon. In practice, the reading frame is 
determined by the site of initiation, which always occurs at 
an AUG codon (AUG codes for methionine, but the ini-
tiating methionine is cleaved from proteins in eukaryotic 
cells). Translation stops at any one of three stop codons 
(UAA, UAG or UGA). Any subsequent modification of a 
protein, such as proteolytic cleavage or addition of carbo-
hydrate, is known as post-translational modification.
Mutation, the source of diversity  
and disease
The accepted terminology, which referred to the ‘nor-
mal’ gene in a population as the ‘wild type’, has changed 
and the terms ‘normal’ and ‘mutant’ (or ‘variant’ if patho-
genicity is unclear or questionable) are now preferred. 
FIGURE 43.2  ■ The structure of a hypothetical gene. Coding sequences (exons) are shown in black, introns and non-coding regions 
are shaded and regulatory regions are in dark shading. Bases in exon sequences are shown in upper case, while bases in intron se-
quences are shown in lower case, illustrating the GT-AGT rule for starts and ends of introns.
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
847
However, the genetic constitution of populations is in a 
constant state of flux with new genes appearing as a re-
sult of mutation and deleterious genes being removed by 
natural selection. Mutations can be broadly divided into 
those that change the genetic code at a specific location 
(point mutations or single nucleotide polymorphisms, 
SNPs) and those that result in gain or loss of genetic 
material (deletions, duplications and insertions). Point 
mutations can result from incorrect insertion of a base 
during DNA replication by DNA polymerase or spon-
taneous decomposition reactions such as depurination 
and deamination. Mutagenic chemicals that increase this 
error rate include those that mimic the natural bases or 
distort the structure of DNA and those that chemically 
modify DNA. Ultraviolet light also causes point muta-
tions, particularly by formation of pyrimidine dimers. 
Point mutations in which a purine is replaced by another 
purine (e.g. A replaced by G) or a pyrimidine is replaced 
by another pyrimidine are known as transitions, while re-
placement of a purine by pyrimidine (e.g. G replaced by 
C) or vice versa is known as a transversion. Gain or loss 
of genetic material can result from various errors, includ-
ing chromosomal breakage and unequal crossing over. 
Insertion of viral sequences into DNA can also disrupt 
the genetic code and the rate of spontaneous chromo-
somal breakage can be markedly increased by ionizing 
radiation. Whenever the number of bases deleted or in-
serted is not a multiple of three, the reading frame of the 
mRNA is altered (frameshift mutation) and the RNA se-
quence subsequent to the mutation becomes nonsense.
Accumulated damage to DNA would rapidly over-
whelm the organism, but repair mechanisms recognize 
and repair damaged DNA so that fewer than 1 in every 
1000 accidental base changes results in a stable mutation. 
It is estimated that stable point mutations are acquired at 
a rate of about 1 in every 10
9 base pairs during each cell 
generation. Consequently, an average gene of about 10
3 
coding base pairs is likely to acquire a mutation once in 
every 10
6 cell generations. As might be expected, individ-
uals with inherited defects in the enzymes responsible for 
DNA repair are markedly more susceptible to the effects 
of environmental mutagens.
A significant proportion of germline point mutations 
are thought to be caused by modification of methyl-
ated cytosine residues. DNA methylation, restricted in 
eukaryotic cells to cytosine residues, usually at CpG di-
nucleotides (CpG denotes C-phosphate-G in a linear se-
quence, in distinction from a CG base pair) is not present 
in all such organisms but is thought to play an important 
role in ensuring stable inheritance of expression pat-
terns when cells divide. Spontaneous deamination of the 
5-methylcytosine creates thymidine, and problems can 
then arise when the normal guanine on the complemen-
tary strand becomes an adenine and the mutation cannot 
be detected by DNA repair mechanisms. Consequently, 
methylation of cytosine can produce mutation ‘hot spots’ 
(i.e. sequences associated with an unusually high fre-
quency of mutations or recombination).
Some mutations may have no effect on the structure of 
a protein – either because the genetic code is degenerate 
DNA
5’
3’
Transcription
mRNA processing 
(addition of 5' cap
and poly A tail)
mRNA processing 
(excision of introns)
Translation
pre-mRNA
mRNA
Protein
Gppp
AAAAAAA.....AAAA
AUG 
(start)
NH2
COOH
UAG 
(stop)
AAAAAAA.....AAAA
Gppp
FIGURE 43.3  ■ Transcription and mRNA processing. After transcription, processing of precursor mRNA involves capping, whereby GTP 
is attached to the 5′ end of the mRNA precursors via a 5′-5′ triphosphate linkage (i.e. in the reverse orientation to all other nucleo-
tides); addition of around 200 adenylate residues to form a poly(A) tail at the 3′ end; and splicing, in which introns are excised and 
exons spliced together. Translation of mRNA into protein is initiated by ribosomes and transfer RNA at the AUG codon and terminated 
at one of the stop codons (UAG, UAA or UGA).
848	
Clinical biochemistry
and the new sequence codes for the same amino acid, 
or because some amino acids in a protein can be sub-
stituted without producing any significant effect on the 
function of the protein. However, some apparently ‘si-
lent’ mutations may have an effect on the protein prod-
uct, not because of the actual base change involved, but 
rather through an effect on splicing by activating cryptic 
splice sites or destroying splice enhancers. Mutations that 
change the three-dimensional structure of a protein and 
so alter its function or stability may do so by a variety of 
mechanisms (Fig. 43.4).
By convention, the DNA strand that has the same se-
quence as mRNA (except that it possesses T instead of U) 
is represented. This strand is known as the coding strand, 
although it is the ‘anticoding’ strand that is complemen-
tary to mRNA and therefore provides the template for 
mRNA synthesis.
Some amino acid changes (missense mutations), such 
as that which produces the Z variant of α1-antitrypsin 
(Fig. 43.4A), can have a profound effect on the process-
ing or function of a protein. Some mutations (nonsense 
mutations) create or destroy codons for the start or 
stop signals of translation so that a protein of abnor-
mal length is produced (Fig. 43.4B). Mutations at splice 
sites (Fig. 43.4C) frequently result in production of ab-
normal mRNA that is unstable. Deletion of three bases 
removes the codon for a single amino acid without alter-
ing the reading frame, as occurs in the most common 
mutation causing cystic fibrosis (Fig. 43.4D). Insertion 
(Fig. 43.4E) or deletion of any number of bases that is 
not a multiple of three will alter the reading frame so 
that the message becomes garbled. Amplification of 
triplet repeat sequences (Fig. 43.4F) has been identified 
as the basis of several inherited diseases. Occasionally, 
mutations affect regulatory regions of DNA so that the 
amount of protein produced is altered. Although muta-
tions are most frequently either neutral or deleterious, 
rare mutations will alter the function of a protein in such 
a way that the fitness of an individual is improved, so 
contributing to evolution. Inheritance of the mutations 
that have accumulated in our ancestors, whether they be 
advantageous, neutral or deleterious, is what constitutes 
our individuality.
An individual inherits two copies of each chromosome 
(one maternal and one paternal). On each chromosome, 
the sequences at each site, or locus, are known as alleles. 
If the two alleles are identical, the individual is said to 
be homozygous at that locus, while if the alleles are dif-
ferent, the individual is said to be heterozygous for each 
allele. As will be seen later, genetic disease is usually 
heterogeneous, so that an individual said to be homozy-
gous for a deleterious gene may be found, when studied 
at the molecular level, to carry a different mutation in 
each allele (i.e. is a compound heterozygote). When the 
prevalence of a mutant allele becomes more common in 
a population than could be maintained by new mutations 
alone (generally taken to be when more than 1% of the 
population carry the allele), there is said to be polymor-
phism. Many proteins in blood (e.g. haptoglobin) and on 
cell surfaces (e.g. human leukocyte antigen, HLA) are 
polymorphic.
The classic inherited diseases result from single gene 
defects and more than 6000 inherited diseases likely to 
be associated with defects in single genes have already 
been identified. Inherited diseases could, in theory, re-
sult from mutations in any one of the human genes – 
the only limitation being that the structure of some 
gene products is so critical that any mutation will not be 
compatible with life. Most of the more common diseases 
that afflict western society, including most cases of dia-
betes, atherosclerosis and hypertension, are the result 
of interaction between the environment and polygenic 
factors (i.e. they are determined by interactions between 
A
B
C
D
E
F
FIGURE 43.4  ■  Examples of mutations. (A) G to A transition in the 
α1-antitrypsin gene, a missense mutation resulting in substitu-
tion of glutamic acid by lysine at position 342, producing the 
Z variant associated with α1-antitrypsin deficiency. (B) Trans­
version of C to T in the steroid 21-hydroxylase gene, converting 
the codon for glutamine to a stop codon, one of the mutations 
causing congenital adrenal hyperplasia. (C) G to A transition in the 
5′ splice site of intron 12 in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene, 
resulting in deletion of exon 12, the most frequent cause of phe-
nylketonuria in Caucasians. Bases in intron sequences are shown 
in lower case. (D) Deletion of three bases in the cystic fibrosis 
transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) gene resulting 
in deletion of phenylalanine at position 508, the most frequent 
mutation causing cystic fibrosis in Caucasians. (E) Insertion of 
a G in the hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl transferase 
gene, a frameshift mutation that results in the Lesch-Nyhan syn-
drome. (F) Amplification of a CGG triplet repeat in the FMR-1 
gene, which causes the fragile X syndrome.
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
849
a
b
a
b
A
B
A
B
a
b
a
B
A
b
A
B
a
b
A
B
FIGURE 43.5  ■  Crossover and linkage. Exchange of alleles as a re-
sult of crossover between homologous chromosomes. Linkage 
between alleles a and b (or A and B) occurs if they are suffi-
ciently close that crossover is unlikely to occur between them.
several genes). Molecular analysis of the polygenic 
diseases is considerably more difficult than analysis of 
single gene defects, but alleles that predispose individu-
als to development of these diseases are being identi-
fied. Both single gene defects and most multifactorial/
polygenic diseases arise from mutations in the nuclear 
DNA but genetic diseases also arise from mutations 
in mitochondrial DNA and from chromosomal abnor-
malities. Mitochondrial DNA is extranuclear and shows 
almost complete maternal inheritance. Chromosomally 
inherited disorders include the trisomies, where faulty 
meiosis allows two copies of a chromosome to be pres-
ent in a gamete, leading to three copies in the embryo. 
Trisomy of chromosome 21, for example, is responsible 
for Down syndrome.
If new mutations occur in germ cells, then they may 
give rise to an inherited disease in the next generation. 
The effects of mutations on non-germ cells, or somatic 
cells, will depend both on the gene affected and on the 
state of differentiation of the cell affected. The ageing 
process is likely to be one result of accumulated muta-
tions in somatic cells and the central role of mutations for 
the development of cancer has become clearer during the 
last few years.
Genesis of an individual: the formation  
of gametes
An individual’s genotype is determined at the time of fer-
tilization, when the chromosomes of the gametes (i.e. the 
male sperm and female egg) are combined. The forma-
tion of gametes (gametogenesis) is particularly relevant 
to an understanding of the detection of inherited disease 
because it is at this stage that ‘shuffling’ of genes occurs.
Normal cell division, or mitosis, involves a simple 
copying of each chromosome, with one identical copy 
being passed on to each daughter cell. To avoid a dou-
bling in the number of chromosomes in each genera-
tion, gametogenesis involves a reduction (by half) of 
the chromosome number during two specialized cell 
divisions known as meiosis. Since the chromosome 
complement of parent and offspring must be equiva-
lent, the reduction in chromosome number cannot be 
arbitrary: parental contributions must be equal and 
equivalent. This requirement can be met because each 
somatic cell of an individual is diploid, containing cor-
responding (homologous) pairs of chromosomes, one 
derived from the mother and the other from the fa-
ther. Meiosis consists of two cell divisions: in the first, 
after duplication of DNA, pairing of homologous 
chromosomes occurs, and to ensure that each gamete 
receives just one member of each homologous pair, 
the duplicated paternal chromosome is distributed to 
one, the duplicated maternal chromosome to the other. 
The assortment between the two cells appears to be 
random so that each cell acquires some maternal and 
some paternal chromosomes. The second cell division 
is like ordinary mitosis, except that it is not preceded 
by duplication of chromosomes. As a consequence, the 
gametes produced are haploid, with half the normal 
number of chromosomes.
At first sight it might be expected that a chromosome 
would be transmitted from one generation to the next as 
an intact unit and that two genes on the same chromo-
some would always be inherited together. The fact that 
this is not so is a result of events that occur during the first 
meiotic division, which have important consequences for 
genetic analysis. As chromosomes pair prior to the first 
division, crossovers (or chiasmata) occur by breakage 
and rejoining between the chromatids of homologous 
chromosomes resulting in recombination (Fig.  43.5). 
The recombination fraction is a measure of the genetic, 
rather than the physical, distance between two genes (or 
loci). The recombination fraction for two loci can never 
be more than 0.5 as the resulting chromatids can only 
ever be recombinant or non-recombinant, no matter 
how many crossovers have occurred between the loci. In 
simple terms, linkage of two genes (i.e. a tendency to be 
inherited together) occurs only when the genetic distance 
separating them is sufficiently short to make crossover 
between them unlikely. The association of two genes 
on separate chromosomes is random but association of 
genes on the same chromosome is not, as it is known that 
crossovers do not occur at random. A process known as 
interference prevents a chiasma forming if one already 
exists nearby. When genes are associated more frequently 
than would be predicted by chance, they are said to be in 
linkage disequilibrium.
In females, gametogenesis is initiated during fetal de-
velopment and, at birth, the germ cells are in a phase of 
arrested maturation of the first stage of meiosis, which 
is not completed until ovulation. The increased risk of 
chromosomal abnormalities in older mothers may be 
850	
Clinical biochemistry
explained by the fact that completion of meiosis occurs 
only after ovulation, when the second stage of meio-
sis (which is similar to ordinary mitotic division) occurs 
and during which fertilization can take place. This may 
happen up to 50 years after formation of the germ cells. 
In males, sperm production continues from the time of 
sexual maturity into old age and the large number of cell 
divisions involved is probably the cause for the increased 
number of new single gene mutations that seem to occur 
in the children of older men.
Genes in families and populations
Mendel introduced the concepts of dominant ‘charac-
ters’ (or traits), which are transmitted without change, 
and recessive traits, which become latent after cross-
fertilization. In modern terms, an allele coding for a 
dominant trait can be said to manifest its phenotype in 
the heterozygous state (i.e. only one copy is required 
for its effects to be apparent), while an allele for a reces-
sive trait expresses its phenotype only in homozygotes. 
An individual who is heterozygous for an autosomal 
recessive condition is described as a carrier. The types 
of family pedigree associated with autosomal dominant 
and recessive genes are illustrated in Figure 43.6A and B. 
Autosomal dominant conditions affect males and fe-
males equally, and affected individuals who are hetero-
zygous for the abnormal allele will transmit it to half 
of their offspring. Autosomal recessive disorders occur 
in individuals whose parents are both carriers for the 
mutant gene. The risk for such patients of having af-
fected children is 25% and the probability of any child 
they have being a carrier is 50%. Dominant diseases 
are often associated with genes coding for proteins that 
have structural, carrier or receptor functions, while 
genes coding for enzymes are often associated with 
recessive disorders. The explanation for this is prob-
ably that the activity of most enzymes is considerably 
greater than necessary for normal metabolism, so loss 
of up to half of the normal activity is of little conse-
quence. Inheritance is somewhat different for alleles on 
X chromosomes. Dominant X-linked diseases will af-
fect both males and females, but an X-linked recessive 
disease will be manifest only in males, who have only 
one X chromosome (Fig.  43.6C). In females, during 
the very early stages of embryogenesis, one or other X 
chromosome is inactivated in every cell; consequently, 
females can be carriers but will usually only suffer from 
an X-linked recessive disease if they are homozygous. 
However, sometimes, in some disorders, the inactiva-
tion is not random but occurs in such a way that only 
the normal chromosome is inactivated, with the result 
that only mutant alleles are expressed in critical tissues 
(‘skewed’ X-inactivation) and the individual becomes a 
manifesting heterozygote. This has been reported in 
several X-linked recessive disorders including, for ex-
ample, Duchenne muscular dystrophy.
When both alleles are expressed in a heterozygote, 
each producing its phenotype independently, inheritance 
is said to be codominant. This type of inheritance is seen 
most clearly when phenotypes are determined by im-
munological or biochemical tests – for example, in test-
ing for blood groups and in restriction fragment length 
polymorphism (RFLP) analysis and, more recently, in 
the growing field of pharmacogenetics (see later), where 
it is possible to distinguish both alleles at each locus.
Of the inherited diseases currently recognized, the 
overwhelming majority are due to problems in nuclear 
DNA and are autosomal dominant, autosomal recessive 
or sex linked. However, it is now known that some dis-
eases are associated with the small amount of DNA that 
is present in mitochondria. These diseases are maternally 
inherited, since the mitochondria in the fertilized egg are 
of maternal origin.
The relative frequency of inherited disease varies 
markedly between populations: for example, cystic fibro-
sis and α1-antitrypsin deficiency are associated primarily 
with northern Europeans, while red cell disorders (thal-
assaemia, sickle cell anaemia and glucose 6-­phosphate 
dehydrogenase deficiency) are found primarily in people 
of Mediterranean, Oriental or African origin, and Tay–
Sachs disease is found primarily in Ashkenazi Jews. In 
some populations, the prevalence of an inherited disease 
is due to a ‘founder effect’, as with variegate porphyria 
in South Africans, which can be traced to a single couple 
who emigrated from Holland in the 1680s. Autosomal 
recessive diseases that are particularly widespread in 
larger populations are likely to represent a balanced 
polymorphism in which disadvantage to homozygotes is 
balanced by an advantage to the larger number of het-
erozygotes. With some red cell disorders (e.g. HbS, the 
A
B
C
FIGURE  43.6  ■  Patterns of inheritance in families. Inheritance 
of (A) a dominant condition, (B) a recessive condition and (C) 
an X-linked recessive condition. Squares represent males and 
circles represent females. Open symbols represent normal indi-
viduals, while fully shaded symbols refer to affected individuals 
and half-shaded symbols represent carriers.
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
851
sickle cell trait), the balanced polymorphism is clearly 
a response to the environment, in this case with het-
erozygosity conferring resistance to malaria caused by 
Plasmodium falciparum.
In a large population, the relative frequencies of dif-
ferent alleles tend to remain constant and a simple math-
ematical formula allows calculation of the frequency of 
different genotypes. If two alleles, A and a, occur at a 
given locus and their frequencies are p and q, respec-
tively, then:
It can be shown that the genotypes AA, Aa and aa 
have frequencies p
2, 2pq and q
2, respectively (the Hardy–
Weinberg law). Use of this law allows simple calculation 
of carrier frequencies for autosomal traits. For example, if 
the homozygote frequency (q
2) for cystic fibrosis is about 
1 in 2500, q is 1/50, p is 1 − q or 49/50 (~1) and the het-
erozygote frequency (2pq) is about 1/25.
The variable expression of genetic disease
Several factors dictate that each genetic disease is associ-
ated with symptoms of quite variable nature and severity.
It is often naively assumed that all mutations of a 
particular gene will have identical consequences for the 
organism, but this is far from being true. Different muta-
tions in a given gene are quite likely to give rise to differ-
ent phenotypes, just as a particular phenotype can result 
from many different mutations in the same gene or even 
in different genes. Since many different mutations that 
have deleterious effects on a particular gene are present 
in most populations, it is not surprising that molecular 
analysis often reveals that individuals who have been 
described as homozygous are in fact compound hetero-
zygotes, that is, they are affected by two different delete-
rious alleles.
Because the haemoglobin gene has been investigated 
in detail, it provides a good illustration of the complexity 
of genetic disease. Several hundred abnormal haemoglo-
bins have been identified. The majority have amino acid 
substitutions resulting from single base changes and the 
consequences range from complete absence of protein 
to variant haemoglobins with function indistinguishable 
from that of normal (see Chapter 29). As study of other 
genes progresses, similar complex arrays of mutations of 
every imaginable type and with differing consequences 
are being discovered. With the introduction of screen-
ing for phenylketonuria (PKU), it soon became appar-
ent that the disease is heterogeneous. It has been shown 
that, in PKU, phenotypic heterogeneity is related to the 
level of phenylalanine hydroxylase activity expressed 
in each patient which, in turn, is determined, in classic 
PKU, by the particular mutations that are present in the 
two alleles of the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene. 
However, not all cases of neonatal hyperphenyalaninae-
mia are due to PAH deficiency. Benign hyperpheny-
alaninaemia arises from a transient liver immaturity and 
does not lead to the disease. Two rare causes of PKU are 
deficiencies in the enzymes ­dihydropteridine reductase 
and dihydrobiopterin synthetase, leading to PKU with 
a severe phenotype. Glucose 6-phosphate dehydroge-
nase (G6PD) deficiency, which is an X-linked recessive 
condition estimated to affect as many as 500 million 
people worldwide, has also proved to be extremely het-
erogeneous at both the phenotypic and molecular levels. 
Some variants appear to have no clinical consequences, 
while at the other extreme, severe defects in G6PD 
cause hereditary non-spherocytic haemolytic anaemia 
(see Chapter  27). Intermediate defects are associated 
with haemolytic anaemia only in the presence of pre-
cipitating factors (e.g. infection, ingestion of fava beans 
or certain drugs). Analysis of the protein had indicated 
the existence of about 400 variants of G6PD and a simi-
lar number of mutations have now been described, but 
many of these appear not to cause disease. Many of the 
mutations causing the most severe disease are clustered 
near the carboxy end of the enzyme in the region of the 
putative NADP binding site.
A further level of heterogeneity in genetic disease 
occurs as a result of varying degrees of penetrance and 
expressivity. Penetrance refers to the degree to which 
the mutation causes disease. Thus, in some disorders, 
the presence of the mutant gene is disease-causing in 
some individuals but not others, demonstrating vari-
able penetrance, whereas in diseases that are fully pen-
etrant, the presence of the mutation will always lead 
to the disease phenotype. For example, the C282Y 
(Cys282Tyr) mutation in the HFE gene (causing sub-
stitution of the cysteine residue at position 282 of the 
human haemochromatosis protein by tyrosine), causes 
haemochromatosis in some individuals but results in a 
completely normal phenotype in others. Expressivity is 
a slightly different aspect of a gene’s effect and refers 
to the presence of variable phenotypes arising from the 
same mutation. It can be age-related or determined by 
the environment (as when drugs such as barbiturates 
precipitate attacks of acute intermittent porphyria). An 
example of a disorder demonstrating variable expressiv-
ity is Waardenburg syndrome, where the ‘full’ syndrome 
includes several phenotypic features (such as different 
coloured eyes, a white forelock or deafness) but where, 
within a single affected family, different individuals may 
have only one feature, which is not always the same one 
within that family. Variable expressivity and penetrance 
tend to be features of dominant, rather than recessive, 
conditions.
Another aspect of inheritance, known as imprinting, 
may help to explain processes such as variable pene-
trance and expressivity. Contrary to the assumptions 
of classic genetics, it now appears that expression of 
some genes depends on whether they are of maternal 
or paternal origin. The molecular mechanism of im-
printing, which is likely to occur during meiosis, in-
volves DNA methylation, which ‘marks’ certain genes 
and ensures that they are preferentially expressed in 
the next generation. If such a gene is imprinted in 
the maternal line, it will continue through a woman’s 
daughters but not through her sons, although both 
may be affected. The converse is true for paternally 
imprinted genes, which will be transmitted through 
p
q
+
=


1
1
sinceoneorotherallele must bepresent,
their sum must be


852	
Clinical biochemistry
sons but not through daughters. Consequently, if an 
imprinted gene contains a deletion, offspring will not 
show expression of the gene product even in the pres-
ence of a normal gene on the opposite chromosome, as 
this will be ‘switched off’.
Prader–Willi and Angelman syndromes are good 
examples of disorders arising due to abnormalities in 
a region carrying imprinted genes (chromosome 15 
at 15q12,). Prader–Willi syndrome, features of which 
include hypotonia and hyperphagia, is produced by 
deletion of the paternal alleles at 15q12. Angelman 
syndrome, which is associated with ataxic movements 
and seizures, is also associated with deletion of 15q12 but, 
in this case, of the maternal allele. In some cases of 
Prader–Willi syndrome, rather than deletion of the 
paternal alleles, loss of the paternal chromosome oc-
curs together with maternal isodisomy (two copies of 
the same allele from the mother) or heterodisomy (one 
copy of each maternal allele). There are several pos-
sible mechanisms by which two alleles can be inherited 
from one parent. Trisomies, for instance, usually re-
sult in spontaneous abortion, but if one chromosome 
is then lost there is a one in three chance that result-
ing cells will have a normal complement of chromo-
somes but with one pair of chromosomes derived from 
a single parent. The interesting possibility that a reces-
sive disease can be inherited from one carrier parent 
then arises. This unusual mode of inheritance has been 
demonstrated in some patients with cystic fibrosis, but 
it is not yet clear how frequently it occurs in this or 
other diseases.
THE TECHNIQUES OF GENETIC ANALYSIS
Detection of specific sequences in DNA
Analysis of DNA is heavily dependent on the availabil-
ity of techniques to identify specific nucleotide sequences. 
Fortunately, the function of DNA has resulted in the evo-
lution of proteins capable of recognizing specific DNA 
sequences and it is inherent in the structure of DNA that one 
strand should recognize and bind (hybridize) specifically to its 
complementary strand. Most of the techniques currently used 
in DNA technology exploit one or other of these properties.
Use of proteins that recognize DNA sequences: 
restriction endonucleases
Without restriction enzymes, much of the molecular bio-
logical analysis carried out in the last 30 years would not 
have been possible. These enzymes are widespread in bac-
teria: over 3000 having been recognized so far, of which 
around 600 are available for commercial/analytical use. 
Each enzyme is named after the species of bacteria in which 
it was found (e.g. EcoRI from Escherichia coli), and in which it 
probably fulfils a defensive function, cleaving molecules 
of foreign DNA. The usefulness of these enzymes derives 
from the fact that they do not cleave DNA at random, but 
recognize and cut specific nucleotide sequences. The most 
commonly used restriction enzymes recognize sequences 
of 4–6 nucleotides that have a two-fold axis of symmetry 
and are therefore said to be palindromes (i.e. the sequence 
reads the same on the complementary strand) (Fig. 43.7A). 
Digestion of DNA by a particular enzyme provides repro-
ducible fragments whose size will depend on the frequency 
with which the enzyme recognition site occurs. On aver-
age, a 4-bp site occurs every 256 bp and a 6-bp site every 
4096 bp. While some enzymes (e.g. HaeIII) cut in such a 
way that ‘blunt ends’ are produced, others (e.g. EcoRI) cut 
asymmetrically so that ‘sticky ends’ are left, which are ex-
tremely useful for reannealing fragments to produce re-
combinant DNA (Fig. 43.7B).
In addition to allowing reproducible cleavage of DNA 
to a manageable size, restriction enzymes are also valu-
able tools for analysing molecular diversity and identify-
ing the individuality of DNA sequences. Differences in 
DNA sequences between individuals may create or de-
stroy sites for restriction enzymes (i.e. there is polymor-
phism of restriction sites). Thus, the distance between 
restriction sites will often differ between individuals and 
between the maternal and paternal strands of DNA. The 
pattern of restriction sites can therefore provide a ‘signa-
ture’ for each individual strand of DNA. The different 
populations of DNA fragments produced on digestion 
by an enzyme are known as restriction fragment length 
polymorphisms or RFLPs.
Restriction enzymes have more recently acquired a 
new use in preparing genomic DNA for the various tech-
niques employed in ‘next generation’ sequencing.
Hybridization: probes and the polymerase  
chain reaction (PCR)
A probe is a sequence of DNA (or RNA) that has been 
labelled in order to identify complementary base se-
quences by molecular hybridization. The two strands 
of DNA can be dissociated (‘denatured’ or ‘melted’) in 
various ways, such as by heating or addition of alkali. 
Denaturation for a given fragment of DNA occurs at 
a specific temperature, and the temperature at which 
50% of the duplex is dissociated is known as the Tm. 
When the temperature is lowered to just below the Tm, 
hydrogen bonds begin to reform between complementary 
bases, a process known as annealing or renaturation. If 
the probe and target DNA are mixed before reannealing 
is allowed to occur, the probe can be used to ‘find’ its 
complementary sequence. The conditions under which 
reannealing occurs (in particular salt concentration and 
temperature) determine the degree of stringency of the 
hybridization.
Probes can be used to detect their complementary 
sequences, traditionally after DNA (or RNA) fragments 
have been separated by electrophoresis. Digestion of ge-
nomic DNA with a restriction enzyme will produce a mil-
lion or so fragments of different sizes and electrophoresis 
has the great advantage of allowing simple determination 
of the size of fragments detected by probes. The now clas-
sic technique of Southern blotting involves the transfer of 
electrophoretically separated bands of DNA to a sheet of 
nitrocellulose or nylon. Complementary DNA sequences 
are then detected by hybridization with labelled probes. 
The technique was originated by Dr (later Professor) 
E M Southern. Subsequently, the terms Northern and 
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
853
Western blotting have been used for processes in which 
RNA or proteins, respectively, are transferred.
In the past, all DNA analysis required some technique 
of visualizing the products of the reaction, and with 
probe hybridization this involves labelling the probe in 
some way. 
32Phosphorous radioactive labelling, although 
still in use for blotting protocols, was superseded by the 
use of fluorescent dyes, particularly for gene sequenc-
ing, a system which allowed the development of large, 
high-throughput, DNA analysers, as well as techniques 
such as real-time PCR. However, some of the technolo-
gies employed in ‘next generation’ sequencing systems 
require neither gels nor dyes, as will be discussed later. 
Some of the newer systems allow for an electrical signal 
to be generated when hybridization of probe to target 
occurs, which may eventually lead to the development 
of point-of-care systems.
Probes, generally of a few thousand bases, may 
be sequences cut from genomic DNA or they may 
have been produced by making complementary DNA 
(cDNA) to an mRNA species. The latter procedure 
uses the enzyme reverse transcriptase, which trans-
mits genetic information in the ‘reverse’ direction, 
that is, from RNA to DNA. Genomic and cDNA se-
quences differ, particularly in the absence of intron 
sequences from the latter. The tolerance of probes 
for mismatching of base sequences will depend on 
their size and on the stringency of hybridization. 
Shorter oligonucleotide probes are often more use-
ful for direct identification of point mutations since 
Some restriction enzymes and their target sequences
Use of cohesive ends for production of recombinant DNA
Microorganism
A
B
Enzyme
Sequence
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens
Bam HI
. . G G A T C C . .
. . C C T A G G . .
Escherichia coli
Eco RI
. . G A A T T C . .
. . C T T A A G . .
Haemophilus influenzae Rd
Hind III
. . A A G C T T . .
. . T T C G A A . .
Providencia stuarti
Pst I
. . G T G C A G . .
. . G A C G T C . .
Escherichia coli
Eco RV 
. . G A T A T C . .
. . C T A T A G . .
Haemophilus aegyptius
Hae III
. . G G C C . .
. . C C G G . .
A
A
T
T
T
T
A
A
T
T
A
A
A
A
T
T
T
T
A
A
TTAA
+
A
A
T
T
AATT
FIGURE 43.7  ■  Restriction enzymes and recombination. (A) Arrows indicate how specific DNA sequences are cleaved by restriction 
enzymes. (B) Cohesive ends produced by restriction enzymes can be used for annealing of DNA sequences, which can then be joined 
by a ligase to form a recombinant DNA molecule.
854	
Clinical biochemistry
conditions can be chosen such that hybridization oc-
curs only when there is complete complementarity 
between probe and target. Because hybridization of 
a relatively smaller proportion of bases in the probe 
is required, larger genomic or cDNA probes will usu-
ally recognize corresponding sequences of DNA from 
different individuals in a population or even different 
but related genes.
Cloning, where the sequence of interest was ‘grown’ 
in bacteria such as E. coli after being inserted into the 
bacterial genome using bacteriophage viruses, has been 
largely superseded as a method of producing probes by 
the ability to create synthetic oligonucleotide sequences, 
although cloning as a technique is still employed in areas 
of research.
Without doubt, the commonest use for synthetic 
­oligonucleotides has been as ‘primers’ in the ­polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR). After its introduction in 1985, 
PCR supplanted many of the more tedious techniques 
of  molecular biology and opened up completely new 
possibilities. Essentially, a means of cloning DNA 
­without the need for vectors or bacteria, PCR uses the 
enzyme DNA polymerase to copy DNA. To do this, 
the enzyme needs two oligonucleotide primers that are 
complementary to sequences flanking the region of inter-
est in the target DNA, with one on each strand (Fig. 43.8). 
Computer and web-based programs are available for de-
signing primers (usually 20 or more bases) in order to 
choose sequences likely to be most suitable for the PCR 
reaction and to maximize specificity by ensuring that the 
GCCATTACCG
GGTAGTTATA
CGGTAATGGC
Heat denaturation 
Primer annealing
Primer extension
Oligonucleotide
primer
GCCATTACCG
TATAACTACC
GCCATTACCG
GCCATTACCG
TATAACTACC
GGTAGTTATA
TATAACTACC
GCCATTACCG
GGTAGTTATA
GGTAGTTATA
GGTAGTTATA
TATAACTACC
~ 30 cycles
Double
stranded
DNA
Single
stranded
DNA
Cycle 1
Cycle 2
CGGTAATGGC
CGGTAATGGC
CGGTAATGGC
TATAACTACC
CGGTAATGGC
FIGURE 43.8  ■ The polymerase chain reaction. After denaturation of DNA, primers anneal to complementary sequences. During the first 
cycle, a heat-stable DNA polymerase (usually Taq) initiates synthesis of two new strands. After a further denaturation cycle, primers 
anneal to the newly synthesized DNA as well as the original sequences and four new strands are synthesized (cycle 2). With an expo-
nential increase in the number of DNA strands, after around 30 cycles the sequence will have been amplified about one million times.
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
855
complementary sequence is virtually unique in the 
genome. The target sequence is amplified exponentially 
by repeated cycles of enzymatic copying. In the first cycle, 
double-stranded DNA is denatured by heating to be-
tween 92°C and 96°C for 5 min, and then cooled to (usu-
ally) between 55°C and 60°C, so that the oligonucleotide 
primers can anneal to their complementary sequences 
in the target DNA. For optimal specificity, the high-
est ­annealing temperature possible is used to minimize 
­extension of primers bound non-specifically. Extension 
of the primers by DNA polymerase, using added nucleo-
tides and the DNA target as a template, is then allowed to 
take place. Use of a heat-stable DNA polymerase, which 
can withstand the heating cycles, avoids the necessity of 
adding fresh enzyme at each cycle and allows extension 
to take place at a high temperature (72°C). After heat de-
naturation, excess primers can then anneal to the newly 
synthesized DNA as well as the original DNA strands 
and the process is repeated. In 30 cycles, amplification 
of over one million-fold can be achieved. Originally, the 
only enzyme available for PCR was that from Thermus 
aquaticus (Taq polymerase), but more have now been 
identified and developed, making amplification of much 
longer sections of genomic DNA possible.
Stringent control of conditions, such as the con-
centrations of magnesium and nucleotides in the reac-
tion mixture, have usually been needed to maintain the 
specificity of a PCR although conditions that maximize 
polymerase fidelity may reduce PCR efficiency. Where 
such manipulation was necessary, it was predominantly 
dependent on the sequences involved, especially that of 
the primers. However, the ability to amplify longer sec-
tions of DNA means that primers can be ‘picked’ to suit 
the conditions required, allowing the use of universal 
‘master mixes’ and thus a greater standardization of PCR 
assays. PCR is so sensitive that it has been used to am-
plify the DNA from a single cell and it can be used with 
samples obtained from materials as diverse as ancient 
mummies, fossils, hair follicles, preimplantation em-
bryos and fixed pathological specimens. The large quan-
tities of amplified DNA produced by PCR, which can be 
detected using a variety of visual labels, have eliminated 
the need for radiolabelling. The extreme sensitivity of 
the technique is also the source of one of its disadvan-
tages – ­contamination by extraneous DNA (e.g. from 
the operator) can create havoc, so that strict precautions 
must be taken to avoid artefacts.
Non-isotopic fluorescent labels are employed in the 
widely used technique of real-time PCR. There are sev-
eral versions of this technique but the basic principle is 
that a PCR reaction is followed, in real time, by monitor-
ing the signals produced by dye-labelled probes that bind 
to the accumulating products. Various modifications to 
the technique allow real-time PCR to be used for quanti-
tation of a target sequence (hence, its other, abbreviated 
name of qPCR) and determining dosage (the number of 
copies of a gene in a cell) and gene duplication as well as 
for mutation detection. Quantitative analysis has become 
increasingly important as a tool for microbiologists for 
determining such things as viral load in samples from pa-
tients suffering from diseases such as human immunode-
ficiency virus infection.
Not to be confused with real-time PCR, reverse tran-
scriptase PCR (rtPCR) uses purified RNA as the start 
point and uses the enzyme reverse transcriptase to pro-
duce cDNA, which can then be amplified using conven-
tional PCR and used to examine the protein expressed 
by the gene of interest. Potentially, this allows investi-
gation of both the effect of any sequence variants in a 
gene on its protein product, and the possible phenotypic 
consequences.
Detection of mutations
The search for mutations causing disease involves either 
the detection of a previously identified, known mutation 
or the screening of the gene to search for an unknown 
mutation. In clinical samples, the process will usually be-
gin with the former and proceed to the latter if none of 
the former is found. There are now a variety of methods 
available for mutation detection and these can be divided 
into manual, low-throughput techniques and automated, 
high-throughput ones. The basic principles of the man-
ual methods often form the basis of the automated ones 
and it is for this reason that several of the manual tech-
niques are described here as they demonstrate principles 
of analysis and the properties of DNA that are exploited, 
however it should be acknowledged that in most large ge-
netics laboratories these have largely been superseded by 
automated high-throughput systems.
Detecting known mutations
The principles of several manual techniques for detecting 
known mutations are shown in Fig. 43.9. The allele-specific 
oligonucleotide (ASO) technique utilizes synthetic oli-
gonucleotide probes (about 19 residues) – one that is 
complementary to the normal and one to the mutant 
allele, with the site of mutation in the middle of the 
complementary region (Fig.  43.9A). Under appropri-
ate conditions of hybridization, the oligonucleotides will 
bind only when there is complete complementarity. This 
technique was first used for detection of the β
s allele of 
the β globin gene that is responsible for sickle cell anae-
mia. Although ASO testing can be performed directly on 
genomic DNA, it is more easily carried out after prior 
amplification of the region of interest using PCR. If a 
mutation (or the corresponding normal sequence) hap-
pens to be a target site for one of the many restriction 
enzymes, then testing for the presence or absence of a 
restriction site by restriction endonuclease allele rec-
ognition can be used to analyse genotypes (Fig. 43.9B). 
This technique was also first used for detection of the 
β
s allele. Again, initial PCR amplification simplifies the 
procedure.
Another method for identifying point mutations 
exploits the specificity of the primers used for PCR: 
the amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) 
(Fig.  43.9C), also known as allele-specific amplifica-
tion, is based on the observation that oligonucleotides 
that are not exactly complementary to the target DNA 
sequence frequently do not function as primers in PCR. 
The method uses two forward primers, one which is 
complementary to the normal sequence and one which 
856	
Clinical biochemistry
is complementary to the mutant sequence, in combination 
with a common reverse primer. In yet another technique – 
ligase-mediated allele detection (Fig. 43.9D) – DNA li-
gase is used to couple two oligonucleotides at the site of 
a mutation. If one of the pair of nucleotides corresponds 
to either the normal or the mutant sequence, the ligase 
will only link the two oligonucleotides if there is a perfect 
match between the oligonucleotides and the target DNA, 
which has usually been amplified by PCR.
Because of the heterogeneity of genetic disease, one of 
the biggest obstacles to the application of DNA analysis 
is the requirement for simultaneous detection of multiple 
mutations. Since it is possible to perform several PCR 
reactions simultaneously (‘multiplex PCR’, Fig. 43.9E), 
several of the systems for the detection of mutations can 
be adapted to identify more than one mutation in a sin-
gle assay. Alternatively, a reverse ASO method (in which 
oligonucleotides are immobilized and the test material is 
used as a probe) allows simultaneous detection of several 
alleles. Such a principle underlies one form of the in-
creasingly available ‘microarray’ or DNA chip, systems 
of DNA analysis. There are basically two forms of mi-
croarray. In the first, target DNA samples are immobi-
lized on the chip and are then interrogated using labelled 
probes. The technique requires great precision in locat-
ing the sample sequences precisely on the chip, which 
needs to be done using robotic delivery systems. The 
second form is a reverse hybridization method in which 
the chip production procedure is highly complex but 
involves synthesizing thousands of different oligonucle-
otide sequences in situ on glass or silicon slides; these are 
the probes. The target DNA is amplified in a reaction 
that labels it with fluorophore, and allowed to hybrid-
ize with the immobilized probes. Bound label is detected 
using a laser scanner, with perfect sequence matches be-
tween sample and probe demonstrating stronger signals, 
Wild type
A
Mutant
Restriction enzyme
recognition site
B
Ligase
D
C
E
FIGURE 43.9  ■  Some techniques for detecting known mutations. (A) Allele-specific oligonucleotides. A synthetic oligonucleotide com-
plementary to the normal sequence will bind to wild-type, but not mutant, DNA (while an oligonucleotide complementary to the 
mutated sequence will bind to mutant DNA but not wild-type DNA). (B) Restriction endonuclease allele recognition. A mutation may 
create a recognition site for a restriction enzyme which is absent in the wild-type sequence. Consequently, digestion with the en-
zyme would cleave mutant DNA into two fragments, but would have no effect on wild-type DNA (similarly, a mutation may destroy 
a recognition site for a restriction enzyme so that wild-type DNA is cleaved, but not mutant). (C) Amplification refractory mutation 
system (ARMS). Primers, one of which spans the site of mutation, are designed for a PCR reaction. Primers complementary to wild-
type sequence amplify normal DNA, but not mutant DNA (for confirmation, a second set of primers which are complementary to the 
mutated sequence is also designed so that a positive reaction is obtained with mutant DNA). (D) Ligase-mediated allele detection. 
Oligonucleotides flanking the site of mutation are joined by a ligase only if they are complementary to the DNA sequence. One of the 
oligonucleotides corresponds to a constant region, while the other is complementary to either wild-type or mutant DNA. (E) Multiplex 
PCR for detection of deletions. Simultaneous PCR reactions for amplification of two or more sequences detect any deletions which 
remove recognition sites for PCR primers.
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
857
and the signals analysed using digital imaging software. 
The second method may be more appropriate to clinical 
analysis but the complexity of production means that chips 
tend to be produced by specialist manufacturers. At the 
moment, the instrumentation, and the chips themselves, 
remain costly but, as with all advances in molecular analy-
sis, costs are likely to fall as the technology becomes more 
widespread.
In some inherited diseases, the gene responsible is 
particularly prone to deletions, copy number changes 
or duplications. Screening a gene by simultaneous am-
plification of several regions of DNA by multiplex PCR 
can be used effectively to screen such genes for deletions. 
Sequences that are absent or of decreased molecular 
weight can be detected simply by electrophoretic separa-
tion of the amplified sequences, although more precise 
methods have now been developed, for example multi-
plex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) (see 
Muscular dystrophy, p. 865).
Scanning or screening methods
To detect mutations when the precise site of mutation 
in a given individual is unknown, mutation screening 
methods were developed (Fig. 43.10). The sequence to 
be screened (e.g. one complete exon in a gene) is usually 
amplified first by PCR. One of several techniques that 
are capable of detecting the presence of single base dif-
ferences in the sequence can then be used. In cleavage 
mismatch detection (Fig. 43.10A), hybridization of mu-
tant and normal DNA strands produces a heteroduplex, 
and chemical or enzymatic techniques are used to cleave 
the strands at the site of mismatched base pairs. The 
size of fragments produced then allows localization of 
mutations within the sequence. Denaturing gradient gel 
electrophoresis and temperature gradient gel electro-
phoresis are methods that take advantage of the sudden 
decrease in electrophoretic mobility that occurs when a 
double-stranded molecule of DNA begins to dissociate 
(Fig. 43.10B). A homoduplex molecule (i.e. a duplex of 
complementary strands) will begin to dissociate and de-
crease its mobility at a characteristic point in a gradient 
of either denaturing agent or temperature. If denatured 
normal DNA is allowed to re-anneal in the presence of 
mutant DNA, heteroduplex molecules will form with a 
mismatch in almost complementary strands, which will 
begin to denature early so that the electrophoretic pro-
file is altered. The technique of single-stranded confor-
mational polymorphism (SSCP) is based on the fact that 
sequences of single-stranded DNA fold into specific 
conformations (Fig. 43.10C), so that normal and mutant 
DNA sequences can be separated by acrylamide gel elec-
trophoresis. All of these, essentially manual, techniques 
are still used and remain valid techniques, but with ris-
ing workloads and the need for rapid results, they too 
are being increasingly overtaken by automated methods 
using large analytical platforms. Conformational sensi-
tive capillary electrophoresis (CSCE) and denaturing 
high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) 
both utilize the principles of heteroduplex formation, 
with detection based on the different mobilities pro-
duced by conformational changes. Conformational 
sensitive capillary electrophoresis uses fluorescence 
detection to screen for the presence of mutations in a 
DNA sequence, while DHPLC uses altered retention 
times in an HPLC system.
If one of the above scanning techniques reveals the 
presence of a mutation, DNA sequencing can then be 
used to identify, or confirm, the precise mutation. Two 
techniques for sequencing of DNA were introduced 
in 1977, one by Sanger and the other by Maxam and 
Gilbert. Both techniques share the same basic principle 
in that a series of single-stranded DNA molecules, each 
one base longer than the last, is generated. These mol-
ecules can be separated by electrophoresis to generate a 
‘ladder’ from which the sequence can be read. The di-
deoxy terminator method of Sanger (Fig. 43.10D) uses 
DNA polymerase to synthesize a complementary copy 
of the target DNA starting from a primer annealed close 
to the region of interest. The enzyme can incorporate 
dideoxynucleosides, but chain elongation then ceases 
immediately because these nucleoside analogues lack a 
3′ hydroxy group. DNA synthesis is carried out in four 
separate incubation mixtures, each containing the four 
deoxynucleoside triphosphate substrates (one of which 
is labelled) in addition to a low concentration of just one 
Wild type
A
Mutant
B
C
T C G A
T C G A
D
FIGURE  43.10  ■  Detection of unknown mutations. (A) Cleavage 
mismatch. If a heteroduplex is formed between wild-type and 
mutant DNA, unpaired bases at mutation sites are suscep-
tible to chemical modification and subsequent cleavage. (B) 
Denaturing or temperature gradient electrophoresis. As DNA 
migrates through a gel with a gradient of temperature or dena-
turant, the rate of migration changes suddenly when the strands 
begin to separate. The presence of a mutation will alter the 
point at which this event occurs. (C) Single-strand conforma-
tional polymorphism. Molecules of single-stranded DNA form 
three-dimensional structures determined by their sequence, 
so that in non-denaturing gels, mobility is determined by se-
quence as well as length. The presence of a mutation may alter 
the three-dimensional structure formed and hence mobility. (D) 
DNA sequencing (dideoxy method of Sanger). Sequencing gels 
are read starting from the smallest fragment. Thus, the wild-
type sequence is GGCAATGATGTT and the mutant sequence is 
GGCAATTATGTT.
858	
Clinical biochemistry
of the four dideoxynucleoside analogues. When incuba-
tion is terminated, a population of labelled DNA mol-
ecules of varying lengths will have been produced. All 
molecules will have the same 5′ end, but will vary in 
length to a base-specific 3′ end (e.g. all terminating in 
A if dideoxy ATP was used). Originally, it was necessary 
to clone a fragment of DNA before sequencing could 
be carried out, but sequencing now uses PCR products 
obtained from either genomic DNA or cDNA. The use 
of radioactive (
32P) labelling followed by polyacrylamide 
electrophoresis (PAGE) gel and autoradiography has 
been superseded by DNA analysers which use four dif-
ferent dyes for the four different nucleosides, and auto-
mated read outs. The availability of these instruments, 
plus automated software for mutation and variant ‘call-
ing’, makes sequencing more attractive for detecting 
mutations, and some laboratories use automated DNA 
analysers and sequencers as their front-line mutation de-
tection system for some genes.
Tracking of mutant genes
When the gene causing a disease has not been identified, 
or it is not feasible to identify the precise mutation caus-
ing a defect, it may nevertheless be possible to predict, by 
gene tracking, whether a particular individual is affected 
provided a closely linked marker is available. Even when 
a disease gene has been identified and cloned, because the 
gene screening methods described above are not always 
100% sensitive, gene tracking methods may still be use-
ful to identify affected individuals. To be useful, a marker 
must exhibit a degree of polymorphism so that it is possi-
ble to distinguish between alleles associated with normal 
and mutant genes. Thus for a marker to be informative, 
an individual who is heterozygous for the disease locus 
must also be heterozygous for the marker. For genetic 
analysis, information on phase is also required, that is, it 
is necessary to determine which allele is linked to (tracks 
with) the mutation in an individual who is heterozygous. 
Some of the situations that may occur with a recessive 
disease are illustrated in Figure 43.11. Family 1 is fully 
informative and the disease gene is associated with allele 
a, so that the fetus would be affected only if it were also 
homozygous for allele a. In family 2, the analysis is infor-
mative only for the mother (in whom the mutant gene 
is linked to allele b), so that there is a 50% probability 
that the fetus can be predicted to be unaffected and a 
50% chance that the fetus will be predicted to be at 50% 
risk. In family 3, the analysis is completely uninforma-
tive, since both parents are homozygous for the marker. 
In family 4, a marker with greater polymorphism is used, 
which is entirely informative.
Often a polymorphic marker can be found within 
the gene of interest, but if a linked marker outside the 
gene is used, there is an increased possibility of errors 
being made as a result of crossover. Even with intra-
genic markers, in large genes such as the dystrophin 
gene, there is a distinct possibility of crossover occur-
ring between a marker and a mutation site. Similarly, 
there can be a degree of uncertainty as to whether an 
affected member of a pedigree has a new disease-causing 
mutation; again this may be particularly true in cases of 
muscular dystrophy. The risk of incorrect diagnosis can 
be minimized by the use of multiple markers, but diag-
nosis will nevertheless be based on an estimate of prob-
ability. Other disadvantages of linkage studies are the 
expense, time and need to test other family members, so 
these techniques are used mainly in specialist laborato-
ries. The developments of ‘next generation’ sequencing 
described below are likely to allow great improvements 
in identifying, and tracking, pathogenic mutations in 
such diseases and pedigrees.
There are several types of polymorphic marker that 
are suitable for tracking inheritance of particular al-
leles within families. Polymorphism at restriction sites 
(Fig. 43.12A) has been used extensively for linkage analy-
sis, both for identification of the genes causing disease 
and for genetic analysis in families. Throughout the hu-
man genome, about one base in 1000 is polymorphic and 
around one in six random base changes creates or abol-
ishes a restriction site. The majority of these polymor-
phisms are of no consequence to the organism, but their 
detection with restriction enzymes has provided what 
was, until recently, the most important technique for ge-
netic mapping and linkage studies. Restriction fragment 
length polymorphisms (RFLPs) can be identified either 
by digestion of genomic DNA with the enzyme and sub-
sequent use of a probe to identify fragments separated 
by electrophoresis or by PCR amplification of the region 
surrounding the restriction site, followed by restriction 
digestion and direct visualization of fragments after elec-
trophoresis. A limitation of RFLP analysis is that the 
maximum polymorphism at any one site, can be no more 
than 50% (i.e. presence or absence of the site), and strate-
gies that use relatively small numbers of SNPs have now 
been largely superseded.
However, the use of SNPs for gene tracking has now 
come full circle as a consequence of the Human Genome 
Project and the production of a dense SNP map of the 
a/b
a/b
a/a
Family 1
?
a/b
a/a
a/b
Family 2
?
a/a
b/b
a/a
Family 3
?
c/d
e/f
c/f
Family 4
?
FIGURE  43.11  ■  Linkage analysis for a recessive condition. 
Linkage of alleles a, b, c, d, e and f is shown in four families. 
Half-shaded symbols represent heterozygotes for the condi-
tion. Fully shaded symbols refer to affected individuals and dia-
monds refer to a fetus for which diagnosis is requested.
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
859
human genome. This knowledge, combined with the de-
velopment of high-throughput microarray technology, 
means that it is possible to obtain SNP chips linked to 
large SNP databases; the use of large numbers of SNPs 
makes these chips more informative.
The discovery of hypervariable sequences in DNA 
consisting of a variable number of tandem repeats 
(VNTRs), with considerable polymorphism in the num-
ber of repeats, has found widespread application. Such 
sequences consist of short (10–60 base pairs) oligonucle-
otide sequences (‘minisatellites’) repeated 20–100 times, 
so that PCR amplification spanning the region (or exci-
sion of the region with a restriction enzyme) produces 
fragments which vary considerably in size in different 
individuals (Fig.  43.12B). The high degree of hetero-
zygosity makes these VNTR loci particularly informa-
tive and, since they are inherited in a simple Mendelian 
fashion, they can be used in just the same way as RFLP 
analysis. Detection of these repeat sequences can be 
used, for example for determining zygosity in twins.
Similar repetitive sequences, with around 10–60 cop-
ies of motifs consisting of 1–4 bases (short tandem repeats 
or ‘microsatellites’) have been identified more recently 
(Fig. 43.12C). Unlike minisatellites, which are frequently 
located near the ends of chromosomes, microsatellites are 
found scattered more evenly. One of the most common 
microsatellites, the (CA)n repeat (where n is roughly 15–
30), occurs on average every 30 000 bases. Polymorphism 
in the length of these sequences can be detected by PCR 
amplification and used to track mutant genes in families. 
Dinucleotide repeats such as AC may separate into two 
bands on electrophoresis because the AC strand migrates 
faster than TG. Because fainter bands, which are proba-
bly generated during amplification, may also be apparent, 
there are advantages to using microsatellites with tri- and 
tetranucleotide repeats that are less susceptible to these 
problems, though the latter occur considerably less fre-
quently in the genome.
Using a multilocus probe capable of hybridizing under 
low-stringency conditions to VNTR sites at several chro-
mosomal sites, digestion with restriction enzymes gives a 
characteristic profile for each individual. The technique 
of ‘DNA fingerprinting’ has found most widespread use 
in forensic studies (e.g. the identification or elimination 
of crime suspects using samples of blood or semen) and 
in proving or disproving family relationships in civil cases 
(e.g. confirmation of maternity or paternity).
Analysis of these repeat sequences can now be per-
formed quite straightforwardly by determining fragment 
length using capillary electrophoresis, a technique with 
greater accuracy than traditional gel based electrophoresis.
Next generation sequencing
One of the challenges in clinical genetics is the search for 
pathogenic mutations, where several genes may be impli-
cated in a disease, or a group of disorders, for example, 
the peripheral neuropathies, and the clinical phenotype 
does not necessarily point to any one gene as the prime 
suspect, or where a large pedigree needs to be searched 
for potential disease causing mutations where one has 
not yet been identified in any individual of that pedigree. 
Traditional methods would involve testing one gene, or 
gene locus, after another. It would, however, potentially 
be more useful to screen all of the likely candidates, from 
all the members of a pedigree on a single sequencing 
run. The new high throughput technologies collectively 
called ‘next generation’ (or ‘massively parallel’ or ‘deep’) 
sequencing may well be the answer to this diagnostic 
problem. Several different platforms have been devel-
oped, with different sequencing technologies, but all the 
systems employ roughly the same essential steps.
Step 1. Genomic DNA is fragmented using restriction 
enzymes.
Step 2. The fragments are enriched for the regions of 
interest.
Step 3. All the fragments are sequenced in parallel.
Step 4. The results are aligned with a reference se-
quence to search for any variants (which at this stage 
may number in the thousands).
Step 5. The bioinformatics step, comparing these vari-
ants to a polymorphism or SNP database (which 
may take the number down to the hundreds).
Step 6. Variant calling, to determine if the variants de-
tected are likely to be pathogenetic or not.
A  Restriction site polymorphism
B  Minisatellite polymorphism
Allele
a
b
c
d
e
f
C  Microsatellite polymorphism
Electrophoresis:
g
h
i
j
a
b
c
d
e
f
g
h
i
j
FIGURE  43.12  ■  Polymorphic markers used for linkage studies. 
(A) Alleles a and b are produced by polymorphism at a restric-
tion site; (B) c, d, e and f, by polymorphism in the number of 
repeats in a minisatellite; (C) g, h, i and j, by polymorphism in 
the number of repeats in a microsatellite. Electrophoresis of a 
produces two small fragments after digestion, while b is not 
cleaved and remains as one large fragment. Electrophoresis of 
alleles c–j detects different sizes of mini- and microsatellites, 
but the latter may be complicated by separation of the two DNA 
strands (see text).
860	
Clinical biochemistry
Another common feature of these new platforms is 
that none of them use traditional Sanger type sequencing 
using dNTPs. Some of the techniques include:
•	 pyrosequencing, which uses luciferase to gener-
ate light when each of the individual nucleotides is 
added to the new DNA, with the reactions happen-
ing inside water droplets suspended in oil (emulsion 
PCR)
•	 use of reversible dye-terminators. Each molecule of 
DNA is amplified as a clone and fluorescently la-
belled nucleotides allow identification of each nu-
cleotide as it is added before the dyes are removed 
prior to the next addition
•	 sequencing by ligation, whereby dye labelled oli-
gonucleotides of known sequence are annealed and 
ligated to clones of amplified DNA immobilized on 
beads or glass slides
•	 ion-semiconductor sequencing, where the termi-
nal incorporation of nucleotides uses traditional 
sequencing chemistry but detection of the incorpo-
rated nucleotides is achieved using a supersensitive 
ion sensor, essentially a form of pH meter, which 
detects the hydrogen ions released when each base 
is added, each cycle (taking only seconds) uses a dif-
ferent nucleotide but runs of the same nucleotide 
in the sequence will all be incorporated in the same 
cycle, giving a proportionally higher signal.
Even in the few years since the last edition of this 
book, both run (or ‘read’) times and cost per read have 
come down considerably, as has the size of the instru-
ments, with recent ones very definitely being bench top, 
so why is it that these new techniques cannot automati-
cally replace all the others currently in use? Over time, 
they may well do so, but at the moment the ability to 
sequence a whole genome or exome is not necessary for 
the detection of common pathogenic mutations in well 
characterized disorders, which tend to benefit from a tar-
geted approach.
THE APPLICATIONS OF DNA ANALYSIS
The clinical application of DNA analysis has grown enor-
mously since the first edition of this book, demonstrated 
by the increase, in both number and size, of molecular 
and clinical genetics departments in our hospitals.
Diagnosis of index cases
The very nature of inherited disease, with its implications 
for the families of affected individuals, means that most 
molecular testing now takes place in specialized genetics 
laboratories. These laboratories work closely with clini-
cal geneticists and genetic counsellors. Consequently, any 
clinical biochemistry laboratory undertaking molecular 
testing must be aware of the consequences of a positive 
diagnosis. However, diagnosis of inherited metabolic dis-
eases (e.g. amino acid and organic acid disorders) has, for 
many years, been undertaken in biochemistry laborato-
ries, and the initial diagnosis of an inherited disease is still 
usually based on clinical history, physical signs and non-
genetic laboratory tests. Confirmation of the diagnosis 
can then often be obtained by a specific enzyme assay 
or protein study, but such assays frequently require the 
use of cell cultures, with their accompanying problems. 
Consequently, in an increasing number of diseases, DNA 
testing is now used for the diagnosis of index cases. These 
are often diseases in which (a) partial or complete gene 
deletions, which are relatively easy to detect, are frequent 
(as in muscular dystrophy) or (b) the defective protein has 
not yet been characterized or where it is difficult to devise 
methods for direct analysis of the protein (as with cystic 
fibrosis). One other potential advantage of DNA tests for 
diagnosis of index cases is that mutant genes are usually 
present in all nucleated cells, so that in diseases in which 
expression of the gene is limited to organs such as liver or 
kidney, biopsy can be avoided.
In the use of DNA analysis for diagnosis in index cases, 
it is important that accurate and reliable data exist on the 
relationship between genotype and phenotype.
Prenatal diagnosis
Analysis of fetal DNA, often with a view to selective ter-
mination of an affected pregnancy, can be used to deter-
mine the presence of severe or potentially fatal genetic 
disease. Such testing is most likely to be carried out when 
the parents have previously had an affected child, when 
they have been identified as carriers, or when one of them 
is affected by a dominant condition.
Although fetal blood samples can be used to detect 
many inherited diseases – particularly those that affect 
proteins in red blood cells or plasma proteins – DNA 
analysis can be carried out without taking tissue sam-
ples from the fetus. In the earliest prenatal diagnoses 
of genetic disorders, amniotic fluid cells obtained by 
amniocentesis at 16–18  weeks of gestation were used. 
However, it is now more common to use chorionic vil-
lus sampling (CVS), carried out at 8–10  weeks (see 
Chapter 22). Potential problems with prenatal diagnosis 
are contamination with maternal DNA and – especially 
where linkage studies are being carried out – uncertainty 
concerning paternity. Analysis of mini- or microsatellites 
can help avoid both of these problems. Where the diag-
nosis relates to an X-linked recessive disorder, if the fetus 
is shown to be female, either by cytogenetic analysis or 
a specific molecular test for identifying the Y chromo-
some, no further CVS testing may be necessary, as the 
fetus will, at most, be a carrier and this can be deter-
mined once the child is born.
Use of PCR makes testing of individual cells pos-
sible, so that it is possible to test fertilized embryos and 
implant only those known to be unaffected by a par-
ticular disease. This procedure has been carried out suc-
cessfully with parents who are both heterozygotes for 
cystic fibrosis. The implications of this procedure are 
considerable, not least because many parents find se-
lective abortion an unacceptable means of avoiding af-
fected children. The use of such techniques for in vitro 
fertilization (IVF) is controlled, in the UK, by law, and 
is overseen by the Human Fertilisation and Embryology 
Authority.
A recent advance has been the ability to detect cell-
free, fetal DNA in the blood of the mother, bringing with 
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
861
it the possibility of testing the fetus for inherited disease 
without the need for invasive testing. Such testing does 
come with risks, mainly relating to avoiding contamina-
tion with the mother’s own DNA. However, where the 
fetus is male, looking for markers carried on the Y chro-
mosome only overcomes this problem. The use of DNA 
methylation ratios to separate fetal from maternal 
DNA has also been described. The use of fetal DNA in 
this way is very much in its early stages and is currently 
used primarily for determining fetal gender but is also 
being looked at as an alternative, and early, method of 
screening for Down syndrome.
Screening
The word ‘screening’ is used in various ways in medicine, 
and in the section on detection of mutations above, it was 
used in the context of examining a whole gene to find 
disease-causing mutations in patients with a clinical di-
agnosis of a genetic disease. In this section, the term is 
used in the context of testing healthy or presymptomatic 
individuals for molecular evidence of disease.
Screening of individuals
Screening can be ‘targeted’ in that individuals from fami-
lies with strong family histories of a disease (high risk) are 
included and it may involve presymptomatic or carrier 
(heterozygote) testing. Such screening is often applied 
to determining the risks of developing a particular form 
of cancer, for example as in breast cancer screening. For 
women with several close relatives with the disease, there 
is a targeted screening programme based on DNA anal-
ysis. Although familial breast cancer represents a small 
percentage of cases of the disease, screening high-risk 
individuals is effective and involves examining the entire 
BRCA1, BRCA2 and TP53 genes.
Population screening
Population screening involves making available to all, on 
an equitable basis, testing for certain diseases or condi-
tions. Examples of such programmes include antenatal 
screening for Down syndrome and those for cervical and 
breast cancer screening in women (not the same as the 
targeted testing described above). Currently, there are 
no such programmes that use DNA analysis in a primary 
testing strategy, although proposals have been made to 
use detection of fetal DNA in maternal serum for screen-
ing for Down syndrome, as mentioned above.
The criteria that must be satisfied for a success-
ful screening programme are the same, regardless of 
whether traditional chemical analysis or DNA techniques 
are used (or, indeed, imaging or cytological testing) and 
have changed little in recent decades. All screening pro-
grammes are fraught with ethical and organizational 
problems, but none of these is peculiar to the analytical 
technique employed. The importance of education and 
the provision of counselling services for the success of a 
screening programme have been repeatedly emphasized, 
but the obtaining of informed consent, the reliabil-
ity of methods (i.e. numbers of false positives and false 
negatives), prevalence of disease in the population and 
the existence of a clearly recognized advantage to pre-­
symptomatic diagnosis (e.g. the possibility of avoiding 
precipitating factors in the environment) must be con-
sidered. In the UK, such screening has, since 1996, been 
overseen by the National Screening Committee, which 
also advises the government on the relevant issues.
Newborn screening to detect affected individuals with 
phenylketonuria and congenital hypothyroidism has been 
widely performed for some years using conventional bio-
chemical tests on dried blood spots obtained by heel prick 
in the first two weeks of life. This scheme has now been 
extended to include testing for cystic fibrosis (see later 
section) haemoglobinopathies and medium chain acyl-
CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (MCADD). While DNA 
diagnostic tests can also be carried out on blood spots, the 
programme still uses biochemical tests as the ‘frontline’ 
screening test. DNA testing can be used to follow-up 
positive screening results but currently is still employed 
mainly to identify the mutation(s) present in the child, 
rather than confirmation of the diagnosis.
At the present time, there are no plans to use DNA 
testing for primary screening of newborn infants. There 
are several reasons why this is not appropriate yet. In 
many genetic diseases, there can be large numbers of 
disease-causing mutations that produce the same bio-
chemical (or haematological) effects. Similarly, not all 
mutations and variations in a gene will be pathogenic. 
Also, some mutations show variable penetrance or 
expressivity, so that whole gene screening, for example by 
sequencing, might create problems by identifying infants 
who have gene mutations but who will not necessarily de-
velop the disease being screened for. Currently, it is still 
more efficient to screen by testing for the gene products. 
However, as DNA arrays and microchips become more 
accessible and cost-effective, molecular screening may 
become more widespread, providing there are accurate 
data on the genotype/phenotype correlations.
Pharmacogenetics
An area of laboratory testing in which biochemistry 
laboratories may find themselves involved is that of 
pharmacogenetics. Pharmacogenetics is concerned with 
identifying genetic variations that affect an individual’s 
response to drugs. Initially, the term was used in re-
spect of variations in drug metabolizing enzymes, but 
it has now been expanded to include polymorphisms in 
drug receptor, drug transporter and ion channel genes. 
Pharmacogenomics, on the other hand, refers to the 
(generally commercial) application of genomic technol-
ogy in drug development and therapy. The two terms are 
often used interchangeably and there is some difference 
of opinion as to whether or not this is an acceptable prac-
tice. However, even though the differences may appear 
to be semantic, in general, pharmacogenomic studies in 
drug discovery regimes mainly aim to identify suitable 
drug targets and are concerned with multiple genes and 
phenotypes, whereas pharmacogenetics aims to identify 
variants in individual genes with the aim of ‘personal-
izing’ drug dosage and thus reducing adverse drug reac-
tions. These are responsible for high levels of therapeutic 
862	
Clinical biochemistry
morbidity and mortality worldwide every year, with an 
associated cost to the health services of millions of dol-
lars each year. Biochemical methods of identifying poor 
metabolizers (see below) are often cumbersome and de-
manding, using metabolic ratios that measure the rela-
tive concentrations of parent drug and metabolites in 
blood and urine.
The term ‘pharmacogenetics’, coined by Vogel in 
1959, was originally brought to prominence by Kalow 
in descriptions of the variation in response to the mus-
cle relaxant suxamethonium seen in patients with se-
rum cholinesterase (butyrylcholinesterase) deficiency. 
Another of the earlier described pharmacogenetic effects 
was that observed with the enzyme N-acetyltransferase 
2 (NAT2), where patients treated with the antitubercu-
losis drug isoniazid were found to show variation in the 
rate at which they metabolized the drug: they were ei-
ther slow, intermediate or rapid acetylators. The largest 
group of drug metabolizing enzymes is the cytochrome 
P450 (CYP P450) ‘superfamily’, which accounts for the 
metabolism of well in excess of 100 commonly used 
prescription and over-the-counter drugs. Of the large 
number of CYP P450 enzymes, six account for close to 
90% of the drugs metabolized by this family. Of these, 
CYP3A4/5 account for around 50% but the most exten-
sively characterized is CYP2D6, debrisoquine hydroxy-
lase, accounting for 30%. It is the metabolizing enzyme 
for a large number and wide variety of drugs includ-
ing antipsychotic, antiarrhythmic and antihypertensive 
drugs. Many drug metabolizing enzymes are now known 
to be highly polymorphic and many of them also demon-
strate codominant inheritance, such that heterozygotes 
for normal and certain variant alleles show intermedi-
ate phenotypes. Poor metabolizers can be affected in a 
variety of ways, depending on whether it is the parent 
drug or its metabolite that is the pharmacoactive moiety. 
Thus, poor metabolizers may suffer the adverse effects of 
overdosing on a standard drug dose if the parent drug is 
active, or a poor therapeutic response if the metabolite is 
active. In the case of CYP2D6, more than 75 polymor-
phisms have been identified so far, and the prevalence of 
poor metabolizers and the frequency of different caus-
ative alleles vary significantly in different geographic and 
ethnic groups. Thus, in Caucasians, poor metabolizer 
status is found in 5–10% of individuals and is caused in 
nearly 90% of those cases by one of just three variant 
alleles, CYP2D6
⁎3, CYP2D6
⁎4 and CYP2D6
⁎5. (By con-
vention, the commonest, or normal, allele of a gene is 
denoted as 
⁎1.) ‘Extensive metabolizer’ is the name given 
to individuals with an expected or normal response to a 
drug, and while these are mainly 
⁎1 homozygotes, some 
of the other alleles, such as the 
⁎2, also produce an exten-
sive metabolizer phenotype. Intermediate metabolizers 
are thought to represent heterozygotes with extensive 
and poor metabolizer alleles.
The molecular variation responsible for the different 
alleles includes not only simple changes such as SNPs, 
small deletions and insertions but also whole gene dele-
tions and duplications. The phenotypic effect of these 
differences can be on the concentration of enzyme pro-
duced or on its function, depending on the location of 
the polymorphism in the translated gene product. In the 
case of CYP2D6, a duplication of the 
⁎2 allele leads to an 
ultra-rapid metabolizer phenotype.
Other clinically important drug metabolizing en-
zymes include thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) 
and uridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 
(UGT1A1). Thiopurine S-methyltransferase is involved 
in the metabolism of the immunosuppressant azathio-
prine and the antileukaemia drug 6-mercaptopurine; 
biochemical testing for TPMT phenotype has been 
available for some time but the role of genotyping has 
yet to be firmly established. Variants of UGT1A1 are re-
sponsible for Gilbert syndrome (unconjugated hyperbili-
rubinaemia) and Crigler–Najjar disease but the enzyme 
is also involved in the metabolism of the anticancer drug, 
irinotecan, and prospective genotyping may be useful in 
the future for avoiding some of the side-effects that can 
occur during treatment with this drug.
With the identification of the genes and sequences for 
an increasing number of drug metabolizing enzymes, anal-
ysis using the new techniques for rapid, high-throughput 
DNA testing should allow early identification of many 
of the variants, thus allowing altered drug dosage prior 
to, or shortly after, therapy commences, and so avoiding 
dangerous and costly adverse drug reactions.
Inherited diseases – some examples
Single gene disorders
The diseases most often thought of as ‘genetic’ tend to 
be those that arise from mutations in a single gene. Some 
disorders may arise from mutations in any one of a col-
lection of genes related to a particular metabolic pathway, 
i.e. they may have monogenic causes but are not neces-
sarily single gene diseases.
α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
The function of α1-antitrypsin (α1AT) is to inhibit neutro-
phil elastase and other proteases. The rate of association 
between α1AT and elastase is rapid, but after cleavage at the 
reactive site (methionine at position 358) of α1AT by the 
elastase, the molecule undergoes a radical change in struc-
ture that prevents dissociation of the elastase, thus inacti-
vating it. The gene coding for α1AT (the protease inhibitor 
or PI gene) spans 12 200 bases and is transcribed into a 
protein with a single chain of 394 amino acids.
α1-antitrypsin displays considerable polymorphism, 
with around 75 alleles having been detected so far. The 
variants are inherited in an autosomal codominant fash-
ion, so that both alleles are expressed independently and 
can be detected in serum. Many of the variants, which 
are identified by letters of the alphabet depending on 
their electrophoretic mobility, function normally. The 
Z variant is of greatest clinical significance. In northern 
Europeans, around 5.3% of the population are carriers 
(i.e. are MZ heterozygotes) and about 1 in 2000 live births 
are ZZ homozygotes. Although deficiency can usually be 
detected by quantitation of serum α1AT, phenotyping by 
isoelectric focusing is more informative and reliable.
Secretion of α1AT, which is synthesized in the liver, 
is markedly reduced in ZZ homozygotes because the 
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
863
mutant protein forms insoluble polymers, which accumu-
late in the endoplasmic reticulum of hepatocytes. The Z 
variant results from a point mutation converting a lysine 
residue in normal (M) protein to a glutamic acid one at 
position 342, which is at the base of the reactive centre 
loop. Juvenile cirrhosis occurs in 3–10% of ZZ homozy-
gotes as a result of damage caused by the intracellular ag-
gregates, though a much higher percentage are affected if 
a sibling has liver disease. The reasons for the incomplete 
penetrance of this condition are not known: intrauterine 
infection, gut-derived proteases, autoimmunity, fever and 
subclinical hepatitis have been suggested as possible ex-
acerbating factors. Additional genetic factors, possibly 
in chaperone proteins responsible for directing mis-
folded protein to the secretory pathway, or other pro-
teins ­involved in α1AT clearance have also been suggested.
Although other protease inhibitors are present in the 
lungs, α1AT contributes over 90% of the inhibitory ac-
tivity capable of blocking neutrophil elastase. In the absence 
of α1AT, neutrophil elastase rapidly degrades tissue matrix 
components in the lung so that individuals with a mark-
edly reduced plasma concentration of α1AT are prone to 
develop emphysema. As a result of reduced hepatic secre-
tion of α1AT, the plasma concentration of this protein 
is reduced to about 15% of normal in ZZ individuals. 
Not all of these individuals are affected by disease, but 
60–70% of ZZ homozygotes who smoke cigarettes develop 
pulmonary emphysema in the third or fourth decade of life. 
Smoking compromises the defences of the lung further be-
cause free radicals in cigarette smoke oxidize methionine at 
the reactive site of α1AT, drastically lowering its ability to 
inhibit neutrophil elastase.
Of the other mutations affecting the α1AT gene, the S 
mutation (changing the glutamic acid at position 264 to 
valine) is more common than Z, with an allele frequency 
of 2–4% in northern Europeans, but the consequences 
are less serious. Although some degradation of the S vari-
ant occurs in the liver and the serum α1AT concentration 
is reduced, S homozygotes are not considered to be at in-
creased risk of liver or lung disease, although inheritance 
of the S allele with an allele causing severe deficiency 
(such as Z) confers a mild risk of emphysema. A number 
of other rare mutations (including the ‘null’ mutation) are 
associated with a decrease in plasma α1AT activity to a 
level that confers a risk of emphysema, and some others 
are characterized by accumulation of mutant protein in 
hepatocytes.
DNA-based techniques for identification of muta-
tions in the PI gene complement phenotypic studies. 
Prenatal diagnosis is possible in juvenile cirrhosis fami-
lies, where the causative mutation can be detected in the 
index case. DNA sequencing is the gold standard for de-
tecting small deletions and point mutations, and this is 
readily available owing to the relatively small size of the 
gene. Various SNP detection techniques have also been 
developed for common mutations (e.g. Z and S), which 
have the potential to be used in screening programmes. 
While screening for this condition has been advocated, 
it has not been taken up widely owing to concerns re-
garding the variable penetrance of the condition, and the 
limited efficacy of interventions such as advice on smok-
ing cessation.
Cystic fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis is inherited in an autosomal recessive man-
ner. The homozygous condition is associated with defec-
tive exocrine secretion and consequent malabsorption 
with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. The disease 
has a prevalence of about 1 in 2500 live births in north-
ern Europe and a carrier frequency of 1 in 25, though 
it is much less common in other populations. For many 
years, laboratory diagnosis relied on the demonstration of 
raised chloride (and, optionally, sodium) concentrations 
in sweat. About 77% of affected individuals can be iden-
tified using the sweat test at two years of age and about 
95% at 12  years. The test is far from ideal, because it 
is technically difficult to perform; not all patients with 
compatible clinical features have a raised sweat chloride 
and some individuals with a raised sweat chloride have 
no clinical features of cystic fibrosis. In one report, up 
to 40% of patients referred to cystic fibrosis centres had 
been wrongly diagnosed because of false positive or false 
negative sweat tests. Serum immunoreactive trypsin 
concentrations tend to be higher in affected newborns, 
forming the basis of a UK screening programme that can 
detect at least 95% of cases.
The gene affected in cystic fibrosis was mapped to 
7q31 using linkage analysis. The gene itself was cloned 
in 1989 and named the cystic fibrosis transmembrane 
conductance regulator (CFTR). It has a size of approxi-
mately 250 kb with 27 exons and the CFTR protein is 
1480 amino acids with a molecular weight of 168 kDa. 
The primary role of the CFTR protein is to form a 
chloride channel that reduces intracellular chloride. It 
appears to consist of two transmembrane domains, two 
ATP binding regions or nucleotide binding folds, and a 
regulatory domain. Phosphorylation of the regulatory 
domain by protein kinase A results in the opening of the 
chloride channel.
Over 1500 pathogenic mutations have been identi-
fied in the CFTR gene, although the great majority of 
them are extremely rare. The mutations include frame-
shift, nonsense, missense and splice site mutations and 
deletions. However, the commonest, and the first to be 
identified, is a 3-bp deletion in exon 10 of the CFTR 
gene that results in the loss of a phenylalanine codon 
at position 508. This mutation, Phe508del (Phe being 
the three letter code for phenylalanine and ‘del’ repre-
sents a deletion) represents around 70% of cases of cys-
tic fibrosis. The frequency of this mutation in different 
populations varies markedly, however, and in Europe its 
frequency increases along a South East to North West 
gradient.
Detection of several cystic fibrosis mutations by mul-
tiplex PCR can be performed simultaneously using an 
ARMS assay (Fig.  43.13). In this assay, the common 
Phe508del mutation is detected together with 28 or 32 
other mutations, depending on the kit manufacturer (e.g. 
the mutation causing substitution of Gly-551 by aspar-
tic acid (Gly551Asp), another that converts Gly-542 to 
a stop codon (Gly542X) and a splice site mutation sub-
stituting T for G immediately after the last nucleotide 
in exon 4 (621 + 1G > T)), but chosen to be appropri-
ate for the local population. This strategy will, for most 
864	
Clinical biochemistry
populations, identify the mutation responsible in more 
than 80% of cases. If the front-line test fails to reveal the 
mutation, additional mutations of progressively lower 
frequency are tested for and, ultimately, a full gene se-
quence may be the only way to identify a rare or new 
mutation.
Muscular dystrophy
Duchenne muscular dystrophy, one of the most common 
X-linked diseases (prevalence about 1 in 3000 live male 
births), results from mutations in the dystrophin gene and 
is characterized by progressive proximal muscle weakness 
in early childhood. Rarely, females can be affected, usu-
ally as a result of X-autosome translocations or skewed 
X inactivation. Symptoms are also apparent in 2–3% of 
female carriers (‘manifesting carriers’) caused by a non-
random X inactivation. The diagnosis of this condition is 
often beyond doubt clinically, but confirmation is usually 
required because of its gravity. Plasma creatine kinase ac-
tivity is markedly raised (often to 50–100 times normal), 
providing a useful confirmatory test. Becker muscular 
dystrophy, a less severe condition with onset in late child-
hood (affecting about 1 in 30 000 newborn males), is an 
allelic disorder, that is, it also results from mutations in 
the dystrophin gene.
The dystrophin gene was discovered in 1986 and 
turned out to be an unusually large gene, currently 
the largest known gene in man, spread over around 
2.5 million bases. The size of the gene may be one of 
the reasons why it is particularly prone to new muta-
tions: it has been calculated that a third of all cases of 
Becker muscular dystrophy arise from new mutations. 
Although at least 99% of the dystrophin gene is ac-
counted for by introns, there are nevertheless 79 exons 
coding for a mRNA of 14 000 bases. The dystrophin 
protein has a molecular weight of about 400 000 kDa 
and it is expressed primarily in muscle cells. Dystrophin 
is normally localized to the inner surface of muscle 
cell sarcolemma and it is tightly linked with an oligo-
meric complex of glycoproteins that provides a linkage 
between the cytoskeleton and the extracellular matrix. 
When muscle biopsies of patients have been examined, it 
has been found that dystrophin is undetectable in patients 
with Duchenne muscular dystrophy, and present, altered 
in size or quantity, in patients with Becker muscular 
dystrophy.
In many patients (about 60%), the mutations causing 
disease are deletions or, less commonly (5%), duplications 
of exons. The remaining 30–35% are point mutations. 
Although the situation is undoubtedly more complex, in 
many cases it appears that Duchenne muscular dystro-
phy results from mutations that cause frameshifts, while 
the mutations causing Becker muscular dystrophy tend 
to be in-frame. Molecular diagnosis of muscular dys-
trophy has advanced considerably with the invention of 
PCR and its subsequent developments. Initially, diagno-
sis relied on RFLP linkage and cDNA probe analysis by 
Southern blotting. This technique was cumbersome and 
not always successful in identifying the disease muta-
tion. An early use of PCR to detect deletions is shown 
in Figure 43.14, where ten pairs of primers were used to 
scan the whole dystrophin cDNA, allowing identifica-
tion of some 65% of affected individuals. This was fol-
lowed by the use of multiplex PCR, where deletions were 
detected by the failure of deleted exons to amplify in the 
reaction. Multiplex PCR has now been superseded as a 
front-line test by a technique called multiplex ligation-
dependent probe amplification (MLPA). This technique 
involves the amplification of specifically hybridized 
FIGURE 43.13  ■  Simultaneous detection of the common mutations 
in the cystic fibrosis gene by ARMS analysis. Bands P1, P2, P3 and 
P4 represent the product amplified using primers complementary 
to the sequences spanning the 621 + 1G > T, G551D, G542X and 
F508del mutation sites, respectively. Two reactions are carried 
out on DNA from each individual. In A lanes, P1 and P4 primers 
are complementary to the normal sequence, while P2 and P3 are 
complementary to the mutant sequences. In B lanes, P1 and P4 
primers are complementary to mutant sequences while P2 and 
P3 primers are complementary to normal sequence. Thus, the 
mother is a carrier for the F508del mutation and the father is a 
carrier for the G542X mutation. The fetus has inherited both dele-
terious mutations (i.e. is a compound heterozygote). Adapted from 
Ferrie R M, Schwartz M J, Robertson N H et al. 1992 Development, 
multiplexing, and application of ARMS tests for common mutations in 
the CFTR gene. American Journal of Human Genetics 51: 251–262, 
with permission.
FIGURE 43.14  ■  PCR analysis to detect deletions in the dystro-
phin gene. Using PCR amplification to amplify the cDNA span-
ning exons 43–51, the mother is shown to be a heterozygote for 
the normal allele (band of 1227 bp) and a mutant allele (band 
of 670 bp) with a deletion of exons 45–48. The father is homo-
zygous for the normal allele but the son expresses only the 
mutant allele. His sister, like their mother, is a heterozygote. 
Adapted from Roberts R G, Bentley D R, Barby TF et al. 1990 Direct 
diagnosis of carriers of Duchenne and Becker muscular dystrophy 
by amplification of lymphocyte RNA. Lancet 336: 1523–1526, with 
permission.
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
865
probes and enables the rapid identification of a deletion 
or duplication of any of the 79 exons in the dystrophin 
gene. It is particularly effective in determining the car-
rier status of females and has been used to identify the 
defect in families who appeared to be normal by earlier 
techniques. A series of characteristic ‘printouts’ is shown 
in Figure 43.15. It is also possible to detect point mis-
match. In families in which the defect in one allele is not 
due to deletion, either multiplex PCR or RFLP analy-
sis can be used for prenatal diagnosis. Multiplex PCR 
can also be carried out on dried blood spots for neona-
tal screening. However, in the absence of any effective 
treatment, this will not benefit the child being screened. 
Any advantage conferred by the opportunity for counsel-
ling to avoid further affected children must be balanced 
against the effect on the parents of having to explain to 
their son that he has a fatal illness, and, indeed, the effect 
of this knowledge on the child himself.
Huntington disease
In Huntington disease, progressive chorea (irregular 
involuntary movements) and dementia lead to death on 
average 17 years after the onset of symptoms. The condi-
tion is autosomal dominant with a prevalence in the UK 
of 3–7 per 100 000. The trait shows complete penetrance, 
but age-dependent expressivity: only 10% of affected in-
dividuals have symptoms by 30 years, but this proportion 
reaches 95% by 70 years. Thus, most individuals who are 
at risk reach the age at which they may wish to have chil-
dren without knowing whether or not they will develop 
the disease.
As a result of exhaustive research by several groups, the 
genetic defect causing Huntington disease was first lo-
cated on chromosome 4; the gene (named ITI5) has since 
been pinpointed to 4p16. Inheritance of many disorders, 
including fragile X syndrome, myotonic dystrophy and 
spino-bulbar-muscular atrophy (Kennedy disease), is 
linked to a mechanism in which increasing expansion of 
triplet repeats eventually leads to disease. Huntington 
disease is caused by this type of mutation, with expansion 
of a CAG repeat in exon 1. The variable age of onset and 
severity of the disease correlates with the extent to which 
the CAG repeat has been expanded. Normal alleles con-
tain up to 26 repeats, are stable and not associated with 
disease, while disease genes contain more than 39 repeats. 
Those with 27–35 repeats have the potential either to de-
crease or to expand and thus become disease alleles: they 
are ‘mutable’. Alleles with 36–38 repeats show reduced 
penetrance with some heterozygotes never developing 
symptoms. Disease-associated alleles containing more 
than 39 repeats are prone to large increases in repeats 
from one generation to the next, which results in a phe-
nomenon called anticipation, where symptoms develop at 
a younger age.
Before the identification of the mutation, presymp-
tomatic diagnosis using RFLP analysis and linkage 
studies was performed with a probability that de-
pended on the number and informativeness of family 
members who could be tested. Not only did this tech-
nique leave a degree of uncertainty over the diagno-
sis, but diagnosis of one individual might depend on 
analysis of samples from other members of the family 
who did not wish to be tested. This technique is now 
used only rarely and the diagnosis is now made using 
PCR analysis to measure directly the size of the CAG 
repeat region.
The ability to identify patients with Huntington 
disease many years before symptoms become apparent 
raises some of the ethical problems of DNA testing in 
A
B
C
D
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Normalized dosage
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Normalized dosage
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Normalized dosage
1.8
1.6
1.4
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
Normalized dosage
FIGURE 43.15  ■  Results of MLPA analysis of the dystrophin gene showing normalized ratios of the hybridization signal: (A) is from a 
normal individual; (B) shows deleted exons in a female carrier; (C) shows deleted exons in an affected male and (D) shows duplicated 
exons in an affected male. In (B) (C) and (D) the affected exons are contiguous in the gene but not in the readout. Courtesy of the 
Bristol Genetics Laboratory, North Bristol NHS Trust.
866	
Clinical biochemistry
their most acute form. Potential psychological prob-
lems for individuals without symptoms knowing that 
they have a fatal disease must be considered and appro-
priate counselling provided. The risk of stigmatization, 
with difficulties in employment and obtaining insur-
ance, makes absolute confidentiality of results crucial. 
The fact that the disease is transmitted in a dominant 
fashion also raises issues where members of one gen-
eration wish to be tested but those of another do not, 
as a positive result in a child almost certainly implies a 
positive result in the parent (depending on the repeat 
number). Consequently, in the UK at least, predictive 
testing is only undertaken using a robust protocol in-
volving close working between clinical genetics and 
laboratory genetics teams.
Multifactorial and polygenic disease
While much progress has been made in understanding 
single gene disorders, and developing techniques for 
their diagnosis, such diseases are still rare in most popu-
lations. The current challenge lies in understanding 
those common diseases that have a polygenic or a multi­
factorial basis. Where a disease or disorder arises from 
mutations in a small number of genes, each of which 
contributes, it can be said to be polygenic. Diseases 
where the role of genetic factors is combined with en-
vironmental triggers can be thought of as multifacto-
rial. However, in reality, conditions such as diabetes and 
essential hypertension, which affect millions of people 
worldwide, can be both and remain the focus of a lot of 
current investigation.
Atherosclerosis
Atherosclerosis is one such multifactorial disease and the 
recognition of a correlation between plasma cholesterol 
concentration and coronary artery disease has provided the 
background for genetic studies of several candidate genes. 
(A search for atherosclerosis on the Online Mendelian 
Inheritance in Man (OMIM) website gives more than 
200 ‘hits’.) Environmental factors such as diet are clearly 
important for determining plasma cholesterol concentra-
tions, but it has been estimated that at least 50% of the 
population variance of cholesterol concentration has a 
genetic basis, with only a small group being monogenic 
(requiring no, or virtually no, environmental triggers for 
their expression). Transport of lipids between tissues is a 
complex process involving formation, modification and 
clearance of lipoprotein particles (see Chapter 37). The 
plasma concentration of one of these particles, low density 
lipoprotein (LDL), is positively correlated with the risk 
of atherosclerosis. LDL particles consist predominantly 
of cholesteryl esters and an apolipoprotein (apoB), and 
their removal from plasma depends on binding of apoB 
to a specific cell surface receptor (the LDL receptor). 
Abnormalities in both the apoB and the LDL receptor 
genes have been shown to affect clearance of LDL, both 
resulting in elevated plasma cholesterol concentrations 
with greater elevations caused by abnormalities of the 
LDL receptor than of apoB.
Familial hypercholesterolaemia
Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) is a dominant dis-
order affecting about 1 in 500 individuals and which 
accounts for around 5% of individuals with clinically 
evident atherosclerosis. In the UK, the most recent 
guidance from the National Institute for Care and 
Excellence (NICE), Clinical Guideline 71, and the sub-
sequent Diagnostics Guidance published in 2011, rec-
ommends that a diagnosis of FH should be made based 
on the Simon Broome criteria, which include DNA-
based as well as clinical/biochemistry criteria, and that 
those with a clinical diagnosis should be offered a DNA 
test. Of the mutations associated with FH approxi-
mately 93% are in the LDL receptor gene (LDLR). It 
is, however, a heterogeneous condition and mutations 
in the genes for apoB, proprotein convertase subtilisin/
kexin type 9 (PCSK9) and LDL receptor-associated 
protein (LDLRAP) are now known also to cause it (see 
Chapter 37).
The LDL receptor gene is located on chromosome 19, 
spans 45 kilobases and codes for a protein of 839 amino 
acids. More than 400 mutations, many of which are dele-
tions, have been identified. These mutations can be di-
vided into five main classes:
1.	 ‘null’ alleles that produce no protein
2.	 mutations that block transport of the newly synthe-
sized receptor from the endoplasmic reticulum to 
the Golgi apparatus
3.	 mutations that prevent the binding of LDL at the 
cell membrane
4.	 mutations producing receptors that can bind but 
cannot internalize LDL
5.	 mutations producing receptors that cannot release 
LDL following internalization and so are not re-
cycled back to the cell surface – receptors must be 
freshly synthesized.
The apoB gene (APOB) is located at chromosome 
2p24 and codes for a protein of 4536 amino acids. 
Apolipoprotein B-100, the full-size protein that is found 
in LDL, is produced by the liver while a smaller protein, 
apo B-48, is produced in the intestine by a unique tissue-
specific process that introduces a stop codon into the 
mRNA. Familial defective apoB-100 is a dominant dis-
order, with a frequency of around 1 in 800 in the general 
population. Unlike deficiency in the LDL receptor, it is 
a much more homogeneous condition. Most cases result 
from one mutation, a SNP affecting codon 3500, which 
decreases the affinity of apo B-100 for the LDL receptor. 
Mutations in APOB account for around 1.5% of FH cases.
The third gene for which the NICE Diagnostics 
Guidance now also recommends testing is PCSK9, which 
encodes proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9. 
This protein is involved in degradation of the LDL re-
ceptor. A gain of function mutation of PCSK9 results in 
a reduction in the number of LDL receptors at the cell 
surface, thus reducing LDL uptake into cells and leading 
to increased circulating cholesterol. There remains some 
uncertainty as to the percentage of cases attributable to 
PCSK9 mutations.
FH, arising from mutations in the three genes de-
scribed above is inherited in autosomal dominant fashion 
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
867
but a very small percentage (<1%) show an autosomal 
recessive mode of inheritance. Mutations in the LDLRAP 
gene (previously referred to as the autosomal recessive 
hypercholesterolaemia gene, ARH) are one of the causes 
of this rarer form of LH. Patients with ARH have a nor-
mal LDL receptor but the receptor associated protein, 
encoded by LDLRAP, fails to mediate internalization of 
the receptor in the usual way.
Apolipoprotein E genotypes
Apolipoprotein E (apo E) mediates clearance of two 
other classes of lipoprotein particle (chylomicron rem-
nants and intermediate density lipoprotein, IDL) by 
binding to the remnant receptor (IDL can also bind to 
the LDL receptor). There are three common apoE iso-
forms, E2, E3 and E4, characterized by different elec-
trophoretic mobilities, with frequencies of 10, 30 and 
60% respectively. The E4 variant is associated with in-
creased cholesterol concentrations in comparison with 
those associated with E3, while E2 is associated with 
lower concentrations. Familial dysbetalipoproteinaemia 
(remnant, or type III, hyperlipidaemia) is associated with 
the E2/2 phenotype, but although almost all individuals 
with the condition are E2 homozygotes, the genotype 
shows poor penetrance so that most E2 homozygotes 
do not manifest the disorder, and other factors in addi-
tion to the E2 allele are clearly involved in expression 
of disease.
It has been estimated that about 7% of the variance in 
plasma cholesterol LDL concentrations found in popula-
tions can be accounted for by recognized mutations in the 
apo B, LDL receptor and apo E genes. Other candidate 
genes that may eventually prove to be involved in the com-
plex process of atherosclerosis include those involved in 
cholesterol absorption, intracellular cholesterol metabo-
lism, haemostasis and fibrinolysis. Angiotensin-converting-
enzyme (ACE) regulates the concentrations of factors 
(angiotensin II and bradykinin) that are involved in modu-
lation of vascular tone and proliferation of smooth muscle 
cells, and some recent results suggest that a polymorphism 
in this candidate gene is a risk factor for atherosclero-
sis. Two polymorphic forms of ACE have been described 
called the I (insertion) and D (deleted) forms, arising from 
the presence or absence of a 287 bp sequence in the gene. 
Individuals homozygous for the D form have been shown 
to be at increased risk of atherosclerosis, particularly those 
considered to be at low risk from other criteria.
Cancer genetics
Cancer can be considered to be a genetic disease. This 
is because it arises either from somatic mutations in cells 
that then become cancerous or from inherited germline 
mutations that lead to a predisposition to the disease, al-
though cancers arising from a single gene defect account 
for fewer than 5% of cases. The genetic component is 
often triggered by environmental or behavioural factors 
(such as cigarette smoking, which increases the risk of de-
veloping lung cancer) and it is now clear that cancer is the 
end-point of an accumulation of somatic and germline 
mutations, most notably in proto-oncogenes and tumour 
suppressor genes.
Oncogenes and suppressor genes
The oncogenes were first identified as genes in retrovi-
ruses capable of producing tumours in birds and rodents. 
The first of these genes was identified in 1973, when a 
single gene (src) of the Rous sarcoma virus was shown to 
be capable of producing sarcomas in chickens. Later, it was 
shown that precursors to oncogenes, the proto-oncogenes 
or cellular oncogenes, were present in normal cells and 
that viral oncogenes were copies of these normal genes 
that had become incorporated into the retroviral ge-
nome. These viral oncogenes are able to transform in-
fected cells once activated in some way.
Although it is now known that viruses do not cause 
most of the common cancers in humans and most of 
the oncogenes detected in this way (including src) are 
not of prime importance in human cancer, work with 
viral oncogenes made possible the rapid advances in 
understanding of human tumours that are now taking 
place. The isolation of human oncogenes was facili-
tated by the development of transfection techniques, 
in which DNA isolated from tumours can be tested for 
ability to transform cultured cells to a cancerous phe-
notype. Mechanisms for activation of proto-oncogenes 
include:
•	 chromosomal translocations so that the oncogene 
comes under the influence of regulatory elements 
from other genes
•	 amplification of a region of DNA including the 
oncogene
•	 point mutations that confer constitutive activity on 
the gene product.
Because the activation of only one allele is sufficient 
for transforming activity, oncogene mutations are gener-
ally dominant.
More than 50 cellular oncogenes have now been iden-
tified; the proteins they code for are mostly involved at 
some stage in the cascade of events associated with stim-
ulation of cell division by growth factors. Thus, the sis 
protein is a mutated form of the platelet derived growth 
factor (PDGF); erbB codes for a truncated form of the 
epidermal growth factor (EGF) receptor; erbA codes for 
a mutant form of the thyroid hormone receptor; ras (a 
GTP-binding protein related to the hormone receptor G 
proteins) is a transducer of growth factor responses, and 
the jun and fos oncogenes mediate growth factor-induced 
gene expression. Oncogenes such as mos have been linked 
to factors that control the cell cycle.
In normal cells, the growth-promoting effects of 
proto-oncogenes are thought to be balanced by growth-
constraining suppressor genes (tumour suppressor genes). 
Early evidence for the existence of such genes came from 
experiments in which fusion of tumour cells with normal 
cells resulted in hybrids with properties of normal cells. 
These experiments were interpreted as evidence for a 
­tumour-suppressing gene in normal cells whose activity 
had been lost in tumour cells. Retinoblastoma, a rare form 
of eye tumour occurring in children, was later shown to 
result from loss of both copies of a gene (RB) located in 
868	
Clinical biochemistry
the q14 band of chromosome 13. In familial retinoblastoma 
(around 40% of cases), a defect in one RB allele is inherited, 
so that tumours arise in cells in which the remaining (nor-
mal) allele is lost. In the remaining 60% of cases (sporadic 
cases), both alleles in the tumour founder cell have under-
gone somatic mutation. This is the two-hit hypothesis of 
Knudson, who proposed that the disease followed two-hit 
kinetics but that, in familial cases, the first ‘hit’ is inherited, 
that is, is a germline mutation, and the second is somatic.
Most cancers do not follow the retinoblastoma para-
digm in such a straightforward manner, but one that does 
is neurofibromatosis type 1, associated with tumours de-
rived from the embryonic neural crest and caused by a 
defect in the NF-1 gene located in the 17q11.2 chromo-
somal region. As with retinoblastoma, predisposition can 
be inherited from an affected parent as a germline muta-
tion and tumour formation is initiated in cells that lose 
the activity of the remaining normal allele. The effects 
of suppressor gene mutations are usually only apparent 
when both alleles are inactivated, so that most of these 
genes behave in a recessive manner.
The majority of tumours that lack a functional sup-
pressor gene (such as NF-1 or RB) are found to have two 
identical mutant alleles. Elimination of the normal alleles 
is thought to occur in these cases by mechanisms such as 
chromosomal non-disjunction or gene conversion, which 
replace the normal allele with a copy of the mutant al-
lele at high frequency (10
−3–10
−4 per cell generation). By 
looking for evidence of this process, suppressor genes 
have been identified through demonstrating ‘loss of het-
erozygosity’ at specific chromosomal sites. Anonymous, 
highly polymorphic, DNA markers that identify hetero-
zygous sites in normal tissue were used to demonstrate 
reduction to homozygosity in tumours, indicating loss of 
one or more alleles (Fig. 43.16), although this approach is 
not without pitfalls. However, the development of DNA 
arrays has been useful in demonstrating the possible loca-
tion of tumour suppressor genes specific for different tu-
mour types against the general background of non-specific 
ones. One pitfall is that simple loss of heterozygosity is 
not the only molecular abnormality in tumours; many 
demonstrate multiple structural abnormalities and some 
of the observed losses may be due to deficient DNA repair 
mechanisms or to chromosomal instability rather than 
the selective loss of a tumour suppressor gene. One likely 
mechanism for inactivation of tumour suppressor genes 
involves methylation of specific CpG dinucleotides in tu-
mour suppressor gene promoters. In some cases, meth-
ylation may be an alternative to point mutation, whereas 
in others it appears to be the only mechanism for loss of 
function.
One of the most studied tumour suppressor genes is 
TP53 (which encodes the transcription factor p53), the 
loss of which is a major contributor to genomic instability 
and is possibly the commonest single genetic change seen 
in cancer. The function of p53 appears to be related to 
apoptosis (programmed cell death) so that – unlike normal 
cells – any cell with a defective p53 protein is more likely 
to proliferate despite the acquisition of mutations. Defects 
in this gene, which is located at 17p12, can be from mu-
tation or deletion, and p53 can be eliminated by inhibi-
tive action of other gene products such as that of MDM2. 
Inherited mutations of TP53 are found in Li–Fraumeni 
syndrome, a dominantly inherited condition in which suf-
ferers demonstrate multiple primary tumours, and are also 
implicated in some familial breast and colon cancers.
Another mechanism whereby suppressor genes func-
tion is illustrated by the ‘deleted in colonic carcinoma’ 
(DCC) gene, identified initially by loss of heterozygos-
ity in the long arm of chromosome 18, which occurs in 
over 70% of colonic carcinomas. Sequencing of this gene 
showed that it encodes a 190 kDa protein with properties 
that suggest that it might be a transmembrane molecule 
that binds cells to the extracellular matrix or basement 
membranes.
The protein encoded by RB (pRB) has been shown to 
form a complex with the oncoproteins produced by the 
adenovirus SV40 and the human papillomavirus, sug-
gesting that the ability of these viruses to form tumours 
results from their ability to inactivate RB. During the cell 
cycle, pRB switches from hyperphosphorylated to rela-
tively unphosphorylated forms, so that pRB is likely to be 
involved in regulating the cell cycle.
In solid tumours, full malignancy requires acquisi-
tion of the ability to metastasize. The processes involved 
include changes in adhesion molecules, proteases and 
angiogenic factors. Little is known about the genetic 
changes that activate these processes, but it may be a side-
effect of the overall genomic disarray seen in the cells of 
advanced tumours.
It has been recognized for many years that tumour cells 
become increasingly genetically unstable, accumulating 
mutations more rapidly as the tumours grow. Genetic 
changes, which may be acquired or inherited, can play 
FIGURE 43.16  ■  Loss of heterozygosity in tumours. Electrophoretic 
separation of digested total genomic DNA and detection of an 
allele on chromosome 5 with a single-locus probe in normal tis-
sue (N) and tumour (T) of two patients with colorectal tumours. 
In both cases, the probe detects the alleles on DNA fragments 
of different size in normal tissue, demonstrating heterozyg­osity. 
Loss of heterozygosity in tumour tissue is demonstrated by dis-
appearance of one allele. Adapted from Solomon E, Voss R, Hall V 
et al. 1987 Chromosome 5 allele loss in human colorectal carcino-
mas. Nature 328: 616–619, with permission.
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
869
a critical role in tumour progression by influencing mu-
tation rates rather than growth regulation. Genes with 
this type of function are well illustrated by xeroderma 
pigmentosum, a rare autosomal recessive disease caused 
by defects in nucleotide excision DNA repair. Sufferers 
are extremely sensitive to ultraviolet light so that skin 
exposed to sunlight develops large numbers of freckles, 
which often progress to skin cancer as the damage caused 
by the sun cannot be repaired.
The early emphasis of research on genetic changes in 
cancer has been on understanding the mechanisms by 
which oncogenes and suppressor gene abnormalities can 
bring about transformation of a normal cell. The knowl-
edge obtained thus far is now leading to progress in pre-
symptomatic detection of tumours, and of identification 
of high-risk individuals, as well as in their diagnosis and 
treatment. This is demonstrated by the breast cancer 
screening programme for women at high risk of devel-
oping the familial form of disease. Sequence screening 
of the entire BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes in high-risk in-
dividuals (around 5% of cases) has close to 100% sen-
sitivity, thus allowing prophylactic mastectomy when 
individuals are shown to have inherited the abnormal 
gene but, significantly, permitting reassurance for those 
women who have not. Testing regimens for other forms 
of cancer, for example bladder cancer, are being devel-
oped based on the fact that tumours shed cells. Sensitive 
PCR techniques can amplify the DNA of tumour cells 
shed into urine, blood and faeces, which can then be 
examined for SNPs (possibly using high-density ar-
rays), loss of heterozygosity and microsatellite instabil-
ity in characteristic tumour suppressor and oncogenes. 
Although not in routine use, such systems, as well as 
being useful for early detection of tumours, are likely to 
be valuable for monitoring possible disease recurrence.
The focus of clinical cancer genetics is now not only 
development of screening programmes capable of detect-
ing tumours at earlier stages, but on the determination 
of whether or not the tumours are malignant, and how 
responsive they are likely to be to treatment. Studies on 
colorectal tumours have shown that formation of malig-
nant tumours requires mutations in at least four or five 
genes, but that fewer changes are present in benign tu-
mours. Work on glioblastoma tumours has shown that 
the degree of methylation in the O
6-methylguanine DNA 
methyltransferase (MGMT) gene can predict response 
to chemotherapy. O
6-methylguanine DNA methyltrans-
ferase is a DNA repair enzyme that removes toxic alkyl 
groups from the O
6 position of guanine. Epigenetic silenc-
ing of MGMT by promoter CpG methylation has been 
associated with longer overall survival in patients with 
glioblastoma who, in addition to radiotherapy, received 
alkylating chemotherapy with an alkylating agent such as 
temozolomide. High levels of MGMT activity in cancer 
cells create a resistant phenotype by reducing the efficacy 
of alkylating chemotherapy.
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN)
Not all ‘cancers’ or neoplasms are malignant, and some 
have both benign and malignant forms, a fact demon-
strated by the MEN group of disorders (see Chapter 41). 
As the name suggests, these disorders are characterized 
by tumours of endocrine glands; they are familial and 
much is now known about their genetics. MEN1, char-
acterized by tumours of the pituitary, parathyroids and 
pancreas, is inherited in a dominant fashion with a high 
penetrance. The gene involved is located on chromo-
some 11, at 11q13, and codes for the protein menin. The 
exact function of the protein remains unknown but at the 
time of writing is thought likely to be a tumour suppres-
sor gene, as the majority of mutations found in MEN1 
patients appear to result in loss of function. Pathogenesis 
follows Knudson’s ‘two-hit’ hypothesis as described 
above, whereby tumour development occurs in individu-
als who have inherited the first ‘hit’ as a germline muta-
tion in the MEN1 gene when a somatic mutation occurs 
in a relevant endocrine cell. MEN1 is notable in that 
many different mutations have been described as con-
tributing to the condition.
MEN2 also demonstrates autosomal dominant inheri-
tance and consists of three sub-groups, all of which have 
medullary carcinoma of the thyroid in common. In the 
case of MEN2, the gene responsible is the RET proto-
oncogene on chromosome 10, which codes for a receptor 
tyrosine kinase. However, unlike in MEN1, the germline 
RET mutations of MEN2 result in gain of function ef-
fects and the site of the mutation appears to be critical in 
determining the site of the tumour. There are also fewer 
loci within the gene where the small number of activat-
ing mutations are likely to be found, of great value in the 
molecular diagnosis of MEN2 and in contrast to the very 
many in the menin gene leading to MEN1.
GENE THERAPY
Gene therapy can be characterized in several ways, but 
essentially, it is the use of introduced genetic material to 
correct disease, either to replace a defective gene product 
or to correct an abnormal gene. It should not be confused 
with the treatment of genetic disease, which currently still 
uses conventional therapies. Ethically, correction of genetic 
defects by insertion of genes into somatic cells is akin to 
organ transplantation. However, germline gene therapy, 
where introduced genes could be transmitted to future 
generations, is universally agreed to be unethical for use 
in humans, although the production of transgenic animals 
by introduction of genes into fertilized eggs is widely used 
for studying gene function and regulation. Consequently, 
many countries have regulatory bodies to oversee gene 
therapy programmes, which concentrate on somatic cell 
gene therapy. Such programmes target the cells, organs or 
tissue affected by the disease or disorder under investiga-
tion. The first replacement of a defective gene in a human 
(to correct immune deficiency resulting from adenosine de-
aminase deficiency) took place in 1990, with limited success 
in that while none of the ten patients in the trial was cured, 
no adverse effects were reported. Since that first trial, gene 
therapy has had a difficult history, but the picture has im-
proved since the last edition of this book, with nearly 2000 
clinical trials approved in the last five years. As the field is 
once again changing rapidly, this section is intended to pro-
vide an outline of the issues and principles involved.
870	
Clinical biochemistry
To be a suitable candidate for potential gene therapy, 
it is an essential prerequisite that the gene involved has 
been cloned and sequenced, together with all the appro-
priate promoter and regulatory elements. The next step 
requires a mechanism for introduction of the therapeutic 
DNA into suitable target cells, and the affected tissue or 
organ must be identified and accessible. The introduc-
tion of the DNA into the target needs a vector, which 
may be viral (such as retroviruses or adenoviruses) or 
non-viral (such as liposomes) and can be ex vivo, where 
the patient’s own cells are cultured with the vector and 
then reintroduced, or in vivo, where the transformed vec-
tor is delivered directly to the affected tissue or organ. 
Ex vivo techniques are generally to be preferred as the 
cells can be checked before they are returned to ensure 
that the desired change has been achieved.
With retrovirus vectors, the viral genome is integrated 
into the DNA of infected cells after reverse transcription 
of viral RNA into DNA. Disadvantages in the use of ret-
roviruses are, first, the relatively small amount of DNA 
that can be introduced (less than ~7 kb), and second, that 
they are unable to infect non-dividing cells, which limits 
their use as very few cell types are continually dividing. 
Adenoviruses avoid these problems, since they can carry 
much larger segments of DNA and are also able to in-
fect non-dividing cells, but they do have the problem of 
potentially being immunogenic. Indeed, a crucial part of 
the development of a gene therapy strategy is that the 
vector should produce no harmful effects. One potential 
danger of gene therapy using a viral vector is the initia-
tion of cancer if the inserted gene disrupts the function of 
a cellular oncogene or suppressor gene. This is called in-
sertional mutagenesis and such an effect was seen in tri-
als for treating the immunodeficiency disorder X-linked 
severe combined immunodeficiency (XL-SCID), using 
ex vivo enrichment of patients’ lymphocytes with a ret-
roviral gene vector. This trial was initially seen as a great 
success, with 9 of the 11 patients being cured, but two of 
them later developed leukaemia owing to an insertional 
activation of the oncogene LMO2. This adverse outcome 
led to the suspension of gene therapy trials using pools of 
lymphocytes. Such a problem occurs mainly with the use 
of retroviruses and can be avoided by using adenoviruses, 
but they do have the problem of immunogenicity, and are 
known to contain genes of their own that can be involved 
in the process of malignant transformation and thus may 
also induce malignancy but by a different mechanism. It 
has not been possible, thus far, to determine precisely 
where in the host genome the introduced gene will in-
sert: the process is random. In the case of the XL-SCID 
trial, only a small number of insertions were in a posi-
tion to activate the oncogene but they produced clones 
that outgrew the other, beneficial, clones. Consequently, 
until, or unless, it is possible to direct the insertion site, 
or avoid damaging insertions, protocols using random 
insertion of vectors are unlikely to be approved.
A further problem is that the introduced normal gene 
must be capable of expressing its normal product in suf-
ficient amounts to be effective in correcting the host 
disorder. Surprisingly, it has been found that functional 
genes can be transfected to skeletal muscle by direct in-
jection, but this approach does not appear to be successful 
for other tissues. This approach has had some success in 
treating haemophilia where adeno-associated virus ex-
pressing factor VIII was injected intramuscularly. The 
encouraging results of this strategy are thought to be be-
cause only a small increase in the amount of factor VIII 
has a major clinical benefit.
Non-viral methods of gene therapy include the use of 
‘naked’ DNA, that is, the direct injection of DNA into 
target cells, and the use of liposomes, aqueous vesicles 
with an outer lipid bilayer, as vectors for the foreign 
DNA. Non-viral methods have the advantage of being 
non-immunogenic and so of being safer. The use of di-
rectly injected DNA is likely to be of use mainly where 
a small amount of product will have a significant ben-
efit, as in the example above of factor VIII. Liposomes 
have the advantage of being able to carry larger quanti-
ties of DNA, but the expression of the introduced gene is 
short lived, meaning that repeated treatment is necessary. 
A potentially useful development of liposome-mediated 
transfer has been in the use of DNA-protein complexes 
designed to target cell surface receptors. The use of an 
appropriate protein, recognized by the cell receptor, leads 
to internalization to intracellular vesicles of the complex. 
This allows transport to lysosomes where the complex is 
degraded and, once the gene has escaped from the lyso-
some, it can be expressed.
Stem cells in gene therapy
Correction of defects in haemopoietic cells is of particu-
lar interest because stem cells in bone marrow are rel-
atively accessible and diseases that can be corrected by 
bone marrow transplantation are obvious candidates for 
gene therapy, bearing in mind the difficulties associated 
with random insertion vectors described above. This is 
most likely to be feasible in the correction of enzyme de-
ficiencies such as Lesch–Nyhan and Gaucher diseases, 
where effective therapy could be achieved with relatively 
low levels of gene expression.
Early stem cell work looked at the use of embryonic 
cells. However, such work raised ethical concerns and 
more recent studies have looked at inducing pluripotency 
in somatic cells (called iPS cells), such as fibroblasts, by in-
troducing genes known to be involved in maintaining plu-
ripotency. A hope for these iPS cells is that they could be 
used in autologous therapy in patients with genetic disease 
once the gene defect had been corrected in the iPS cells 
in vitro. A major target for gene therapy has been cystic fi-
brosis. In this disorder, some of the most damaging effects 
result from a lack of the gene protein in the lungs, and 
studies have indicated that restoration of as little as 5–10% 
of normal gene expression would be enough to produce a 
beneficial clinical response. An adenovirus, tropic for re-
spiratory epithelium, was successfully exploited as a vector 
to insert these genes while other trials used liposomes or 
adeno-associated virus. However, although gene transfer 
was demonstrated, there were concerns about the safety 
of using adenoviruses that might cause an immune reac-
tion and in both types of trial the gene expression was too 
short-lived. If stem cells, such as iPS cells, could be used, 
this could avoid some of the need for repeat administra-
tion and thus reduce the risks of an immune reaction.
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
871
Early trials using stem cells as gene therapy in this way, 
to correct some rare forms of inherited eye disorders, 
have shown some success and hold promise for the future 
of these techniques.
Gene therapy in cancer
A major aim of gene therapy has been the treatment of 
cancer, with more than 60% of approved trials target-
ing this area. Projects are looking at various stages of the 
process, including the supplementation of tumour sup-
pressor genes and the prevention of activated oncogene 
expression, but also at areas such as the manipulation of 
tumour cells to promote apoptosis or to render them vul-
nerable to the host’s immune system by increasing their 
antigenicity. Such trials demonstrate the diverse potential 
of gene therapy.
So, while the work carried out in the field of gene 
therapy has mushroomed in the last decade, there are still 
many problems to be overcome before its use in clinical 
medicine becomes frequent or widespread. However, the 
knowledge gained in the process has been enormous and 
it may take only one significant breakthrough to produce 
a major leap forward.
CONCLUSION
Clinical molecular genetics has advanced tremen-
dously in recent years, a fact demonstrated by the al-
most exponential rise in the establishment of genetics 
laboratories in hospitals in developed countries. Its 
perceived importance in the future of healthcare in the 
UK was demonstrated by the publication, in 2003, of 
a Department of Health White Paper, Our Inheritance, 
Our Future, which resulted in large injections of money 
into NHS genetics laboratories to fund investment in 
new technology and staffing and was followed by a re-
view document in 2011.
The advances of the past ten years have perhaps not 
been in the direction that might have been predicted 
at the start but some of the most startling have been in 
technology. Surprisingly, some techniques, such as DNA 
chips and microarrays, have been slower to transfer to 
routine clinical use than might have been expected, al-
most certainly because the cost of the analytical plat-
forms and consumables did not fall as quickly as hoped. 
However, other technologies such as CSCE and real-
time PCR have become routine and the speed with which 
next generation sequencing is being applied to clini-
cal genetics is remarkable. Consequently, predictions of 
high-throughput, faster turnaround analysis have become 
a reality – and technological development is still enabling 
scientific discovery.
Gene therapy is beginning once again to live up to its 
early promise with more successes being reported and 
safer solutions coming forward. Conversely, pharmaco-
genetics has grown much more slowly than predicted, 
despite evidence that shows that predictive genotyping 
can prevent adverse drug reactions, the reasons for this 
remain unclear, but unexpected complexity of the issues 
may play a part.
The emphasis in the coming years is likely to be ‘more 
and faster’; that is, increasing laboratory capacity for 
molecular analysis and improving turnaround times. In 
terms of innovation, areas such as direct analysis of cell-
free DNA in plasma may well begin to make an appear-
ance in the laboratory.
The role of molecular biology in polygenic and multi-
factorial diseases is receiving a lot of attention, especially 
as these are the conditions (diabetes, hypertension, heart 
disease) that affect a large proportion of the population. 
Linked to this is the growing area of epigenetics, an area 
that examines heritable characters that are not due to 
changes in the DNA sequence. One mechanism for such 
inheritance is methylation.
Other areas that are finding their way into the clini-
cal laboratory now are expression analysis and pro-
teomics. At its simplest, expression analysis (sometimes 
called ‘transcriptomics’) examines the products of genes 
by creating cDNA from a gene’s mRNA (usually by re-
verse transcriptase PCR – rtPCR) and cloning it into 
vectors from which the protein product can then be 
expressed and studied. Expression screening employs 
microarray technology to examine heterogeneous mix-
tures, usually of mRNA or cDNA, often to compare 
expression in different tissues. An area worthy of a book 
in its own right, proteomics takes expression analysis 
one step further, in that it is concerned with the analy-
sis of complex mixtures of proteins, that is, with the 
expressed mRNAs that are actually translated. Not all 
mRNAs are translated into protein products and some 
undergo post-translational changes. Proteomics allows 
identification of changes in the relative abundance of 
expressed proteins as well as of their structure and func-
tion using mass spectroscopy techniques, in particular 
matrix-assisted laser desorption-time of flight mass 
spectrometry (MALDI-TOF MS). The technique is ex-
pected to be particularly valuable not only in the study 
of cancer (e.g. bladder cancer), but also, it is hoped, in 
its diagnosis and treatment.
Clinical molecular biology has made huge advances in 
recent years but there are still many more to be made.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The author wishes to acknowledge the invaluable help of 
the staff of the Bristol Genetics Laboratory, North Bristol 
NHS Trust and of David Halsall, Department of Clinical 
Biochemistry, Addenbrooke’s Hospital, Cambridge in 
the preparation of the earlier edition of this chapter. 
The chapter is based, with permission, on that written by 
Dr Michael Norman, Department of Medicine, 
University of Bristol, for the first edition of this book.
GLOSSARY
Allele  alternative forms of a gene at the same locus
Balanced polymorphism  a polymorphism that is stable 
in a population
Carrier  an individual who is heterozygote for a recessive 
gene
872	
Clinical biochemistry
cDNA  DNA that is complementary to a mRNA molecule
Clone  a cell line derived from a single cell, or gene se-
quences propagated by recombinant DNA techniques
Codominant  pertaining to two alleles which are both 
expressed in a heterozygote
Compound heterozygote  an individual with two different 
mutant alleles at the same locus
Crossover (or recombination)  exchange of information 
between homologous chromosomes during meiosis
Diploid  chromosome complement with two copies of 
each chromosome (as in normal human cells where the 
diploid number is 46)
Dominant  an allele that manifests its phenotypic effect 
in heterozygotes
Downstream  sequences further in the direction of 
expression (5′ → 3′)
Enhancer  a regulatory DNA sequence that can function 
to stimulate transcription of a gene irrespective of its po-
sition and orientation relative to that gene
Epigenetic  heritable traits (e.g. those caused by gene 
methylation) that are not dependent on DNA sequence 
changes
Exome  all the exons in a genome
Exon  any segment of an interrupted gene that is present 
in the mature mRNA
Expressivity  variability in the severity of a genetic 
trait
Frameshift mutation  mutation resulting from insertion 
or deletion of bases (but not a multiple of three) that 
alters the reading frame of an mRNA
Gamete  haploid cell generated by meiosis (sperm or egg)
Genome  the complete ensemble of genetic information 
of an individual
Germ cell  gametes or their precursors
Haploid cell  a cell containing only one copy of each 
chromosome
Haplotype  a group of closely linked alleles that are in-
herited as a single unit
Heterozygote  an individual with different alleles (usu-
ally one normal and one mutant) at a given locus on 
homologous chromosomes
Homozygote  an individual having the same allele at a 
given locus on homologous chromosomes
Hot spot  site with a high frequency of mutation or 
recombination
Imprinting  differences in the expression of genes de-
pending on parental origin
Intron  any segment of an interrupted gene that is 
transcribed but removed during formation of mature 
mRNA
Linkage  two or more loci on a single chromosome that 
are sufficiently close that they do not segregate indepen-
dently in offspring
Linkage disequilibrium  association of two loci more fre-
quently than predicted by chance
Locus  unique location on a chromosome of a gene or 
particular DNA sequence
Loss of heterozygosity (LOH)  homozygosity (in a tu-
mour or somatic cell) when the constitutional state is 
heterozygous
Meiosis  a series of two modified mitoses generating 
haploid gametes from a diploid cell
Messenger 
RNA 
(mRNA)  sequence 
of 
RNA 
­transcribed from a gene which, after processing, codes 
for a protein
Microsatellite  polymorphic sequences due to a variable 
number of tandem repeats of a di-, tri- or tetranucleotide 
sequence
Minisatellite  polymorphic sequences due to a variable 
number of tandem repeats of a short sequence of ten or 
more nucleotides
Mitosis  process of division in somatic cells
Multiplex PCR  simultaneous PCR reactions performed us-
ing more than one pair of primers in the same reaction mix
Mutation  a heritable change in the genetic material
Northern blot  a technique for transferring RNA to a fil-
ter for subsequent detection
Oncogene  a gene involved in cell development capable 
of causing transformation to a tumour cell
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)  a technique for ampli-
fying a specific sequence of DNA
Penetrance  the frequency with which a particular geno-
type is expressed
Phenotype  the 
observable 
characteristics 
of 
an 
individual
Point mutation  changes in the sequence of DNA in-
volving single base pairs
Polygenic  a trait influenced by the cumulative effects of 
several genes at different loci
Polymorphism  the occurrence of two or more alleles at 
a given locus at significant frequencies in the population
Positional cloning  cloning of a gene after determining 
its chromosomal position by linkage analysis without 
knowing its function.
Probe  a labelled fragment of DNA used to identify 
complementary sequences by hybridization
Promoter  region of DNA to which RNA polymerase 
binds before initiating transcription
Recessive  an allele that produces a phenotypic effect 
only when present in the homozygous state
Restriction enzyme  an enzyme that cleaves DNA at 
specific sequences
Retrovirus  an RNA virus that utilizes reverse transcrip-
tase to insert itself into the DNA of a host cell
Restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP)  poly-
morphism in the size of fragments produced by digesting 
DNA with a restriction enzyme
Somatic cell  all cells of the body except gametes
Southern blot  the technique of transferring fragments 
of DNA after electrophoresis to a filter
Trait  any phenotypically detectable character or property
Transcription  production of mRNA from the DNA 
template
Transfection  incorporation of foreign DNA into a cell
	
43  Molecular clinical biochemistry	
873
Transformation  conversion of cells to a state of unre-
strained growth, resembling tumour cells
Transgenic animal  animal into which a foreign gene has 
been incorporated
Translation  conversion of the mature mRNA message 
into a protein
Tumour suppressor gene  a gene that is growth con-
straining and whose inactivation can lead to unrestrained 
growth of a cell
Upstream  sequences located in the opposite direction 
to transcription (3′ → 5′)
Vector  any plasmid, phage etc. into which foreign 
DNA can be inserted for cloning
Variable number of tandem repeats (VNTR)  minisatel-
lite and microsatellite sequences with polymorphism in 
the number of repeats
Western blot  transfer of proteins to a filter after 
electrophoresis
Wild type  the allele which is most frequent in natural 
populations; now referred to as ‘normal type’.
Further reading
In a subject that changes as rapidly as this one, any bibli-
ography is likely to become outdated very quickly and so 
this one is short with respect to texts, listing only those 
likely to form a valuable ‘core’ for the subject. Readers 
are directed to the internet, where the most up-to-date 
information is to be found: several appropriate starting 
points are listed. Regular review of appropriate journals, 
many of which are available online, is also recommended, 
especially for technological applications.
Background
Strachen T, Read PR. Human molecular genetics. 4th ed. London: 
Garland Science; 2011. 
Essential text covering the principles of molecular genetics; well referenced.
Turnpenny P, Ellard S. Emery’s elements of medical genetics. 14th ed. 
London: Elsevier; 2012. 
Highly readable text for clinical aspects, covering cytogenetic as well as 
molecular genetic disease with a useful chapter on ethical issues.
Young ID. Medical genetics. Oxford: Oxford University Press; 2005. 
Although slightly older now, this is another very readable introductory 
text that uses landmark publications and case histories to illustrate the issues 
effectively.
Internet resources
The British Society for Human Genetics. http://www.bshg.org.uk. 
An excellent place to start: it is a searchable site and has extensive links to 
other major websites as well as to useful online genetics journals.
OMIM database, linked through the NCBI website (PubMed). 
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim.
For information on Mendelian disorders, the OMIM site contains highly 
referenced entries for most disorders and genes. The NCBI website is also the 
starting point for links to other databases, e.g. on protein structure, as well 
as being the best starting point for literature searching.
Journals
Clinical Chemistry. The Journal of the American Association of Clinical 
Chemistry (AACC).
Now subtitled as an International Journal of Molecular Diagnostics and 
Laboratory Medicine, this is an excellent source of up-to-date information 
on emerging molecular techniques and their applications, which also tend to 
be of particular relevance to clinical biochemists.
Nature Genetics. 
The dedicated genetics journal in the ‘Nature’ family of scientific journals.
874
C H A P T E R  4 4
Forensic biochemistry
Robert J. Flanagan  •  Sarah Belsey  • Terhi Launiainen
CHAPTER OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION  874
SAMPLES AND SAMPLING  875
POISONING WITH ENDOGENOUS AGENTS  876
γ-Hydroxybutyrate  876
Insulin  877
Magnesium  877
Sodium  878
POST-MORTEM BIOCHEMISTRY  878
Vitreous humour  879
SPECIFIC DIAGNOSTIC PROBLEMS  880
Anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid  
reactions   880
Diabetes  880
Drowning  880
Hypothermia/hyperthermia  880
Inflammation  882
Sudden death  882
INTRODUCTION
Forensic biochemistry can be defined as the applica-
tion of biochemical assays in the service of the courts. 
Examples include DNA analysis for human identification 
and methods for the detection of trace evidence, such 
as the Kastle–Mayer (phenolphthalein/hydrogen perox-
ide) and luminol reactions used to detect the presence 
of blood. This chapter, however, focuses on laboratory 
measurements rather than methods. Many of these are 
standard laboratory procedures, while others are specific 
to forensic work.
The range of forensic situations that the clinical bio-
chemistry laboratory may be asked to help with is wide 
and, as in all such work, the results of tests can usually 
be properly interpreted only when considered together 
with all the available evidence. Post-mortem biochemis-
try has a role in investigating the cause of death in some 
apparently natural deaths, including both diabetic and 
alcoholic ketoacidosis, deaths that may have involved a 
prolonged stress response such as hypothermia, as well 
as in the diagnosis of disease processes such as early myo-
cardial infarction, which may be difficult to diagnose 
by physical examination. There is clearly considerable 
overlap between clinical and forensic toxicology, in that 
some endogenous substances can be used as poisons (e.g. 
sodium chloride, potassium chloride and insulin) and in 
some instances, suspicion of poisoning may be aroused by 
abnormal biochemical results (see Table 44.1).
Forensic biochemistry has an important role in the 
investigation of deaths and serious injuries occurring in 
hospital. Assault committed within hospital may involve 
poisoning, and can range from murder (intent to kill), 
through manslaughter (culpable homicide) and attempted 
murder, to malicious poisoning (usually of a child or an 
elderly relative). Iatrogenic poisoning may range from 
relatively minor drug administration errors, to catastro-
phes such as asphyxia caused by an anaesthetic error. The 
results of an analysis, or residual or unused samples, or 
even apparatus used in giving the drug, may be required 
by officers acting on behalf of the courts. Therefore, in all 
cases, careful specimen labelling and handling, reporting 
and laboratory record-keeping is important. The stan-
dard of completion of request forms and sample label-
ling is still very poor in some hospitals. This can cause 
many problems if samples are required by the police or 
coroner. Knowledge of the limitations of the analytical 
methods used is also important – an enzymatic ethanol 
assay is not as selective as headspace gas chromatography, 
for example.
One practical problem is that samples may be col-
lected, assays performed and results reported before the 
need for forensic investigation has become apparent. 
Another problem is that all that may be available are 
specimens collected after death (see Box 44.1), although 
in general it is information on an analyte’s concentration 
prior to, or at the time of death that is required. In this 
case, the likelihood of agonal or post-mortem change, and 
indeed, sample contamination during collection, must be 
taken into account when interpreting results. An associ-
ated problem is that there are often no reference ranges 
for fluids such as vitreous humour, pericardial fluid, or 
synovial fluid since such samples are, for practical pur-
poses, rarely available during life, except from laboratory 
animals. Method validation is also compromised by this 
same lack of reference material. Furthermore, the time 
needed for analyte equilibration between plasma and, for 
example, vitreous humour during life remains unknown.
Of course the laboratory, too, can be the subject of 
forensic investigation if laboratory error of whatever na-
ture comes under scrutiny of the courts (see Box 44.2). 
Examples here include the use of inappropriate analyses, 
	
44  Forensic biochemistry	
875
delayed analyses, sample mix-ups and errors in reporting, 
including the use of inappropriate units. In all cases, it 
is best to write out units in full, for example ‘milligrams 
per litre’, rather than using symbols, when producing re-
ports for the courts. The laboratory should provide clear 
guidance as to the significance of a result, especially when 
different units may be used. Patients have died when a 
paracetamol result reported in mg/L has been assumed to 
be in mmol/L. Mass units (SI) should be used for drugs ex-
cept for lithium, thyroxine and methotrexate, where mo-
lar units should be employed. For metals/trace elements 
and for alcohol (ethanol), either molar or mass units may 
be employed. However, for forensic purposes, including 
the regulations governing occupational lead exposure, 
mass units are often the rule and the laboratory should 
remember this when providing interpretation of results. 
For clinical purposes, ethanol is often reported as mass 
units per litre (mg/L), but for forensic purposes, at least 
in the UK, ethanol is still reported as mg/100 mL (mg%).
SAMPLES AND SAMPLING
Information recorded on the sample container at the 
time the sample is collected should include the names 
(first and family or last name) and date of birth, patient or 
post-mortem number and the date and time of collection. 
This information, together with details of the collection 
site in post-mortem work, and the sample type (includ-
ing a note of any preservative), and any other appropri-
ate information, should be recorded on an accompanying 
assay request form (see Box 44.3). The date and time of 
receipt of all specimens by the laboratory should be re-
corded and a unique identifying number assigned in each 
TABLE 44.1  Some laboratory investigations commonly requested on blood samples that may arouse 
suspicion of poisoning
Investigation
Possible cause of increase
Possible cause of decrease
Sodium
MDMA
a (malignant hyperthermia), 
sodium salts
Diuretics, water intoxication (acute and 
chronic), MDMA (very rare)
Potassium
Digoxin, potassium salts
Diuretics, laxatives (both chronic), 
insulin, salbutamol, sulfonylureas, 
theophylline
Glucose
Salicylates, theophylline
Ethanol (especially children), insulin, 
salicylates, sulfonylureas, valproate
Calcium
–
Ethylene glycol, fluorides, magnesium 
salts
Chloride
Bromide or organobromines (actually 
interference in method)
–
Lactate
Ethylene glycol (artefact on some 
blood gas analyzers)
–
Magnesium
Magnesium salts
–
International normalized ratio (INR, 
prothrombin time)
Anticoagulant rodenticides (warfarin, 
brodifacoum), paracetamol (early 
marker of hepatic damage)
–
Anion gap 
Na
K
HCO
Cl
+
+
−
−

+ 

(
) −
+] [


(
)
3
Ethanol, ethylene glycol, iron salts, 
isoniazid, methanol, metformin, 
paraldehyde, salicylates, toluene 
(chronic)
–
Osmolar gap
b
Acetone, ethanol, ethylene glycol, 
methanol, 2-propanol, hypertonic 
i.v. solutions (e.g. mannitol)
–
aMethylenedioxymetamfetamine.
bMeasured osmolality (freezing point depression) – calculated osmolality. Calculated osmolality = 2([Na
+] + [K
+]) + urea + glucose (all mmol/L).
BOX 44.1	
Thanatochemistry
Post-mortem biochemistry is sometimes termed ‘thanato-
chemistry’ (from the Greek, Thanatos, the personification of 
death in Greek mythology).
BOX 44.2	
Red or dead?
A 64-year-old male with a long history of medical problems, 
including type 2 diabetes, was admitted to hospital at ap-
proximately 17:00 with a 2-day history of diarrhoea. A blood 
sample was requested on admission for electrolytes and as-
sessment of renal function. However, phlebotomy was dif-
ficult; blood was obtained at the sixth attempt (22:12). The 
results were sodium 128 mmol/L, potassium 8.2 mmol/L, 
urea 36.8 mmol/L and creatinine 596 μmol/L. The results 
were known in the laboratory at 23:40, but were not reported 
because the sample was haemolysed. Instead, the laboratory 
asked for an urgent repeat sample.
In the event, no attempt was made to obtain a second 
specimen urgently in view of the difficulty in obtaining the 
first sample. The patient was found collapsed at about 01:10 
the next day. Resuscitation was unsuccessful. The high urea 
and creatinine indicated that the patient had been in renal 
failure for some hours before he died and, if the urea and 
creatinine results had been reported together with the potas-
sium, this would have alerted the clinician to the possibility 
of a potentially fatal hyperkalaemia and placed the likelihood 
of haemolysis contributing to the raised potassium in proper 
clinical context.
In retrospect, it was agreed that appropriate action to 
lower the plasma potassium should have been taken. Insulin, 
nebulized salbutamol and/or haemodialysis (depending on 
the clinical condition of the patient and the facilities avail-
able) would have been the treatments of choice.
876	
Clinical biochemistry
case. Any residual specimen should be kept securely at 
−20 °C or below until investigation of the incident has 
been concluded.
In forensic work, it is important to be able to guar-
antee the identity and integrity of the specimen from 
when it was collected through to the reporting of the 
results, although this ideal is often not attained in nor-
mal clinical laboratory practice. ‘Chain of custody’ is a 
term used to refer to the process used to maintain and 
document the history of the specimen (see Box 44.4). 
Procedures for appropriate storage of samples that may 
be required for forensic analysis and for authorizing 
and documenting the release of such samples on re-
quest of a coroner, for example, must also be in place. 
Ideally, samples should be protected during transport 
by the use of tamper-evident seals and should be sub-
mitted in person to the laboratory by the coroner’s 
officer or other investigating personnel. If storage is 
to be at −5 to −70 °C, basic precautions to preserve 
sample integrity, including labelling, must be under-
taken (glass tubes will break if over-full when frozen). 
The requirements of the UK Human Tissue Act, or 
other relevant legislation on the retention and storage 
of pathological samples, must be met.
POISONING WITH ENDOGENOUS AGENTS
Many analytes of toxicological interest (and their 
­metabolites) also occur naturally in the body and hence, 
reference ranges, ‘cut-offs’ or other means of ­delineating 
an exogenous source for the compound(s) of inter-
est must be adopted. Examples include acetone, carbon 
monoxide (measured as % carboxyhaemoglobin) etha-
nol, γ-hydroxybutyrate (GHB), insulin, iron, potassium, 
­sodium and testosterone.
Testosterone continues to be abused by athletes and 
this remains the most common adverse finding declared 
by World Anti-Doping Agency accredited laboratories; 
the practice is usually detected by the demonstration of 
an elevated testosterone:epitestosterone ratio and by pro-
cedures to ensure that such a finding is not ‘natural’ for 
a particular athlete. Numerous other endogenous agents 
have been used in an attempt to enhance performance or 
to mask use of other agents in sport but further discussion 
of this topic is beyond the scope of this chapter.
γ-Hydroxybutyrate
γ-Hydroxybutyrate (GHB), and its precursors γ-
butyrolactone (GBL) and 1,4-butanediol, are used to im-
prove athletic performance, as intoxicants and sometimes 
in assault such as drug-facilitated sexual assault (which in-
cludes rape). As with alcohol, voluntary ingestion always 
has to be considered (Box 44.5). γ-Hydroxybutyrate expo-
sure may also arise from unexpected sources (Box 44.6). 
The substance is practically odourless and tasteless and 
has a short plasma half-life (20 min or so), making covert 
administration hard to detect. Quantitation is needed as 
GHB is an endogenous compound. A urine cut-off of 
10 mg/L is recommended in attempting to differentiate 
endogenous GHB excretion from deliberate GHB/GBL 
administration. Unusually, the urine cut-off seems more 
reliable than a measure of plasma GHB, but by ~12 h 
after GHB ingestion, the concentration in urine is usu-
ally <10 mg/L. For post-mortem blood, the cut-off is 
BOX 44.3	
Information that should accompany 
a request for forensic biochemistry 
or toxicology
•	 Name, address and telephone number of clinician/­
pathologist and/or coroner’s officer, and address to which 
the report and invoice are to be sent. A post-mortem (ref-
erence) number may also be appropriate
•	 Circumstances of incident (including copy of sudden 
death report if available)
•	 Past medical history, including current or recent pre-
scription medication, and details of whether the patient 
­suffered from any serious potentially infectious disease 
such as hepatitis or tuberculosis
•	 Information on the likely cause, and estimated time, of 
ingestion and/or death and the nature and quantity of any 
substance(s) implicated
•	 If the patient has been treated in hospital, a summary 
of the relevant hospital notes should be supplied, in-
cluding details of emergency treatment and drugs given 
both therapeutically and incidentally during investigative 
procedures
•	 Note of occupation/hobbies
•	 A copy of any preliminary pathology report, if available
BOX 44.4	
Chain of custody documents
•	 Name of the individual collecting the specimen
•	 Name of each person or entity subsequently having 
custody of the specimen, and details of how it has been 
stored
•	 Date and time the specimen was collected or transferred
•	 Specimen or post-mortem number
•	 Name and date of birth of the subject or deceased
•	 Brief description of the specimen
•	 Record of the condition of tamper-evident seals
BOX 44.5	
Covert GHB administration?
A man and a woman met at a party. They spent the eve-
ning together and took a taxi to the woman’s house around 
midnight. She had no further recollection of events until she 
awoke and thought that she had had sexual activity. She re-
ported the suspected incident to police and provided blood 
and urine samples (fluoride preserved) about 20 h after the 
incident. Cannabinoids and GHB (30 mg/L) were present in 
urine. No GHB was detected in either blood (limit of detec-
tion 5 mg/L) or drinks containers (glasses etc.) at her home.
The man was arrested and charged with rape on the 
day the incident was reported. A bottle of ‘Lucozade’ in his 
possession contained about 20% (w/v) GHB. However, al-
though he was found guilty of rape, the woman later admit-
ted to prior voluntary GHB ingestion.
	
44  Forensic biochemistry	
877
generally taken as 50 mg/L because of the likelihood of 
post-mortem GHB production.
Insulin
Endogenous insulin is co-secreted with C-peptide. In 
theory, therefore, in suspected administration of exog-
enous insulin, which lacks C-peptide, the ratio of the two 
analytes could be useful as an indicator of the source of 
the insulin. However, commercially available immunoas-
says have highly variable responses to different types of 
insulin making the insulin:C-peptide ratio extremely dif-
ficult to interpret. An insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) 
is widely distributed in tissues including erythrocytes, 
hence use of haemolysed samples, including post-mortem 
samples, is likely to give false results. Use of different an-
ticoagulants to preserve samples is also associated with 
differences in plasma insulin results. The presence of he-
patic or renal insufficiency, or of endogenous anti-insulin 
or anti-proinsulin antibodies (analogous to the analyti-
cal problems with digoxin assay if anti-digoxin Fab anti-
body fragments have been given) may be further possible 
sources of error (see also Chapter 17).
Plasma C-peptide is stable for only ~2–3  weeks 
at −20 °C and for up to 6  months at −80 °C, whereas 
plasma insulin is more stable (~5 h at room ­temperature, 
~1  week at 4 °C and several months at −20 °C). On 
the other hand, C-peptide is not degraded by IDE. 
Anti-insulin antibodies bind proinsulin via its insulin 
moiety and greatly retard its clearance from the circula-
tion. Because of cross-reaction with proinsulin in some 
C-peptide immunoassays, proinsulin bound to anti-(pro)
insulin antibodies can interfere.
Murder or suicide by insulin is difficult to diagnose 
and to prove (see Box 44.7). Immunohistochemical dem-
onstration or measurement of elevated insulin concentra-
tion in tissue around an injection site compared with a 
control site can help support the diagnosis. Unlike most 
purely immunological methods, liquid chromatography-
tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) may allow 
differentiation of human insulin from its synthetic de-
rivatives. Besides its use in doping control, the method 
has been applied to post-mortem material related to an 
insulin poisoning case.
Magnesium
Poisoning with magnesium is rare, and usually fol-
lows intravenous administration. Confusion over units 
is not uncommon (see Box  44.8). Clinical features of 
BOX 44.6	
Girl nearly killed by ‘GHB’ toy
A girl of 7  years nearly died after eating some toy beads. 
She suffered severe poisoning. The beads were coated with 
1,4-butanediol, a GHB precursor. The girl said she ate the 
beads thinking they were sweets: they tasted of marzipan. 
Six children in Australia and NZ and two in the USA needed 
hospital treatment after swallowing them. The beads, made 
in China, could be arranged into designs and fused together 
when sprayed with water. Half a million Bindeez toys were 
recalled in the UK/Eire in November 2007.
BOX 44.7	
The Grantham disaster
February to April 1991: three children died suddenly on 
Ward 4 at Grantham and Kesteven Hospital. A further baby 
died at home soon after discharge. Nine other patients col-
lapsed unexpectedly, some more than once. All but one were 
transferred urgently to the paediatric ITU. Clinical and 
post-mortem investigations were inconclusive. One patient 
had three hypoglycaemic attacks on Ward 4, and insulin poi-
soning was suspected.
On 12 April, a very high insulin/low C-peptide result was 
reported on a blood sample collected on 28 March. On 30 
April, police were called to investigate continuing emergen-
cies (which included a further death). In November 1991, en-
rolled nurse Beverly Allitt, 26, was charged with four murders, 
nine attempted murders and nine counts of causing grievous 
bodily harm. She was also charged with the attempted mur-
der of two adult patients when she had worked on their ward 
before moving to the children’s ward. Potassium and lido-
caine were implicated in some of the Ward 4 assaults.
In 1993, she was convicted of four murders, three at-
tempted murders and on six counts of causing grievous bodily 
harm. She was found not guilty with respect to the charges 
concerning the adult patients. As in all criminal poisoning 
cases, much of the evidence was circumstantial. Allitt’s history 
suggested factitious disorder (Münchausen syndrome).
BOX 44.8	
Was it poisoning?
A 57-year-old male presented to hospital complaining of 
chest pain and dizziness. He was sweaty and light-headed 
(heart rate reported as 230/min). Ventricular tachycardia 
was diagnosed, and three unsuccessful attempts were made 
at electrical cardioversion. His condition deteriorated.
Cardiology advice at this stage was to give 8 mmol magne-
sium ion by slow i.v. bolus followed by further magnesium by 
infusion. In the event, an i.v. bolus of 8 g magnesium sulphate 
(32 mmol magnesium ion) was administered, whereupon the 
patient complained of feeling flushed and unwell. He was 
visibly hot and sweaty, and suffered cardiac arrest. After 13 
cycles of cardiopulmonary resuscitation and administration 
of calcium chloride to reverse possible magnesium toxicity, 
he was pronounced dead some 2 h after presentation.
Whole blood magnesium was 1.50 mmol/L in a sample 
obtained on admission and was 2.67–3.54 mmol/L in three 
samples obtained after the administration of magnesium sul-
phate, but before death. These latter results provided evidence 
to support the report of accidental magnesium overdosage, 
but the blood magnesium concentrations are similar to those 
obtained in patients given magnesium to control convulsions.
At post-mortem the next day, femoral whole blood mag-
nesium was 10.0 mmol/L and vitreous humour magnesium 
(each eye separately) was 0.46 and 1.42 mmol/L. In court, it 
was suggested that:
1.	 the post-mortem blood magnesium result was likely to 
have been affected by post-mortem change
2.	 the 
average 
of 
the 
vitreous 
humour 
results 
(0.94 mmol/L) was compatible with the ante-mortem 
post-overdose results, given that vitreous humour 
magnesium probably reflects plasma magnesium
3.	 although the temporal relationship between magne-
sium administration and the fatal event might suggest 
a causal relationship, there was no toxicological or car-
diological evidence of fatal magnesium poisoning.
Verdict: death by natural causes.
878	
Clinical biochemistry
magnesium overdose may include drowsiness, uncon-
sciousness, loss of muscle tone and respiratory and car-
diac arrest. Plasma magnesium in healthy adults ranges 
from 0.7 to 1.3 mmol/L. Features of toxicity are reported 
at plasma magnesium concentrations of 3.5–5.0 mmol/L, 
and cardiorespiratory arrest may occur at concentrations 
of >8.5 mmol/L. During life, magnesium is distributed 
within cells (approximate cell:plasma distribution ratio 
4:1), hence whole blood concentrations are somewhat 
higher than plasma concentrations. Doses of magnesium 
sulphate of up to 4 g (16 mmol magnesium ion) are some-
times given for control of convulsions.
Sodium
Hypernatraemia from sodium chloride (common salt) poi-
soning must be distinguished from hypernatraemia owing 
to dehydration from fluid loss or, very rarely, low fluid in-
take. This is especially important because sodium chloride 
poisoning may be the result of deliberate administration of 
large amounts of salt by a third party – salt is hardly ever 
encountered in self-poisoning episodes nowadays, although 
there were many deaths, especially in children, when saline 
emetics were used in an attempt to induce vomiting.
When a patient presents with hypernatraemia, diabe-
tes insipidus and renal disease have to be excluded before 
salt poisoning can be diagnosed. Hypernatraemia caused 
by disease processes may be associated with obvious poly-
uria and polydipsia. Negative water balance can occur 
easily. This reduces solute excretion and induces hyper-
natraemic dehydration. Finally, there are rare individu-
als who develop hypodipsic hypernatraemia (see p. 44). A 
water deprivation test may be required if this disorder is 
suspected in life.
Common criteria used to diagnose salt (sodium chlo-
ride) poisoning focus on hypernatraemia, with high uri-
nary concentrations of sodium and chloride. However, 
high urinary concentrations of sodium alone cannot dis-
tinguish salt poisoning from dehydration. The medical 
and legal implications of the two conditions are funda-
mentally different, so reliable ways to distinguish between 
them are needed. Be this as it may, both salt poisoning 
and dehydration (caused by neglect) may lead to criminal 
or civil action. Fractional excretions (the proportions of 
sodium and water filtered at the glomerulus that subse-
quently reach the urine), calculated from the sodium and 
creatinine concentrations of paired plasma and associ-
ated (‘spot’) urine samples, can distinguish the two situ-
ations (see Box 44.9). The values should be >2% in an 
individual who has been poisoned with salt and is volume 
replete and <1% when dehydrated but with viable renal 
tubules. Note that the units of measurement used must be 
the same for plasma and urine (plasma creatinine is usu-
ally reported in μmol/L, while urine creatinine is often 
reported in mmol/L).
POST-MORTEM BIOCHEMISTRY
Gradients that are maintained by active processes during 
life, such as that between intra- and extracellular potas-
sium begin to break down soon after the occurrence of 
hypoxic or anoxic damage, hence the possibility of both 
terminal and post-mortem change has to be evaluated 
when interpreting results. Most deaths that become the 
subject of post-mortem investigation occur outside hos-
pital and it may be some days before the body is found 
and samples collected for analysis. Therefore, blood 
samples are invariably haemolysed to a greater or lesser 
degree and the likelihood of other changes, such as loss 
of labile analytes (e.g. glucose and insulin), is high (see 
Box 44.10). It should be remembered that most clinical 
BOX 44.10	 Diabetic or alcoholic ketoacidosis?
A 56-year-old female had a history of chronic alcohol abuse 
and diabetes mellitus requiring insulin, probably secondary 
to an episode of alcohol-induced pancreatitis. Her husband 
found her collapsed one evening. This was a regular occur-
rence. He measured her capillary glucose concentration, and 
found it to be 1.5 mmol/L. He gave her an injection of 1 mg 
glucagon. She woke up, and so he went to bed. He awoke the 
following morning to find her dead in bed.
A blood sample was obtained post-mortem. The only no-
table finding was a raised β-hydroxybutyrate concentration 
(11.36 mmol/L). No ethanol was detected. It was not possible 
to measure glucose because of the condition of the sample.
At the inquest, it was thought that an individual who had 
abused alcohol chronically was unlikely to have a significant 
hepatic glycogen store, hence it was felt unlikely that a stan-
dard dose of glucagon would have led to excessive release of 
glucose. Thus, it was thought more likely that the ketoaci-
dosis was due to the consequences of chronic alcohol abuse 
rather than to diabetic ketoacidosis.
BOX 44.9	
Derivation of the fractional 
excretion of sodium (FENa) and 
water (FEH2O)
Fractional excretion of water, FEH2O
•	 The FEH2O is the volume of electrolyte-free water that 
appears as urine compared with the amount filtered
•	 Thus, FEH2O = V / GFR
•	 Since GFR = UCr × V / PCr
•	 FEH2O = V × PCr / UCr × V
•	 Simplifying, FEH2O = PCr / UCr (then multiply by 100 to 
express as a percentage)
Fractional excretion of sodium, FENa
•	 The FENa is the amount of sodium lost in the urine 
compared to the amount filtered
•	 Thus, FENa = urinary sodium excretion/filtered sodium
•	 The urinary sodium excretion = UNa × V
•	 And the filtered sodium = PNa × GFR
•	 Since GFR = UCr × V / PCr
•	 The filtered sodium = PNa × UCr × V / PCr
•	 Therefore, FENa = UNa × V × PCr / PNa × UCr × V
•	 Simplifying, FENa = UNa / PNa × PCr / UCr (then multiply 
by 100 to express as a percentage)
Adapted from: Coulthard MG, Haycock GB
Distinguishing between salt poisoning and hypernatraemic 
­dehydration in children. BMJ 2003; 326: 157–160.
P, plasma concentration; U, urine concentration; Cr, creatinine; GFR, 
glomerular filtration rate; V, urine flow rate.
	
44  Forensic biochemistry	
879
reference values are established for plasma or serum, and 
not haemolysed whole blood.
Vitreous humour
Vitreous humour is preferred to blood for most post-­
mortem biochemistry (Table 44.2), since it is thought to be 
far less susceptible to autolytic change, is less likely to 
be subject to post-mortem contamination by diffusion of 
drugs or other poisons that may be present at high con-
centration in the thorax or abdomen at death, and lies 
within the relatively protected environment of the eye 
socket. After death, however, potassium quickly leaks 
from the retina and hence vitreous potassium is not a re-
liable indicator of ante-mortem plasma potassium and is 
of minimal value in the diagnosis of exogenous potassium 
administration. The possibility of concurrent vitreous 
disease confounding the results must also be remembered.
When collecting vitreous humour, ideally both eyes 
should be sampled independently and the results reported 
separately. Potassium concentrations may differ by up to 
2.3 mmol/L between the two eyes (in samples from non-
putrefied bodies). Specimen contamination with retinal 
cells is a recognized source of falsely raised vitreous po-
tassium concentrations. Hence, aspiration must be gentle 
to avoid contamination with retinal fragments as far as 
possible. Differences may also be due to inappropriate 
sample handling. Vitreous humour is viscous, hence may 
require treatment such as centrifugation, heating, dilu-
tion or addition of hyaluronidase, to facilitate accurate pi-
petting. A vitreous potassium concentration >15 mmol/L 
suggests gross post-mortem decomposition.
Vitreous sodium and chloride concentrations may fall 
after death, at rates of up to 1 mmol/L per hour, whereas 
potassium increases at a rate of 0.14–0.19 mmol/L per 
hour. If the potassium concentration is <15 mmol/L, 
then the sodium and chloride concentrations are thought 
likely to reflect the situation at death. Urea and creati-
nine are relatively stable in post-mortem specimens. If 
vitreous sodium, chloride and urea are >155, >115 and 
>10 mmol/L, respectively, this may indicate ante-mortem 
dehydration. If the urea concentration is >20 mmol/L 
and creatinine >200 μmol/L with sodium and chloride 
concentrations within the normally accepted range, this 
indicates that uraemia was present before death.
A number of biochemical tests have been advocated for 
particular purposes, but remain little used (see Table 44.3). 
Attempts to employ the rate of rise of vitreous humour 
potassium concentration, in order to calculate the time 
of death, have largely been abandoned because of the 
TABLE 44.2  Post-mortem biochemistry interpretation
Analyte
Matrix
Acceptable post-mortem range
Interpretation of raised concentration
Glucose
Vitreous humour
After death, vitreous humour glucose 
falls rapidly, therefore any detectable 
glucose requires investigation
(Drug induced) hyperglycaemia, 
diabetic ketoacidosis, stress response 
(interpret in conjunction with lactate)
β-Hydroxy-butyrate
Blood, vitreous 
humour
0.1–1.0 mmol/L
Fasting, prolonged alcohol abuse, 
diabetic ketoacidosis, stress response 
(e.g. hypothermia)
HbA1c
Blood
27–67 mmol/mol
Poor long-term (2–8 weeks) blood 
glucose control
Creatinine
Vitreous humour
<100 μmol/L
Poor renal function; high protein intake; 
large muscle mass; heat shock
Lactate
Vitreous humour
<10 mmol/L
Interpret in conjunction with glucose
Sodium
Vitreous humour
135–145 mmol/L
Salt poisoning; dehydration (interpret in 
conjunction with creatinine and urea)
Chloride
Vitreous humour
95–105 mmol/L
Salt poisoning; dehydration (interpret in 
conjunction with creatinine and urea)
Urea
Vitreous humour
<10 mmol/L
Poor renal function; upper GI haemorrhage
Tryptase
Blood
<100 μmol/L
Anaphylactic shock
TABLE 44.3  Post-mortem biochemistry: some little used/unvalidated tests
Analyte
Matrix
Suggested role in diagnosis of:
Adrenaline:noradrenaline ratio
Urine
Hypothermia
Chymase
Blood
Anaphylactic shock
Chromogranin A
Serum, cerebrospinal fluid
Hypothermia
C-reactive protein (CRP)
EDTA blood, liver
Recent infection, trauma, burns, ketoacidosis, necrosis.
Diagnosis of sepsis if measured soon after death
Fructosamine
Vitreous humour
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Hypoxanthine
Vitreous humour
Time of death
Lactate
Vitreous humour
If very high, may indicate lactic acidaemia (but may be 
formed perimortem)
Thyroglobulin, free tri-iodothyronine 
(fT3)
Blood
Neck trauma (e.g. strangulation)
Troponin
Pericardial fluid
Myocardial damage present prior to microscopic 
changes
880	
Clinical biochemistry
inherent uncertainty of this method, even when vitreous 
humour hypoxanthine is also analysed, with the aim of 
increasing the accuracy of the procedure. Use of synovial 
fluid, as an alternative to vitreous humour, for potassium 
measurement for time-of-death estimation, has also been 
advocated. It has been claimed that regression analysis 
of vitreous humour hypoxanthine, potassium and urea 
concentrations can give a reliable time-of-death estimate, 
taking into account the cause of death. There are reports 
of immunochemical detection of glucagon in pancreatic 
cells and of calcitonin in thyroid C-cells being used to in-
dicate time of death, but these methods are experimental 
at best. Serial monitoring of C-reactive protein (CRP), 
procalcitonin, interleukin-6, interleukin-1β, soluble 
­interleukin-2 receptor or lipopolysaccharide binding 
protein in the hours after death, has been suggested as 
an aid to the diagnosis of sepsis, but has not been widely 
adopted.
The measurement of markers of heart muscle damage 
(e.g. myoglobin, creatine kinase, troponin) as an adjunct to 
searching for evidence of microscopic changes in samples 
of myocardium post-mortem, has been investigated with 
the aim of improving the diagnosis of ante-mortem isch-
aemic damage. However, the only post-mortem fluid with 
which there has been some success in this approach, has 
been pericardial fluid; concurrent post-mortem changes 
limiting the value of fluids such as blood. Unfortunately, 
as microscopy has always been viewed as the definitive 
method for the diagnosis of ante-mortem heart damage, 
the use of biochemical markers in cases where death has 
occurred prior to microscopic changes becoming appar-
ent has not been fully investigated. Hence, the interpreta-
tion of results remains problematic.
SPECIFIC DIAGNOSTIC PROBLEMS
Anaphylaxis/anaphylactoid reactions
Many drugs may precipitate anaphylaxis or anaphylac-
toid reactions. Mast-cell tryptase is an indicator of ana-
phylactic shock. Measurement of blood chymase has also 
been suggested in this context. Although a raised serum 
or plasma tryptase activity can supply important support-
ing evidence in the diagnosis of anaphylaxis, it cannot be 
used as the sole criterion for the post-mortem diagnosis 
of anaphylaxis as a cause of death, since there is overlap 
with results from people who die from causes other than 
anaphylaxis.
Diabetes
Blood and vitreous humour glucose concentrations gen-
erally fall rapidly after death and are thus an unreliable 
guide to ante-mortem glucose concentration. However, 
since glucose undergoes anaerobic glycolysis to lactate, 
some investigators have suggested that measuring the 
sum of vitreous humour glucose and lactate may give a 
better estimation of the glucose concentration at the time 
of death. A potentially complicating factor is that lactate 
may increase perimortem. Moreover, some drugs that 
are themselves unstable in biological systems, for example 
ethanol and insulin, may cause fatal ­hypoglycaemia, hence 
compounding the ­difficulties that may be encountered in 
establishing a cause of death.
An elevated post-mortem blood HbA1c concentration 
might indicate poor glucose control during life. This sug-
gestion may be supported by an elevated vitreous humour 
glucose concentration. In patients with type 1 diabetes, 
the presence of ketones (principally acetone and its me-
tabolite 2-propanol, but also acetoacetate) may indicate 
the presence of diabetic ketosis prior to death, especially 
if considered together with the blood β-hydroxybutyrate 
(BHB) concentration. Schemes to aid interpretation 
of vitreous glucose concentrations, similar to that in 
Figure 44.1, are often cited, but even these may not give 
clear guidance as to the likely situation perimortem in 
some cases.
Measurement of ketones in blood or vitreous humour 
is recommended in unexplained deaths in chronic alco-
holic as well as diabetic patients. Prolonged poor nutri-
tion and use of alcohol (common in chronic alcoholics) 
promote the accumulation of ketones (acetone, butanone) 
and BHB, and often, elevated ketone concentrations (ac-
etone >20 mg/L) are the only notable post-mortem find-
ing. A practical scheme for investigating such deaths is 
given in Figure 44.2.
Drowning
Haemodilution is likely in victims of fresh-water drown-
ing, but not in those drowned in salt water. Thus, concen-
trations of ethanol, drugs or other analytes measured in 
the blood of victims of fresh-water drowning may be mis-
leadingly low. Conversely, haemoconcentration is likely if 
a cadaver has been dehydrated, for example by heat or by 
mummification. In all such cases, measurement of blood 
haemoglobin may give an estimate of the magnitude of 
haemodilution/concentration, if it has not been degraded 
by heat or by prolonged storage.
It has been suggested that haemodilution in fresh-
water drowning produces a lower chloride concentration 
in left heart blood as compared with right heart blood, 
while in salt water drowning, haemoconcentration and 
chloride ion absorption is said to produce the opposite 
result. High concentrations of magnesium in left heart 
blood compared with right heart blood may reflect mag-
nesium absorption from salt water. Trace element analysis 
has been proposed as an aid to discriminate fresh-water 
drowning from salt-water drowning, but seems to offer 
poor discriminatory power and other (non-biochemical) 
investigations, notably looking for species of diatoms, are 
more helpful in such cases.
Hypothermia/hyperthermia
Cold may be a significant factor in a death, but there 
are no specific biochemical markers that can be used to 
confirm a diagnosis of fatal hypothermia. Indications of 
ante-mortem cold stress include high urinary adrena-
line and noradrenaline concentrations and Wischnewsky 
spots (small gastric mucosal bleeds). An increased 
adrenaline:noradrenaline ratio may be a better indi-
cator of ante-mortem hypothermia than the separate 
	
44  Forensic biochemistry	
881
Acetone >20 mg/L on headspace GC:
measure β-hydroxybutyrate in blood or
vitreous humour
β-Hydroxybutyrate ≥1 mmol/L:
measure vitreous glucose and blood HbA1c
β-Hydroxybutyrate <1 mmol/L:
significant ketosis unlikely
Likely potentially fatal 
diabetic ketoacidosis 
Vitreous glucose detectable and
HbA1c raised with β-hydroxy-
butyrate 1–5 mmol/L 
Vitreous glucose detectable and
HbA1c raised with β-hydroxy-
butyrate >5 mmol/L 
Vitreous glucose
undetectable, HbA1c
normal, but β-hydroxy-
butyrate >5 mmol/L 
Likely poorly controlled
diabetes with moderate ketone
body formation
Possibly starvation,
alcoholic ketoacidosis, or
prolonged stress response
FIGURE 44.2  ■  Suggested scheme for investigation of unexpected deaths in patients in whom diabetes or alcoholism is a possibility.
No
No
Yes
Yes
No
Yes
Yes
Blood HbA1c >67 mmol/mol Hb
Vitreous glucose detectable 
Ketones and/or β-Hydroxybutyrate
raised
Ketones and/or β-Hydroxybutyrate
raised
Ketones and/or β-Hydroxybutyrate raised
Hyperosmolar  
non-ketotic 
hyperglycaemia*
Non-diabetic hyper- 
glycaemia or hypothermia 
?
Non-diabetic ketoacidosis, but
cannot exclude hypoglycaemia
or hypothermia
Cannot exclude hypoglycaemia
due to, e.g., insulin or acute
ethanol poisoning
No
No
Diabetic  
hyperglycaemia/ 
ketoacidosis
Yes
FIGURE 44.1  ■  Aid to the interpretation of post-mortem vitreous humour glucose and blood β-hydroxybutyrate concentrations. 
*Requires confirmation from vitreous humour sodium and urea/creatinine.
882	
Clinical biochemistry
catecholamine results. Ketone and glucose concentra-
tions may also be elevated, and in persistent hypother-
mia, there may be electrolyte disturbances and metabolic 
acidosis. A role for measurement of chromogranin A has 
been postulated.
Fatal hyperthermia (heat stroke) often involves mul-
tiple organ dysfunction, including skeletal muscle dam-
age without marked inflammatory responses. It has been 
suggested that isolated elevation of serum creatinine may 
help in diagnosis.
Inflammation
Blood CRP concentration peaks within 6 h of a stimulus 
and CRP is stable in post-mortem samples. Liver is said 
to be a good alternative specimen if blood is not avail-
able. Interpretation of results can be difficult, however, as 
there are many causes of a raised blood CRP in addition 
to inflammation (see Table 44.3).
Sudden death
Sudden unexpected death in infancy (SUDI, also known 
as sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), Table  44.4), 
may be an acute manifestation of an inborn error of me-
tabolism, particularly a fat oxidation defect, and there-
fore these should be excluded. Sudden arrhythmic death 
syndrome (also known as sudden adult death syndrome 
(SADS)) is thought likely often to have a cardiac origin 
such as a fatal arrhythmia, but a full toxicological analy-
sis is required to exclude recent use of not only illicit 
drugs (such as cocaine and other stimulants), but also 
therapeutic drugs (e.g. tricyclic antidepressants and an-
tipsychotics) that may increase the risk of a fatal ­cardiac 
arrhythmia.
Further reading
Up-to-date reviews on post-mortem biochemistry
Madea B. Sudden death, especially in infancy – improvement of 
diagnoses by biochemistry, immunohistochemistry and molecular 
pathology. Legal Medicine (Tokyo) 2009;11(Suppl. 1):S36–42.
Maeda H, Ishikawa T, Michiue T. Forensic biochemistry for functional 
investigation of death: concept and practical application. Legal 
Medicine (Tokyo) 2011;13:55–67.
Palmiere C, Lesta Mdel M, Sabatasso S et al. Usefulness of post-mortem 
biochemistry in forensic pathology: illustrative case reports. Legal 
Medicine (Tokyo) 2012a;14:27–35.
Practical guidance on post-mortem samples  
and sampling
Dinis-Oliveira RJ, Carvalho F, Duarte JA et  al. Collection of 
biological samples in forensic toxicology. Toxicol Mech Methods 
2010;20:363–414.
Flanagan RJ, Connally G, Evans JM. Analytical toxicology: guidelines 
for sample collection post-mortem. Toxicol Rev 2005;24:63–71.
Royal College of Pathologists and Royal College of Paediatrics and 
Child Health. Sudden unexpected death in infancy. A multiagency 
protocol for care and investigation. London: RCP and RCPCH; 2004. 
http://www.rcpath.org/NR/rdonlyres/30213EB6-451B-4830-A7FD-
4EEFF0420260/0/SUDIreportforweb.pdf [Accessed 30.09.13].
Clinical and post-mortem diagnosis of disorders  
of glucose metabolism
Boulagnon C, Garnotel R, Fornes P et al. Post-mortem biochemistry of 
vitreous humor and glucose metabolism: an update. Clin Chem Lab 
Med 2011;49:1265–70.
Elliott S, Smith C, Cassidy D. The post-mortem relationship between 
beta-hydroxybutyrate (BHB), acetone and ethanol in ketoacidosis. 
Forensic Sci Int 2010;198:53–7.
Hess C, Musshoff F, Madea B. Disorders of glucose metabolism: 
post-mortem analyses in forensic cases: part I. Int J Legal Med 
2011;125:163–70.
Hockenhull J, Dhillo W, Andrews R et al. Investigation of markers to 
indicate and distinguish death due to alcoholic ketoacidosis, diabetic 
ketoacidosis and hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state using post-
mortem samples. Forensic Sci Int 2012;214:142–7.
McGuire LC, Cruickshank AM, Munro PT. Alcoholic ketoacidosis. 
Emerg Med J 2006;23:417–20.
Musshoff F, Hess C, Madea B. Disorders of glucose metabolism: 
post-mortem analyses in forensic cases. Part II. Int J Legal Med 
2011;125:171–80.
Palmiere C, Sporkert F, Werner D et  al. Blood, urine and vitreous 
isopropyl alcohol as biochemical markers in forensic investigations. 
Leg Med (Tokyo) 2012b;14:17–20.
Reviews on post-mortem diagnosis of anaphylaxis,  
hyperthermia/hypothermia and sepsis
Da Broi U, Moreschi C. Post-mortem diagnosis of anaphylaxis: a 
difficult task in forensic medicine. Forensic Sci Int 2011;204:1–5.
Tsokos M. Post-mortem diagnosis of sepsis. Forensic Sci Int 
2007;165:155–64.
Yoshida C, Ishikawa T, Michiue T et al. Post-mortem biochemistry and 
immunohistochemistry of chromogranin A as a stress marker with 
special regard to fatal hypothermia and hyperthermia. Int J Legal 
Med 2011;125:11–20.
TABLE 44.4  Some biological samples required 
when investigating sudden unexpected death 
in infancy (SUDI)
Sample (volume)
Handling
Test
Blood (serum)
(1–2 mL)
Centrifuge, 
store serum 
at −20 °C
Toxicology
Urine (20 mL if 
possible)
Store at −20 °C
Toxicology and 
specialized 
tests for 
inherited 
metabolic 
diseases
Blood from 
Guthrie card
Ensure circle is 
filled. Do not 
put in plastic 
bag
Tests for inherited 
metabolic 
diseases
Skin biopsy
After discussion 
with 
paediatrician 
and 
laboratory
Tests for inherited 
metabolic 
disease, e.g. 
fibroblast 
enzyme activity
Muscle biopsy
After discussion 
with 
paediatrician 
and 
laboratory
If history suggests 
mitochondrial 
disorder
Further details: Royal College of Pathologists and Royal College of 
Paediatrics and Child Health (2004).
883
Note
Page numbers suffixed by 'b,' 'f,' and 't' refer 
to boxes, figures and tables respectively.
A
Abdomen, acute 227–230
causes 228, 228b
Abdominal pain, in acute porphyria 538, 541
Abetalipoproteinemia 689, 700, 722t, 724
ABO blood group 510, 510t
laboratory tests 511, 511t
Abortion, spontaneous 443
Acanthosis nigricans 294–295
Acarbose 317
Accidental poisoning 788. See also Poisoning
Accuracy 10–11
Acetaldehyde 257
Acetaminophen. See Paracetamol
Acetoacetate, in ketoacidosis 77, 299, 327
Acetyl-CoA, metabolism 647–649,  
650f, 657
Acetylcysteine 794t, 796
N-Acetyl β-d-glucosaminidase (NAG) 
161–162, 162b
N-Acetylglutamate synthetase (NAGS) 
deficiency 463f, 478
N-Acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine (NAPQI) 
795, 795f
Acetylsalicylic acid. See Aspirin
Aches
in articular disorders 638–639. See also  
Pain
Acholuric jaundice 245
Acidaemia 65–66
methylmalonic 479, 480f
propionic 479, 480f
Acid–base disturbances. See Hydrogen ion 
homeostasis, disorders
Acid–base status
in acute kidney injury 140
assessment 73–74
in chronic kidney disease 143–144
data interpretation 85–86, 85f
potassium distribution and 32. See also 
Hydrogen ion homeostasis
Acid-labile subunit (ALS), in tumour-related 
hypoglycaemia 282, 343
Acidosis
anion gap 74
definition 65–66
dilutional 78
effect on TmP/GFR 112
lactic. See Lactic acidosis
metabolic. See Acidosis, non-respiratory
osteomalacia and 623
potassium secretion and 33
in renal disease 78–80
acute kidney injury 78–79, 140
chronic kidney disease 78–79, 143
renal hypokalaemic 54–55, 54b, 57
renal tubular. See Renal tubular acidosis 
(RTA)
respiratory. See Acidosis, respiratory
systemic effects 75–76
urinary ammonium excretion 71
Acidosis, non-respiratory 74–80
biochemical characteristics 75
buffering 74
causes 74, 75b, 76–80
compensatory responses 73, 74–75
in diabetic subjects 330. See also Diabetic 
ketoacidosis (DKA)
differential diagnosis 469b
hyperventilation 73, 74–75
in inherited metabolic disease 469, 469b, 
473–474
interpretation of acid–base data 85, 85f
management 76
in neonates 488
osteomalacia and 623
poisoning-related 790t
renal hydrogen ion excretion 75. See also 
specific causes
Acidosis, respiratory 80–82
biochemical characteristics 81
buffering 80–81
causes 81b
compensatory responses 80–81
hyperventilation 81
interpretation of acid–base data 85, 85f
management 81–82
renal hydrogen ion excretion 81
systemic effects 81
Acid phosphatase, tartrate-resistant 613
Acidurias, amino 136, 170–172
Acid α-glucosidase 654–655
Acinus 232–233, 233f
Acquired immunity 560. See also Adaptive 
immune system
Acromegaly 362–363
diagnosis 362
management 362–363
monitoring response to therapy 363
presentation 362–363
hypertension 748–749
peripheral neuropathy 693
secondary diabetes 294
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
(ACTH)
Actin 646, 647f, 740
Action limits 16
Activated charcoal 794, 797, 798, 803
Activated partial thromboplastin time 
(APTT) 508, 509t
Active transport, in renal tubule 169f
Activin 436–437
Acute abdomen. See Abdomen, acute
Acute chest syndrome 556
Acute confusional state. See Delirium
Acute coronary syndrome (ACS) 738,  
739f, 744
non-ST elevation 739f, 744
treatment 744, 744f. See also 
Myocardial damage, acute; 
Myocardial infarction
Acute dilutional hyponatraemia 46–47, 47f, 50
causes 47b
laboratory investigation 50
management 51. See also Hyponatraemia
Acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP) 263, 
445, 465–466
Acute intermittent porphyria (AIP) 534t, 
537t, 538
hepatocellular carcinoma risk 539
homozygous 542
molecular genetics 534–537, 537t
pathophysiology 538
screening 541t. See also Porphyria(s),  
acute
Acute kidney injury (AKI) 136–141
acid–base balance 140
causes 136–137, 137b
chronic kidney disease vs. 136
in cirrhosis 260–261
differential diagnosis 261, 261t
classification 136–137
clinical features 136t
fluid and electrolyte balance 140
hepatorenal syndrome. See Hepatorenal 
syndrome (HRS)
hypertension in 759
intrinsic 137b, 138–139
diagnosis 138, 138t
management 140–141
general 140
renal replacement treatment 141
metabolic consequences 140–141
acidosis 78–79, 140
hypercalcaemia 103t, 140
hyperkalaemia 140
metabolic features 136t
nutrition and 140
poisoning-related 793
postrenal (obstructive) 137b, 139
prerenal 137–138, 137b
diagnosis 137–138, 138t
management 138
in setting of chronic kidney disease 139, 
139b
Acute liver failure (ALF) 253
amino acid metabolism 235
assessment of prognosis 249
carbohydrate metabolism 234
laboratory features 253
liver transplantation 253
monitoring 246
in pregnancy 263
progression from viral hepatitis 252–253
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) 505f
Acute myelomonocytic leukaemia, renal 
potassium loss 56
Acute phase proteins 408, 571–572
functions 572t
properties 572, 572t
psychiatric disorder investigation 676t
Acute phase reactants, liver function tests 243
Acute phase response, investigation/markers 
598, 644
Index
884	
Index
Acute phosphate deficiency syndrome 116, 116t
Acute rejection 599b
Acute renal failure. See Acute kidney injury
Acute sodium loading 38
Acute tubular necrosis (ATN) 138–139
natural history 139
pathogenesis 138, 139f
Acylcarnitine profiling 473
Acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase (ACAT) 
718
Acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase 2 
(ACAT2) 711, 718
Acyl-CoA dehydrogenases 647–649, 649f
Acylglycines, measurement in urine 657
Adaptive immune system 562–570, 562t
antigen recognition 566–570
cells 562, 562t, 563t, 564f. See also White 
blood cells (WBCs)
cellular immune activation 570
lymphoid tissue 562, 562t, 563f
soluble mediators 562, 562t
Addison disease 59, 583
clinical features 369–370
depression 679
hypercalcaemia 103t
hypoglycaemia 345
salt wasting 35
Addisonian crisis 369–370
hypoglycaemia in 345
Adenohypophysis. See Pituitary gland, 
anterior lobe
Adenomas
pituitary. See Pituitary adenomas
toxic. See Toxic adenoma
Adenomatous primary hyperparathyroidism 
101, 102t, 103–104
Adenosine deaminase (ADA) deficiency 481, 
528
Adenosine phosphoribosyl transferase 
(APRT) deficiency 178
Adenosine triphosphate (ATP) 109–110
generation in red blood cells 517, 518f
defective 528
muscle contraction role 646
cardiac muscle 740–741
Adenoviruses, gene therapy vectors 870
Adenylate kinase 647
Adherence, drug 767–768
therapeutic drug monitoring 772
Adipocyte lipid-binding protein (ALBP) 717
Adipose tissue
insulin actions 280t
lipolysis 713
Adipose triglyceride lipase (ATGL) 713
Adipsic hypernatraemia 44
Adjustable gastric band (AGB) 206, 206f
Adolescents, with disorder of sex 
development 419–420, 419f
Adrenal glands
anatomy 352
disease 369–370
autoimmune 583
hormone replacement therapy, 
monitoring 370–371. See also specific 
diseases
function, depression and 678–679, 680
function tests
steroid therapy and 358–359. See also 
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
(ACTH)–adrenal axis, assessment
physiology 352, 353f
Adrenal incidentaloma 762, 764
assessment 370
Adrenaline
secretion, hypoglycaemia response 334
stress response 405, 407–408
Adrenaline:noradrenaline ratio, post-mortem 
biochemistry 879t, 880–882
Adrenal insufficiency, primary. See Addison 
disease
Adrenal medulla, stress response 405
Adrenal suppression, steroid therapy-
associated, assessment 358–359
Adrenarche 414
premature 429
Adrenergic receptors 407
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) 
350–351
deficiency 352, 354, 358, 360
hypoglycaemia due to 345
investigation 353–354, 357, 358
isolated 369
in depression 678–679
petrosal sinus sampling 365–366
plasma measurements, Cushing syndrome 
364, 365
in post-traumatic stress disorder 679
secretion 350–351
ectopic 364, 761t, 814, 815t. See also 
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
(ACTH)-dependent Cushing 
syndrome
stress response 9, 404
test (short tetracosactide test) 354, 355, 
358, 372
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH)–­
adrenal axis, assessment
clinical approach 358–359
dynamic tests of function 354–355
reproducibility 355
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone  
(ACTH)-dependent Cushing 
syndrome
clinical context 364–365
differential diagnosis 364, 364f. See also 
Cushing syndrome
Adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) 465
Adrenoleukodystrophy protein (ALDP) 465
Adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) 465, 689
Advanced glycation end products (AGEs) 
296–297
Adynamic bone disease 625
Aerobic exercise tests 655
Affective disorders 675, 675t. See also specific 
affective disorders
Affinity maturation 561
AFP (α-fetoprotein)
Down syndrome screening 443
liver function tests 242
plasma concentrations
in children 837–838
effect of gestational age on 443, 443f
as tumour marker 264, 822t, 826t
gastric cancer 831
germ cell tumours 832, 833–834, 833f, 
834f
hepatocellular carcinoma 264, 835–836, 
838
Age
body fluid distribution in relation to 28t
cardiovascular disease risk and 751, 751f
effect on test results 8, 8t
effect on urinary protein excretion 155
Age-related changes
alkaline phosphatase 8, 493, 610f, 632
bone 609, 615
cerebrospinal fluid proteins 663, 663t
immunoglobulins 575–576, 576f
osteocalcin 610f, 632
plasma phosphate concentration  
113, 113t
thyroid function 379
Agouti-related peptide (AgRP) 203
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
in acute hepatitis 251
in alcoholic hepatitis 257
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
in cerebrospinal fluid 667
critical difference 15t
liver function tests 240
in muscle disease 653. See also 
Aminotransferases
Alarmins 406
Albright hereditary osteodystrophy 491
Albumin 2, 242
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
cerebrospinal fluid 663, 663f, 663t
in assessment of blood–brain barrier 
permeability 664
clearance 154t
critical difference 15t
glomerular filtration rate 153–154, 160
liver function tests 242
oncotic pressure 28
plasma concentration
in chronic hepatitis 254
in malnutrition 194–195
in pregnancy 446
in protein–energy malnutrition 201
reabsorption 154
sodium excess and 37
thyroid hormone transport 376
urinary excretion 152, 155, 155t
age-related differences 155
in diabetes 322
diet and 155
glomerular vs. tubular disease 160, 160t
in pregnancy 156. See also 
Microalbuminuria
urine, measurement 165–166
investigation of stone formers 178
Alcohol
acid–base disturbances 77
cardiovascular disease risk and 756
effects 800
on biochemical variables 8t
on bone mineral density 615
on protein metabolism 258
hypertriglyceridaemia association 731
metabolism 257, 801f
metabolites, measurement 258
poisoning 685, 792t, 799–800, 801f
withdrawal syndrome 800. See also Alcohol 
misuse
Alcoholic hepatitis 251, 254t, 257, 800
Alcoholic ketoacidosis 76–77, 330, 800
Alcoholic liver disease 257–258, 800
biochemical abnormalities 257–258
γ-glutamyltransferase activity 241, 257
iron overload 257
differential diagnosis 254t, 255
laboratory tests 258
liver pathology 257–258
Alcoholic steatosis 257–258
Alcohol-induced hypoglycaemia 321, 346–347
Alcohol misuse
acute pancreatitis and 228, 229t
diabetes mellitus and 293
thiamin deficiency and 686. See also 
Alcohol
Aldolase B deficiency 464
Aldose reductase 296
diabetic neuropathy pathophysiology 
691–692
	
  Index	
885
Aldosterone 28–29, 29f
effect of posture 9
effect of potassium 33
menstrual cycle and 38
in pre-eclampsia 38
reference ranges 766
in stress response 406
in syndromes of hypoaldosteronism 59–60, 
59t
Aldosterone-producing adenoma (APA) 
760–761
localization 762. See also 
Hyperaldosteronism
Aldosterone:renin ratio 762
confounding factors 762
protocol for investigation 765–766
Aldosteronism. See Hyperaldosteronism
Alendronate 617–618
Alfacalcidol 98, 622, 623, 627
Alkalaemia 65–66
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP) 239, 609
in acute hepatitis 251
age-related changes 8, 493, 610f, 632
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
bone 607
as turnover marker 609–610, 610f, 626, 
630
in chronic hepatitis 254
in chronic kidney disease–mineral and 
bone disorder 626
critical difference 15t
in hypophosphatasia 624
in infants 492–493
iso-enzymes 239
analysis 240, 240f
liver function tests 239–240, 245, 247
enhancement of specificity 240, 240f
in osteopenia of prematurity 492, 492t
in Paget disease 630
parenteral nutrition-associated changes 
264
placental, as tumour marker 823t, 832
in pregnancy 262–263, 446
in primary biliary cirrhosis 256
in primary sclerosing cholangitis 256–257
sex-related changes 493
Alkalosis
effect on TmP/GFR 112
metabolic. See Alkalosis, non-respiratory
post-hypercapnic 81, 83
potassium secretion and 33
renal hypokalaemic 54b, 55–56, 57
respiratory. See Alkalosis, respiratory
systemic effects 83
Alkalosis, non-respiratory 75
biochemical characteristics 83
buffering 82
causes 82b, 83–84
compensatory responses 82–83
hypoventilation 82
interpretation of acid–base data  
85, 85f
management 83
potassium depletion 82–83
renal bicarbonate excretion 82–83
systemic effects 83
Alkalosis, respiratory 84–85
biochemical features 84
causes 84b
compensatory responses 84
hypophosphataemia 116
in inherited metabolic disease 469
management 84–85
systemic effects 84
Alkapton 643
Alkaptonuria 482, 482f
articular manifestations 643
Allan–Herndon–Dudley syndrome 377
Alleles 848
definition 871
Allele-specific amplification 855–856, 856f
Allele-specific oligonucleotide (ASO) 
technique 855, 856f
reverse method 856–857
Allergies 580–582
clinical features 580
investigation 580–581
IgE measurement 581, 581t, 582t
indications 581t
patient history 580–581, 580t
skin prick testing 581, 581t
prevalence 580
therapeutic diets 209t. See also Anaphylaxis
Allopurinol 641
Allopurinol loading test 475
Alpha-glucosidase inhibitors 317
Alpha-subunit, measurement 386
Alpha thalassaemia 552–553, 552t, 558
α-Blockers, hypertension management in 
diabetes mellitus 309
Alprostadil 459
Alstrom syndrome 202t
Alternative pathway, complement activation 
570, 571f
Aluminium
plasma concentrations, measurement 
626–627, 635
retention in chronic kidney disease–
mineral and bone disorder 625
clinical features 625
investigation 626–627, 635
toxicity, treatment 628
Aluminium hydroxide 114–115
toxicity 148–149
Alveolar gas equation 87
Alveolar ventilation 87
Alzheimer disease 665, 670, 677
apolipoprotein E and 710, 719
cerebrospinal fluid analysis 670–671
genetics 678
markers 678
Amadori products 296–297
Amadori rearrangement 300–301
Amanitins 806
Amenorrhoea 439–440
causes 615, 615b
depression 680
hypothalamic 353, 356–357, 368f, 369
investigations, in adolescent girls 419, 
419f
Amfetamine abuse 792t, 801, 801t
Amikacin, therapeutic drug monitoring 781
Amino acid(s)
essential 183, 183b
metabolism. See Amino acid metabolism
non-essential 183, 183b
parenteral nutrition 211
plasma analysis, in inherited metabolic 
diseases 472, 472b
renal tubular handling 168, 170
transporters, L-type 377
urinary analysis, in inherited metabolic 
diseases 472, 472b
Amino acid disorders 472, 472t
investigation 472, 472b
primary 472
renal 472, 472t. See also specific disorders
Amino acid metabolism 69–70
disorders. See Amino acid disorders
hepatic 235, 235f
Aminoacidurias 136, 170–172
Aminoglycoside antibiotics
therapeutic drug monitoring 770–771, 
773, 781
toxicity 161, 781
Aminoguanidine 692
5-Aminolaevulinic acid (ALA) dehydratase 
533, 535f
5-Aminolaevulinic acid dehydratase 
deficiency porphyria (ADP) 534t, 542
biochemical findings 537t, 542
molecular genetics 537t
5-Aminolaevulinic acid synthase (ALAS) 533, 
535f
Aminotransferases, liver function tests 
240–241, 245, 247–248
in acute hepatitis 251
in alcoholic hepatitis 257
in chronic hepatitis 254
in hepatitis B infection 255
parenteral nutrition-associated changes 264
in primary sclerosing cholangitis 256–257
Amiodarone, therapeutic drug monitoring 
777
Amiodarone-induced thyroid dysfunction 
390t, 393
Amitriptyline, therapeutic drug monitoring 
780
Ammonia
buffering 67
intoxication, urea cycle defects 462, 469
plasma measurements, in inherited 
metabolic diseases 469, 470
production and clearance 235, 235f
Ammonium
buffering 67
urinary excretion 67, 71, 72f
non-respiratory acidosis 75
respiratory acidosis 81
Amniocentesis 444–445, 444f, 444t, 476, 860
Amplification refractory mutation system 
(ARMS), genetic analysis in cystic 
fibrosis 863–864, 864f
Amylase
clearance 154t
elevated activity, non-pancreatic causes 
218t
pancreatic function testing 217–218
acute pancreatitis 228–229
salivary 221
Amylin 288
Amylo-1:6-glucosidae 654–655
Amyloid A, properties 572t
Amyloidosis 596–597, 597t, 697–699
biochemical abnormalities 696b
Amyloid precursor protein (APP) 678
Amyloid protein β 665–666
deposition in Alzheimer disease 678
Amylopectin 182f, 220–221
Amylose 182f, 220–221
Amyotrophy, diabetic 324
Anaemia 517
aplastic 524
associated with increased red cell loss 
524–529. See also Haemolytic anaemia
associated with reduction in red cell 
production 517–524
acquired causes 524
inherited causes 524
nutritional deficiencies 517–520
vitamin B12 and folate deficiency. See 
Megaloblastic anaemia
of chronic disease 524, 643–644, 816, 816t
in chronic kidney disease 143, 147, 149
classification 517
definition 501, 517
886	
Index
Anaemia (Continued)
in erythropoietic protoporphyria 547
in gastric and small bowel disease 220
haemolytic. See Haemolytic anaemia
in hypothyroidism 395
investigation in immunological diseases 
601t
iron deficiency. See Iron deficiency 
anaemia
leukoerythroblastic 524
in malignancy 816, 816t
megaloblastic. See Megaloblastic anaemia
morphological changes in red blood cells 
501–503
pernicious. See Pernicious anaemia
in rheumatoid arthritis 643–644
sickle cell. See Sickle cell disease
symptoms 517
Anaerobic glycolysis. See Glycolysis
Anaesthesia, porphyria patients 542
Analbuminaemia, congenital 37
Analgesics
narcotic, antidote 794t
therapeutic drug monitoring 777
tubular damage 161
Analytical factors, affecting test results 10–12
Analytical goals 11t, 12
Analytical precision 11, 11t
Analytical range 10–12
Analytical variation 9–10, 11, 11t, 15
Anaphylactic shock 574–575
Anaphylactoid reactions 581–582
post-mortem biochemistry 880
Anaphylatoxins 157, 571t
Anaphylaxis 581–582
clinical features 582t
investigation 582, 601t
mediators 572t, 581–582
post-mortem biochemistry 880
treatment 581–582
Androgen(s) 262
deficiency/resistance, XY disorder of sex 
development 425, 426t
effect on prostate cancer 820
excess
polycystic ovary syndrome 440
XX disorder of sex development 
423–425, 424t
in females 439
secretion 352
sensitivity, assessment 428
Androgen insensitivity syndromes 456
complete 426t, 427–428, 456
partial 419–420, 426t, 427–428, 456
Androstenedione
biosynthesis 437–438, 438f
in females 439
excess 440
human chorionic gonadotrophin 
stimulation test 422
Angelman syndrome 852
Angina
stable 744
unstable 738, 739f, 744
Angiokeratoma corporis diffusum. See Fabry 
disease
Angiopoietin-like protein 3 (ANGPTL3) 721
Angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) 
28–29, 29f
in cerebrospinal fluid 667
Angiotensin-converting-enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors
control of pathological thirst 41
diabetes management
cardiovascular risk 309
kidney disease 323
hyperkalaemia risk 59
proteinuria management
in chronic kidney disease 156
membranous nephropathy 158
microalbuminuria 164–165
Angiotensin I 28–29, 29f, 127
Angiotensin II 28–29, 29f, 127, 137
control of thirst 32, 41
in stress response 406
Angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARBs)
diabetes management
cardiovascular risk 309
kidney disease 323
microalbuminuria management 164–165
proteinuria management
in chronic kidney disease 156
membranous nephropathy 158
microalbuminuria 164–165
Angiotensinogen 28–29, 29f
Anion gap 74
in poisoning 875t
Ankylosing spondylitis 638
Ankyrins 516–517
Anorchia 431, 455
Anorexia nervosa 207
amenorrhoea and 369
endocrine abnormalities 207, 207b, 681
potassium depletion 53
Antacid-induced hypophosphataemic 
­osteomalacia 621t, 622, 623
Antenatal screening 4–5. See also Fetus, 
screening for malformation. specific 
techniques
Anthropometric measurements, nutritional 
status 193–194
Antiarrhythmics, therapeutic drug 
­monitoring 777–778
Antibiotic therapy
shocked patients 409–411
therapeutic drug monitoring
aminoglycoside antibiotics 770–771, 
773, 781
chloramphenicol 781
glycopeptides 781
Antibodies
heterophilic, immunoassay interference 
385, 826b
non-pathogenic 583t
pathogenic 582, 583t. See also 
Autoantibodies
specific responses, quantification 602
Antibody identification panels 511
Antibody screening 511
Antibody tests
chronic CNS infections 669–670
pernicious anaemia 524
Anticholinergic syndrome 790t
α1-Antichymotrypsin 572t
Anticoagulants, antidotes 794t
Anticonvulsants, therapeutic drug 
­monitoring 778–780
newer drugs 779–780
Anti-D antibodies 510, 512–513
Antidepressants
poisoning 803–804
therapeutic drug monitoring 780
Antidiuretic hormone. See Arginine 
­vasopressin (AVP)
Antidotes 794, 794t
Antiemetics, as cause of hyperprolactinaemia 
361
Antiepileptics. See Anticonvulsants
Antifungal drugs, therapeutic drug 
­monitoring 781–782
Antigen(s) 561
blood group 510–511
distribution, nucleus 587, 587f
presentation 570
receptors 561
B lymphocytes. See Immunoglobulin(s)
T lymphocytes. See T cell receptor 
(TCR)
recognition 561, 566–570
Antihypertensive therapy 765
hyperlipidaemia association 731
sodium excess 39
Anti-inflammatory drugs, therapeutic drug 
monitoring 777
Antimicrobial drugs
therapeutic drug monitoring  781–782. 
See also Antibiotic therapy
Antimitochondrial antibodies (AMA) 256
Antimitotic syndrome 790t
Anti-Müllerian hormone (AMH) 413, 
434–435, 437, 451–452
measurement 437
in disorder of sex development (DSD) 
420, 422t
in infertile women 440–441
Antineoplastic drugs, therapeutic drug 
­monitoring 782–783
Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies 
(ANCA) 585, 586f
Antinuclear antibodies (ANAs) 255–256, 585, 
586f, 587, 587t
in pregnancy 587
Antinuclear factor (ANF), antibodies against 
638, 639t, 644–645
Anti-oestrogen preparations 439
Antiphospholipid antibodies 587–588
Antipsychotic drugs
metabolic complications
hyperglycaemia 682
hyperlipidaemia 682, 732
hyperprolactinaemia 681
therapeutic drug monitoring 780
Antiretroviral drugs
hyperlipidaemia association 732
therapeutic drug monitoring 782
Antithrombin 408
Antithyroid drugs 376
Graves disease treatment 391
maternal–fetal transfer 380
thyroid stimulating hormone-secreting 
pituitary tumour treatment 393
toxic multinodular goitre treatment 392
α1-Antitrypsin
deficiency 254t, 255, 268, 495
DNA analysis 862–863
gene 862
location 845
liver function tests 242
properties 572t
Antitubercular drugs, therapeutic drug 
­monitoring 782
Anuria 129
in acute kidney injury 136
Anxiety 676–677, 681
Aplastic anaemia 524
Apnoea of prematurity 486
Apolipoprotein 708–710
characteristics 707t
functions 707t, 708
measurement, investigation of lipid 
­disorders 733
in nephrotic syndrome 160t
Apolipoprotein(a) 710
cardiovascular disease risk and 753
Apolipoprotein A 707t, 709, 713
abnormal structure 722t, 728
A-I 707t, 709
deficiency 722t, 728
	
  Index	
887
A-I Milano 728
A-II 707t, 709
A-IV 707t, 709
A-V 707t, 709
Apolipoprotein B 707, 707t, 709
measurement, investigation of lipid 
disorders 733
Apolipoprotein B-48 224, 707–708,  
709, 713
characteristics 707t
Apolipoprotein B-100 707t, 709, 714, 866
familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 
727, 866
Apolipoprotein B-containing lipoproteins 
709
assembly 703–704, 711–713
Apolipoprotein C 707t, 709–710
C-I 707t, 710
C-II 707t, 710, 713, 714
deficiency 725
C-III 707t, 710, 713
Apolipoprotein D 707t, 710
Apolipoprotein E 707t, 710
investigation of lipid disorders 733
polymorphism 710, 719, 752, 867
Apolipoprotein M 707t, 710
Appetite 203–205
central control 203–204
in cancer cachexia 817
peripheral signals 204–205
salt 30
Aprataxin, gene mutation 700
APUDomas 226–227
Aquaporins 27, 30, 129
Arachidonic acid 705, 706f
Arcuate nucleus, appetite control and 203
Arginine
structure 170f
supplementation 410
Arginine infusion, assessment of growth 
hormone reserve 356
Arginine vasopressin (AVP) 31, 129,  
352, 404
in ascites formation 259
in chronic dilutional hyponatraemia  
47, 49f
in chronic kidney disease 147
collecting duct and 129
in diabetes insipidus 39, 40–41
cranial 39–40, 40f
in hypodipsic hypernatraemia 44, 45–46, 
45f
non-osmotic control 31
osmoregulatory control 31, 31f
plasma measurements, pituitary function 
assessment 354
in pregnancy 41
renal responsiveness 31, 32f
secretion 352
ectopic 814, 815t
fetal 487
water deprivation test. See Water 
deprivation test
stress response 404, 405, 406
Arginine vasopressin (AVP) receptor 
antagonists 51
Arginine vasopressin (AVP) V2 receptor 
(AVPR2) 31, 32f
in congenital nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus 40–41, 43
Arginyl-glycyl-aspartate (RGD)-containing 
glycoproteins 607, 607t
Aromatase 438
Aromatic amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) 
deficiency 478
Arteries, structure and function 741, 741f
Arthritis
Charcot 643
crystal 639–643
inflammatory 637–638. See also 
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
osteoarthritis. See Osteoarthritis (OA)
Arthus reaction 575
Articular cartilage 636–637, 637f
Articular disorders 637–643
aches and pains 638–639
autoimmune 585, 601t, 638, 639t, 644–645
in endocrine disease 643
laboratory testing 643–645
in systemic disease 643. See also Arthritis. 
specific disorders
Articular system 636–637
disorders. See Articular disorders
Ascites 259–260
bacterial infections and 264–265, 265t
causes 259–260, 260b
investigations 260, 260t, 261f
monitoring 260
l-Ascorbic acid 189. See also Vitamin C
Asfotase alfa 624
Asialotransferrin 666, 666f
Aspartate, metabolism 70
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
in acute hepatitis 251
in alcoholic hepatitis 257
liver function tests 240
mitochondrial isoenzyme 241
in muscle disease 653
in pregnancy 446. See also 
Aminotransferases
Aspirin 705
management of diabetes-related 
cardiovascular risk 307–308
pharmacological and metabolic effects 
797f
poisoning 796–797
clinical features 796
laboratory measurements 792t, 796–797
management 797
mechanisms 796, 797f
therapeutic drug monitoring 777
Asplenic patients, immune deficiency 580
Assisted reproduction 441, 457. See also 
In vitro fertilization (IVF)
Asterixis 699
Asymmetrical proximal neuropathy 691
Ataxia 699–701
in cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis 
700–701
in ceroid lipofuscinosis 701
in coeliac disease 701
early-onset with oculomotor apraxia and 
hypoalbuminemia 700
fragile-X-associated tremor/ataxia 
syndrome 700
Friedreich 699
in hexoaminidase deficiency 700
with vitamin E deficiency 185, 699–700
Ataxia telangiectasia 700
Atelectasis 89
Atherogenesis
cholesteryl esterase transfer protein and 
718
lipoprotein lipase role 716
theories of 741–743
lipid oxidation hypothesis 741–743, 
742f
response-to-injury hypothesis 741
vitamin E and 743
Atherosclerosis 738, 741–743, 755
diabetic populations 298
DNA analysis 866
eicosanoid role 705
high density lipoprotein association 715
lecithin cholesterol acyltransferase  
and 716
Atherosclerotic plaque 743, 743f
complicated/rupture 743, 743f
ATP binding cassette (ABC) transporter 
family 720
Atrial flutter/fibrillation, in ­hyperthyroidism 
388
Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) 29, 30, 30f
ectopic secretion 815t
in hyperaldosteronism 38–39
in idiopathic oedema 38
menstrual cycle and 38
in pre-eclampsia 38
in pregnancy 37
Audit, laboratory services 23, 23b, 23f
Autoantibodies 582
detection 582, 603
tests, in connective tissue diseases 
644–645
to thyroidal antigens 386–387, 583, 601t. 
See also Autoimmune diseases
Autohaemolysis test 530–531
Autoimmune diseases 582–588
articular 585, 601t, 638, 639t, 644–645
endocrine 583–588, 601t
gastrointestinal tract 583, 601t
kidneys 585, 585t, 586f, 601t
liver 584–585, 584t, 601t
skin 585, 601t. See also Autoantibodies
Autoimmune encephalopathy 688, 688t
Autoimmune haemolytic anaemia 527b, 528
in malignant disease 816
morphological features 501, 503f
Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) 255–256, 584
investigations 584, 584t
monitoring response to therapy 256
in pregnancy 263
Autoimmune hypoglycaemia 344
Autoimmune hypoparathyroidism 106
Autoimmune insulin syndrome 344
Autoimmune polyendocrine syndromes 
(APS) 583–585, 584t
Autoimmune polyendocrinopathy–
candidiasis–ectodermal dystrophy 
(APECED) syndrome 106, 107t, 
584t
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 1 
(APS-1) 106
Autoimmune polyglandular syndrome type 2 
(APS-2) 106
Automated peritoneal dialysis (APD), chronic 
kidney disease 150
Autonomic failure, hypoglycaemia-associated 
320
Autonomic nervous system (ANS), stress 
response 403–404, 404f
Autonomic neuropathy, diabetic 324
Autosomal dominant hypocalcaemia with 
hypercalciuria (ADHH) 106
Autosomal dominant hypophosphataemic 
rickets (ADHR) 112, 113
Autosomal dominant inheritance 467, 467f, 
850, 850f
Autosomal recessive hypercholesterolaemia 
(ARH) 727–728
Autosomal recessive hypophosphataemic 
rickets (ARHR) 113
Autosomal recessive inheritance 466–467, 
467f, 850, 850f
Avidin, biotin deficiency and 189
Azathioprine therapy 600t
autoimmune hepatitis 256
Azodipyrrole 239
888	
Index
B
Bacterial flora, commensal 218, 561
Bacterial infections 597–598, 597t
asplenic patients 580
diagnosis and monitoring 598
liver function test abnormalities 264–265
sickle cell patients 556
white blood cell morphological 
­abnormalities 504, 505f. See also 
Infection(s)
Bacterial overgrowth, small bowel. See Small 
bowel bacterial overgrowth
Bacterial septicaemia, hypoglycaemia 
­association 347
Barbiturate abuse 801t
Bardet–Biedl syndrome 202t
Bariatric surgery 205–206
combined restrictive and malabsorptive 
procedures 206, 206f
contraindications 205–206
monitoring after 206, 207t
neuropathy associated with 694
resolution of type 2 diabetes mellitus 
following 206, 286–287, 291, 318
restrictive procedures 206, 206f
type 2 diabetes management 291, 317–318
Barker hypothesis 286
Bartter syndrome 55
non-respiratory alkalosis 84
Basal metabolic rate (BMR),  
calculation 196, 196f
Base deficit 74
Base excess 73
Basic calcium phosphate (BCP) crystals  
639, 642
Basic calcium phosphate deposition  
disease 642
Basic multicellular unit (BMU) 608
Basophil(s) 563t, 565
count, reference ranges 498t, 563t
morphological features 504f
Basophilic stippling, excessive 529
Bazedoxifene 618
B cell malignancies 594–597
investigation 588. See also Monoclonal 
proteins
paraprotein types 591, 591t
Becker muscular dystrophy 653
DNA analysis 864–865, 864f
gene mapping 845f
Beer potomania 49
Behavioural syndromes 675t
Bence Jones escape 590
Bence Jones protein (BJP) 588
in amyloidosis 596
in B cell malignancy 590
in heavy chain disease 595
immunofixation 592, 592f
measurement 590, 593
in monoclonal gammopathy of unknown 
significance 596
in myeloma 594
in Waldenström macroglobulinaemia 595
Bence Jones proteinuria 163–164, 163t
Benzodiazepine overdose 803
antidote 794t, 803
Beri-beri. See Thiamin (vitamin B1) 
deficiency
β-Cells. See Pancreatic β-Cells
β-Blockers
antidotes 794t
Graves disease management 391
hypertension management, in diabetes 
mellitus 309
hypoglycaemia association 346
redistribution hyperkalaemia and 58
β-Thalassaemia 552, 553–554, 554b, 554t, 
557–558
Bias 10–11, 12
Bicarbonate
body fluid composition 28t
buffering 66–67
diabetic ketoacidosis management 328–329
extrarenal fluid composition 34t
fractional excretion 179
measurement 73
non-respiratory acidosis management 76
reabsorption 70, 71f, 82, 169, 169t
renal absorption 128
renal excretion, non-respiratory alkalosis 
82–83
renal tubular handling 169, 169t
Bicarbonate, plasma concentration
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
critical difference 15t
Biglycan 606–607
Biguanides 313. See also Metformin
Bile 233–234, 711
fluid composition 34t
secretion 236
Bile acid(s)
enterohepatic circulation 236, 236f, 711
liver function tests 243
metabolism 711
plasma
in intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy 
262–263
measurement 243
sequestrants 735t
synthesis 236, 236f
defects 495, 711
Bile ducts 234
tests of patency 247
Bile pigments, metabolism 237–239
Bile salts 224, 236
Biliary atresias 494–495
Biliary canaliculi 233f, 234
Biliary cirrhosis, primary 256
Biliary drainage 234
Biliary tract disease, neoplastic 264
Biliary tract obstruction
alkaline phosphatase activity 239. See also 
Cholestasis
Biliopancreatic diversion 206, 206f, 207t
Bilirubin
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
in cerebrospinal fluid 661, 666
detection 667
conjugated 237, 238f, 493
in haemolysis 529
quantitation 239
critical difference 15t
enterohepatic circulation 237–238, 238f
liver function tests 237, 247
plasma concentrations 238, 238f
in chronic hepatitis 254
elevated. See Hyperbilirubinaemia
in pre-hepatic jaundice 245
quantitation 239
unconjugated 237, 493
in haemolysis 525, 529
quantitation 239
urinary 131, 245. See also Bilirubinuria
Bilirubin metabolism 237–239, 237f, 238f
disorders
inherited, presenting in childhood 494. 
See also Hyperbilirubinaemia
neonates 493
Bilirubinuria 245
in acute hepatitis 251
Biliverdin 237, 237f
Bioavailability 768
Biochemical data 6–20
acquisition 6, 7t
comparison. See Comparison of results
factors affecting 7–13
analytical 10–12
postanalytical 12–13
preanalytical 7–10
interpretation 13–16
predictive value. See Predictive value of tests
uses 1–5. See also Tests
Biological factors, affecting test results 7–10, 8t
Biological variation, intrinsic 9–10, 11t, 15
Biologics, rheumatoid arthritis treatment 638
Biopterin 477
metabolism defects 670
Biothesiometry, investigation of impotence 459
Biotin 189
deficiency 189
laboratory-based assessment 198
Biotransformation, hepatic 235
Bipolar affective disorder 678
Birth weight, low 484
as cardiovascular disease risk factor 752
Bisphosphonate therapy
acute phase response 617–618
hypercalcaemia 105
osteogenesis imperfecta 633–634
osteoporosis 616, 617–619
biochemical responses 619
Paget disease, biochemical responses 
631–632, 631f
Bitot's spots 185
Black tea 757
Blackwater fever 528
Bladder
cancer, tumour markers 827
urinary diversion from 54
Bleeding
as cause of anaemia 524
in vitamin K deficiency 186–187. See also 
Haemorrhage
Blood 515
clotting. See entries beginning coagulation
count. See Full blood count (FBC)
donation 510
glucose. See Glucose, blood
grouping 511, 511t
ketone testing 299–300
oxygen uptake. See Oxygen uptake
peripheral, as stem cell source 600
pH 66
products 513
transfusion. See Blood transfusion; 
Haematology
Blood–brain barrier (BBB)
appetite control and 203
permeability
assessment 664
proteins 662–663
Blood cell morphology 501–507
in haematological malignancies 504–507
red blood cells. See Red blood cell 
morphology
white blood cells. See White blood cells 
(WBCs)
Blood film 501
Blood film examination 501
Blood flow, renal. See Renal blood flow
Blood gas analysers 73, 88, 91
Blood gas analysis
inherited metabolic disease 469
psychiatric disorder investigation 676t
	
  Index	
889
Blood group antigens 510–511
Blood pressure measurement 757
penile 459
Blood transfusion 510–514
antibody identification panels 511
β thalassaemia management 553
blood products 513
crossmatching 511–512
haemolytic reaction, investigation 512
laboratory tests 511–512
regulations 514
risks 513
sickle cell disease 556
universal donors 510
universal recipients 510
Blood vessels
arteries, structure and function 741,  
741f
renal 127
B lymphocytes 563t, 566, 588–594
antigen presentation 570
antigen receptors. See Immunoglobulin(s)
clonality 561
deficiency
associated infections 576, 577t
primary immunodeficiencies 577–578
Body fluid distribution 27–28, 28t
Body mass, effect on test results 8
Body mass index (BMI) 193, 193t,  
201–202
relationship with type 2 diabetes  
risk 286, 286f
Body temperature, management in ­poisoning 
793
Bohr effect 76, 550–551
Bone(s) 604–613
age-related changes 609, 615
anatomy 604–605
macroscopic 604
microscopic 604–605
biopsy, indications 617, 620, 635
chronic kidney disease–mineral and 
bone disorder 627
calcium fluxes 94f, 95
cellular elements 605, 607–609
cortical (compact) 604
disease. See Bone disease
effect of acidosis 76
flat 604
formation, markers 609–611, 610f
hyperthyroidism manifestations 389
lamellar 604–605
long 604
loss, age-related 609
matrix proteins 605–607
pain, pagetic 630
parathyroid hormone receptors 96
remodelling 95, 607–609, 609f
resorption 608, 609f
markers 611–613
roles 604
trabecular 604
turnover
assessment of calcium metabolism 100
in children 632, 632t
in Paget disease 630
turnover markers 609–613, 610b
in chronic kidney disease–mineral and 
bone disorder 626
new 613
in osteoporosis 616, 616t
in Paget disease 630–631
variation in 613
Bone densitometry 615–616
chronic kidney disease–mineral and bone 
disorder investigation 627
Bone disease
adynamic 625
genetic 632–634, 633t
metabolic. See Metabolic bone disease
prevention, in chronic kidney disease 149. 
See also specific diseases
Bone Gla-protein. See Osteocalcin
Bone marrow 562
aspiration, iron deficiency investigation 
520
malignant infiltration 524, 816t
as stem cell source 600t
Bone marrow transplantation
β thalassaemia 554
congenital erythropoietic porphyria 545
erythropoietic protoporphyria 547
inherited metabolic disease 
management 480. See also Stem cell 
transplantation
Bone mineral density (BMD)
age-related changes 615
effect of sex hormone loss 615
effects of parenteral nutrition 212–213
effects of physical activity 615
effects of smoking 615
osteopenia definition 613–614
osteoporosis definition 613–614
reduced 613–614
intestinal disease-associated 220
Bowel
short 213. See also Gastrointestinal tract
Bowman capsule 125
Bowman space 125
BRAF mutation analysis, in melanoma 837
Brain
catecholaminergic systems, stress response 
408
creatine kinase 652
in cerebrospinal fluid 667
glucose metabolism 274–275, 334, 662, 
687
Brain cells
response to dehydration 45
volume in hyponatraemia 46, 47, 47f
Brain natriuretic peptide. See B-type 
natriuretic peptide (BNP)
Brain-specific proteins 663f, 665–666
Brain stem, appetite control 203
BRCA1 gene 828, 869
BRCA2 gene 828, 869
Breast cancer 827–829
diagnosis 828
monitoring, tumour markers 828–829
oestrogen effects 820
prognosis, tumour markers 828
screening 828, 861, 869
Breast development 414–415, 415f
isolated early 429
Breast milk
calcium content 95
magnesium content 118
phosphate content 110
Breath tests
13/14C-triolein 225
Helicobacter pylori 216
small bowel bacteria 219
Brittle diabetes 326
Bromocriptine therapy 361, 440
Bronchodilator drugs, therapeutic drug 
monitoring 783
Brown tumours 628
Bruck syndrome 633, 633t
Bruton agammaglobulinaemia 578
B-type natriuretic peptide (BNP) 29, 30f
as heart failure biomarker 749
clinical utility 749–750, 750f
critical values 749
factors affecting 749
Buccal mucosa 215
Buffering 66–67, 68
ammonia 67
bicarbonate 66–67
haemoglobin 67, 67f
non-respiratory acidosis 74
non-respiratory alkalosis 82
phosphate 67
plasma proteins 67
respiratory acidosis 80–81
respiratory alkalosis 84
Bulimia nervosa 207, 208, 681
Bullous porphyrias 542–545
biochemical features and diagnostic 
approach 536f, 537t, 543
congenital erythropoietic porphyria. See 
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria 
(CEP)
hepatoerythropoietic porphyria 542–543, 
545
pathophysiology 543
porphyria cutanea tarda. See Porphyria 
cutanea tarda (PCT)
skin symptoms and signs 543, 543f
Buprenorphine, therapeutic drug monitoring 
785
Butane abuse 803
γ-Butyrolactone (GBL) 876–877
C
C1 esterase inhibitor 571t
deficiency 579
C282Y mutation 265
Cabergoline therapy
acromegaly 363
hyperprolactinaemia 361, 440
Cachexia, cancer. See Cancer cachexia
Cadmium, tubular damage 161
Caecum, microflora 218
Caerulein 217
Caeruloplasmin 190, 198–199, 243
liver function tests 243
properties 572t
in Wilson disease 243, 266
Caffeine
effect on levothyroxine absorption 
381–382
therapeutic drug monitoring 783
Calcidiol. See 25-Hydroxyvitamin D 
(25(OH)D)
Calciferol 622. See also Vitamin D
Calcification 114
Calcimimetic drugs 104–105, 628
Calcineurin inhibitors 150
Calcinosis, tumoral 113–114
Calciopenic osteomalacia. See Osteomalacia
Calciphylaxis 114
Calcipotriol 98
Calcitonin 98–99
ectopic secretion 815t
effect on TmP/GFR 112
as marker for medullary thyroid carcinoma 
400, 812, 823t
osteoporosis management 619
Paget disease management 632
Calcitonin gene-related peptide, ectopic 
secretion 815t
Calcitriol. See 1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D 
(1,25(OH)2D)
Calcitriol therapy
hypophosphataemic osteomalacia 623
osteoporosis 617
vitamin D-dependent rickets 622
890	
Index
Calcium
absorption test 100, 121–122, 617
interpretation 122
analysis of tubular handling 100, 104, 122
interpretation 122, 122f
biological role 93
body fluid composition 28t
deficiency 93
dietary intake 94
bone health and 615
osteoporosis management 617
postmenopausal women 617
distribution 93, 94t
effect on TmP/GFR microalbuminuria 112
endogenous faecal 94
fluxes 94–95, 94f
intestinal absorption 94, 94f
increased 175
measurement 100
test. See absorption test (above)
plasma concentration. See Calcium, plasma 
concentration
stones 175–177, 175t
supplementation, osteoporosis 
management 617
urinary excretion 95
urinary measurement 100
in osteoporosis 616
in Paget disease 631
Calcium, plasma concentration 93, 99
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
in chronic kidney disease 144
in chronic kidney disease–mineral and 
bone disorder 625–627, 626b
critical difference 15t
diurnal variation 100, 100f
in hypoparathyroidism 106
measurement 99–100
in osteopenia of prematurity 492, 492t
in Paget disease 631
in poisoning 875t
Calcium-based phosphate binders 114–115, 
148–149
Calcium channel blockers, hypertension 
management in diabetes mellitus 309
Calcium gluconate 61, 109, 121
Calcium metabolism 93–109
biochemical assessment 99–100
bone 94f, 95
in chronic kidney disease 144
gastrointestinal tract 94, 94f
kidney 94–95, 94f
in neonates. See Neonates
regulation 95–99
Calcium pyrophosphate (CPP) crystals 639
Calcium pyrophosphate deposition (CPPD) 
642
Calcium sensing receptor (CaSR) 102
mutations 491
Calculi, renal. See Renal calculi
Calorimetry 195
Calprotectin 225
in disease 225–226
Campesterol 757
Campylobacter jejuni, food contamination 190
Cancer
breast. See Breast cancer
cachexia. See Cancer cachexia
cervical. See Cervical cancer
colorectal. See Colorectal cancer
diet and 208, 208t
protective effect of dietary fibre 192, 208
gastric. See Gastric cancer
gene therapy 871
genetics 867–869
liver, primary. See Hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC)
lung, tumour markers 836–837, 836t
pancreatic, tumour marker 840
parathyroid gland 101, 102t
prostate. See Prostate cancer
testicular. See Testicular cancer
thyroid gland. See Thyroid cancer; See also 
Malignancy; Tumour markers
Cancer antigen 15-3 (CA 15-3) 823t, 826t
in breast cancer monitoring 828–829
Cancer antigen 19-9 (CA 19-9)
as cancer marker 823t, 826t
gastric cancer 831
pancreatic cancer 840
in primary sclerosing cholangitis 256–257
Cancer antigen 125 (CA125) 822t, 826t
factors interfering with levels 838, 838t
as ovarian cancer marker 824t, 838
detection of residual disease 839
diagnosis 839
long-term surveillance 840
monitoring 839–840
prognosis 839
screening 838–839
Cancer cachexia 816–818
metabolic changes 817–818, 817f, 817t
treatment 818
Cancers of unknown primary origin, tumour 
markers 842
Cannabis abuse 801t, 802–803
Capillary zone electrophoresis (CZE), 
paraprotein identification/
quantitation 589–590, 592
Capsulitis, shoulder 643
Carbamazepine
measurement, indications 792t
therapeutic drug monitoring 778
Carbidopa 477
Carbimazole 391
Carbohydrate(s)
absorption 220–222, 221f
clinical aspects 222
investigation 222
deficiency 182
dietary 181–182, 220–221
digestion 221–222
enteral feeding 210
intake in diabetes 306
parenteral nutrition 211
Carbohydrate-deficient transferrin (CDT) 
242–243, 258
Carbohydrate metabolism
in chronic kidney disease 148, 148b
disorders of 654
investigation 654–655
in malignancy 818
muscle pain and 650–651. See also specific 
disorders
hepatic role 234
in neonates 488–490, 489f
Carbonate dehydratase 67, 67f, 71f, 72f
Carbon dioxide
buffering 66
erythrocytes 67, 67f
daily production and elimination 68, 68t, 
73
excretion 68t, 70, 80
hydrogen ion production 68, 68t
partial pressure. See PCO2
retention 80. See also Acidosis,  
respiratory
total, measurement 73
Carbonic acid 66, 68, 70
Carbonic anhydrase II deficiency 634
Carbon monoxide 805
Carbon monoxide poisoning 685, 805
clinical features 805
management 794t, 805
mechanisms 805
pregnant women 788
Carboxyhaemoglobin 788–791, 805
measurement 789–791, 792t, 805
Carboxyl ester lipase 717
Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 264, 822t, 
824t, 826t
as colorectal cancer marker
diagnosis 830
monitoring 830–831
prognosis 830
as gastric cancer marker 831
as lung cancer marker 836t, 837
as medullary thyroid cancer marker 812
Carcinoid crisis 808–809
Carcinoid syndrome 226
clinical features 808–809, 809b
Carcinoid tumours 808–810
clinical presentation 808–809, 809b
diagnostic imaging 810
foregut 811
intestinal 226
laboratory investigation 809–810
serotonin metabolism 809
treatment 810
Cardiac failure. See Heart failure
Cardiac glycosides, therapeutic drug 
monitoring 777–778
Cardiac muscle 740–741, 740f
creatine kinase 652. See also Creatine 
kinase-MB (CK-MB)
Cardiac troponins. See Troponin(s)
Cardiorespiratory failure, encephalopathy 
and 687
Cardiovascular disease (CVD) 737–738
diabetes-related risk, pharmacological 
management 307–309
effect of hormonal contraceptives on risk 
448
hyperlipidaemia-associated risk, reduction 
734
microalbuminuria as marker of risk 
164–165
mortality 737–738, 738f
risk assessment 750–751, 751f
risk factors. See Cardiovascular risk factors; 
See also Atherosclerosis
Cardiovascular risk factors 750–757
dietary 208, 756–757
potentially modifiable 752–756
relative importance of 755–756
unmodifiable 751–752
Cardiovascular system 737
arteries, structure and function 741, 741f
cardiac muscle 740–741, 740f
disease. See Cardiovascular disease (CVD)
functions 737
Carney complex 813
Carnitine 189
measurement in plasma, tissue and urine 
657
therapy 482–483
transport, measurement 657–658
Carnitine deficiency 657–658
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase, measurement 
of activity 657–658
Carnitine palmitoyltransferase I (CPT I) 
488–489, 489f, 647–649, 649f
β-Carotene 184, 184f, 185
β-Carotene therapy, erythropoietic 
­protoporphyria 547
Carotenoids 184
	
  Index	
891
Carpal tunnel syndrome
in acromegaly 693
in hyperthyroidism 693
in hypothyroidism 332, 693
Carpenter syndrome 202t
Carrier 850
definition 871
Cartilage, articular 636–637, 637f
Cartilaginous joints 636
Casts, urinary 131
Catecholamines
in chronic kidney disease 147
effect on potassium distribution 32
measurement, phaeochromocytoma 
­diagnosis 763–764, 763t
factors affecting results 763–764, 764t
in post-traumatic stress disorder 679
in redistribution hypokalaemia 52
stress response 9, 405, 407–408
tumour marker characteristics 823t
Cathepsin K 613, 619
inhibitors 619
Cation exchange resins 54
Caveolae 703–704
CD (cluster of differentiation) 562–564,  
565t
CD36 719–720, 742
CD117 antigen 831–832
CD ligand deficiency 578
Cell counting, blood cells 498
Cell-mediated immunity
primary immunodeficiencies 578. See also 
T lymphocytes
Cell membranes, cholesterol and 703–704
Cellulose 192
Cellulose acetate electrophoresis, 
­haemoglobinopathy investigation 557
Central cyanosis 88
Central nervous system (CNS)
acidosis effects 76
acute infections 669
acute porphyria manifestations 538–539
chronic infections 669–670
disorders
biochemical investigations 669–671
inflammatory 701
non-biochemical investigations 
668–669, 668b
hypercapnia effects 81
hyperthyroidism manifestations 389
hypothyroidism manifestations 394–395
insulin actions 280t
poisoning-related complications 791–793
Central pontine myelinolysis (CPM)  
51, 687
Ceramide 705, 707f
Ceramide trihexosidase deficiency. See Fabry 
disease
Cerebral oedema, in diabetic ketoacidosis 
329
Cerebral salt wasting 50
Cerebrosides 705
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 660–672
in acute CNS infections 669
appearance 661
cells 661–662
in chronic CNS infections 669–670
cisternal 661
composition 661
in dementia 670–671, 688
in demyelinating diseases 671
enzymes 667
ferritin 666–667
formation 661
glucose 662
in meningitis 669
haem pigments 661, 666–667
detection 667
inflammation markers 667–668
in inherited metabolic diseases 670
in intracranial haemorrhage 670
investigations 661–669
biochemical, in central nervous system 
disorders 669–671
non-biochemical 668–669, 668b
lactate 662
in congenital lactic acidosis 463
in meningitis 669
in respiratory chain dysfunction 655, 
662
in malignancy 670
obstructed flow 670
otorrhoea 666
physiology 661
proteins 662–665, 663t, 671–672
age-related changes 663, 663t
in assessment of blood–brain barrier 
permeability and reduced fluid flow 
664
brain-specific 663f, 665–666
increased concentrations, causes 663
in meningitis 669
plasma-derived 662–663, 663f
protein index 664
reduced flow 663–664
assessment 664
rhinorrhoea 666, 666f
sampling and pressure 661
ventricular 661
Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis 695–696, 
700–701, 711
Cerebrovascular disease 737–738. See also 
Stroke
Ceroid lipofuscinosis, neuronal 701
Cervical cancer 829
monitoring 829
prognosis 829
screening and diagnosis 829
α-Chain disease 595–596
γ-Chain disease 596
μ-Chain disease 596
Chain of custody documents 876, 876b
Charcoal, activated 794, 797, 798, 803
Charcot foot 324–325
Charcot joint 643
Chase–Aurbach test 122
Cheiroarthropathy, diabetic 643
Chelation therapy
iron poisoning 794t, 798
lead poisoning 794t, 799
Chemokines 573t
Chemotaxins 571t
Chemotherapy
effect on somatic growth 818–819
hyperkalaemia and 58–59
malignant insulinoma 342–343
Chenodeoxycholic acid 236, 236f, 711
Chest pain 744
tests 748–749. See also Myocardial damage, 
acute
Children
bone disease 632, 632t
bone turnover 632
diabetic, nutrition and growth 296
hypercalcaemia, causes 104b
liver disease 495–496
conjugated hyperbilirubinaemia and 
hepatocellular disease 494–495, 494b
malignant disease therapies, effects on 
growth 632
poisoning 788
protein–energy malnutrition 200, 201
thyroid function 379
tumour markers 837–838. See also Infants
Child–Turcotte–Pugh classification 248,  
248t
Chloramphenicol, therapeutic drug 
monitoring 781
Chloride
body fluid composition 28t
depletion 55, 57
extrarenal fluid composition 34t
plasma concentration
in poisoning 875t
renal tubular acidosis 172
retention 57
vitreous humour concentration,  
post-mortem 879, 879t
Chloride-losing diarrhoea, congenital 55
Chloroquine poisoning 792t, 798
Chloroquine therapy, porphyria cutanea 
tarda 544
Chlorpromazine 682
Chloruresis 57
Cholangitis, primary sclerosing 256–257
Cholecalciferol 96
Cholecystokinin (CCK)
appetite control 204
in bulimia nervosa 208
Cholestanolosis 695–696, 700–701, 711
Cholestasis 236, 245
alkaline phosphatase activity 239
lipoprotein X in 708, 731
in pregnancy 262–263, 445
Cholestatic jaundice 246
Cholesterol 703–704
absorption 710–711
crystals, synovial fluid 643
dietary, effect on plasma concentrations 
757
efflux 715
function 703t
HDL. See High density lipoprotein (HDL) 
cholesterol
hepatic metabolism 236, 236f, 703, 711
hepatic trafficking 714
LDL. See Low density lipoprotein (LDL) 
cholesterol
measurement, investigation of lipid 
disorders 732
in membranes 703–704
non-HDL, measurement 733
nuclear 706
plasma concentration. See Cholesterol, 
plasma concentration
reverse transport 714f, 715
side chain cleavage, ovarian steroidogenesis 
437, 438f
structure 437f, 703f
synthesis, defective in Smith–Lemli–Opitz 
syndrome 462
total 732
cardiovascular disease risk and 752
Cholesterol, plasma concentration
age-related changes 8
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
critical difference 15t
effect of dietary cholesterol 757
gender differences 8
in nephrotic syndrome 160, 160t
normal range 13, 14f
in type 2 diabetes 290
Cholesterol desmolase deficiency 35, 
353t. See also Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (CAH)
Cholesteryl ester storage disease 717
892	
Index
Cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP) 
709, 714f, 715, 718
deficiency 722t, 729
inhibitors 735t
Cholic acid 236, 236f, 711
Choline 189
Cholinergic syndrome 790t
Cholinesterase, measurement 792t
Chondrocalcinosis 642
in haemochromatosis 643
Chorea 699
Choriocarcinoma 835. See also Gestational 
trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN)
Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) 444–445, 
444f, 444t, 476, 860
mutation analysis and 476
Choroid plexus 661, 662–663
Chromium 191–192
deficiency 191–192
dietary sources 191–192
laboratory-based assessment 199
toxicity 192, 199, 799
Chromogranin A (CgA) 809–810, 811, 823t
post-mortem biochemistry 879t
Chronic dilutional hyponatraemia 46, 47–49, 
47f, 49f, 50
arginine vasopressin responses to 
hypertonic saline infusion 47, 49f
causes 47, 48b
laboratory investigation 50–51
management 51. See also Hyponatraemia
Chronic disease, anaemia of 524, 643–644, 
816, 816t
Chronic energy deficiency (CED) 200
in western adults 201
Chronic granulomatous disease 579
Chronic inflammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathy (CIDP) 692–693
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) 141–150
acute kidney injury vs. 136
acute-on-chronic kidney disease 139, 139b
aetiology and pathogenesis 141–142, 141b
anaemia 143, 147, 149
calcification 114
carbohydrate metabolism 148, 148b
definition, using estimated glomerular 
filtration rate 134, 135t
encephalopathy and 686
endocrine disturbances 144, 145b
endocrine control of salt and water 
balance 147, 147f
major abnormalities 144, 145b
mechanisms 145t
hypertension in 142, 759
hypertriglyceridaemia in 730–731
hypoglycaemia in, predisposing factors 
337–338
incidental factors contributing to 142, 142b
lipid metabolism 148, 730–731
management 148–150
dietary protein restriction 148–149, 323
general 148–149
prevention of complications 149
renal replacement treatment 149–150
metabolic disturbances 143–144
acidosis 78–79, 143
peripheral neuropathy and 693
prognosis, proteinuria quantitation 156
sexual dysfunction 145–146
sodium excretion 34, 147, 147f
staging 135, 135t, 148
proteinuria quantitation 156
thyroid abnormalities 146–147, 146b
uraemic syndrome. See Uraemic syndrome
Chronic Kidney Disease Epidemiology 
Collaboration group (CKD–EPI) 134
Chronic kidney disease–mineral and bone 
disorder (CKD–MBD) 143, 144, 
624–628, 624f
acidosis role in pathogenesis 76, 78–79, 
625
aetiology 624–625
clinical features 625
investigations 625–627
treatment 627–628
Chronic liver disease. See Liver disease
Chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) 
505–506, 506f, 591t, 595–596
Chronic lymphoid leukaemias 505–506
Chronic myeloid leukaemia 505, 506f
Chronic pain syndrome, in acute porphyria 
539
Chronic rejection 599b
Chronic sensorimotor neuropathy, diabetic 
323–324
Chronic tophaceous gout 641
Chylomicron(s) 224, 707–708, 708t, 713
modification 713
remnants 707–708, 713
Chylomicronaemia syndrome 716, 724–725
Chylomicron retention disease 712–713, 
722t, 724
Chymase, post-mortem biochemistry 879t
Chymotrypsin 223
faecal test 218
Ciclosporin
statin interaction 653
therapeutic drug monitoring 772–773,  
784
Ciclosporin A 600t
Cider potomania 49
Cinacalcet 104–105, 628
Circulatory system. See Cardiovascular 
system
Circumference measurements 194
Cirrhosis 77, 259–263
ascites 259–260
differential diagnosis 260, 260t, 261f
monitoring 260
glucose intolerance 263, 295
hepatic encephalopathy 259
Indian childhood 267t, 268
in men 262, 262t
primary biliary 256
renal impairment 260–261
differential diagnosis 261t
sex hormones and their binding proteins 
261–263
vascular disturbance 259. See also Alcoholic 
liver disease
Cisterna magna, cerebrospinal fluid 661
Citalopram
overdose 804
therapeutic drug monitoring 780
Citrate-glucuronic acid solutions 121
Classical pathway, complement activation 
570, 571f
Clearance 131, 768–769
creatinine. See Creatinine clearance
inulin 132, 132t
Clearance tests, hepatic function 243–244
Clinical audit, laboratory services 23, 25
Clinical effectiveness, laboratory  
medicine 24
Clinical geneticists, role in disorder of sex 
development (DSD) investigations/
interventions 422–423
Clinical pseudohypoglycaemia 320
Clinical quality indicators, laboratory 
medicine 24–25, 24t
Clitoromegaly 417, 419, 425
Clomifene 440
Clomifene test 356–357, 454, 460
Clomipramine, therapeutic drug ­monitoring 
780
Clonality 561
Clone, definition 872
Clonidine test, assessment of growth 
­hormone reserve 356
Cloning 854
positional, definition 872
Clozapine 682
Cluster of differentiation (CD) 562–564, 
565t. See also entries beginning CD
Coagulation cascade 507, 508f
role of vitamin K 186
Coagulation factor(s) 507, 508f
abnormalities in nephrotic syndrome 159
cardiovascular disease risk and 753
concentrates 513
deficiency of individual factors, detection 
509
liver function tests 242
stress response 408–409
Coagulation tests 507–509
interpretation 509–510, 509t
Coatomer protein 711–712
Cobalamin. See Vitamin B12
Cobalamin C disorder 476–477
Cobalt toxicity 799
Cocaine abuse 801t, 802
Cocaine- and amfetamine-regulated 
transcript (CART) 203, 204, 811
Cockcroft and Gault formula 134
Codeine abuse 801t
Codominant, definition 850, 872
Codons 846
Coefficients of variation (CV) 10, 12
Coeliac disease 220, 583
as cause of iron deficiency anaemia 519–520
diabetes association 296
diagnosis 583
neurological complications 701
therapeutic diets 209t
Coenzyme Q10 209
Cofactor supplementation, inherited 
metabolic disease management 479, 
479t
Coffee consumption 757
Colchicine 641
Colipase 224
Collagen 605
cross-links 611–612, 612f
metabolites, serum tests for hepatic fibrosis 
244
synthesis 605, 606f
telopeptides 612–613, 612f, 630, 632
Collecting duct 125, 125f, 126
function 129
Colloid osmotic pressure 28
Colon
fluid and electrolyte absorption 54–55
microflora 218. See also Gastrointestinal 
tract
Colony-stimulating factors 573t
Colorectal cancer 829
advanced disease, monitoring 831
'deleted in colonic carcinoma' gene (DCC) 
868
diagnosis 830
faecal calprotectin concentrations 225–226
monitoring 830–831
prognosis and staging 830, 830t
protective effect of dietary fibre 192
screening 829–830
DNA analysis 869
tumour markers 829–831
cautions and caveats 831
	
  Index	
893
Coma
diabetic 326–327, 687
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 684, 684t
hyperglycaemic 687
myxoedema 397
Combined oral contraceptives 447, 447t
contraindications 448
metabolic effects 448–449
Commensal organisms 218, 561
Common variable immunodeficiency 
(CVID) 577
Comparison of results
observed results vs. reference limits 15
with previous values 15–16, 15t
Compatibility testing (crossmatching) 
511–512
Complement 570–571, 571f
activation pathways 570, 571f
alternative pathway 570, 571f
classical pathways 570, 571f
lectin pathway 570, 571f
biological actions 570, 571t
deficiency 579
associated infections 576, 577t
quantification 602
regulation 570–571, 571t
Complementary DNA (cDNA) 853–854
definition 872
Complementation studies, inherited 
metabolic diseases 475
Complement C3 572t
Complement regulatory protein C4b binding 
protein (C4bBP) 408–409
Complete androgen insensitivity syndrome 
(CAIS) 426t, 427–428, 456
Complete gonadal dysgenesis (Swyer 
syndrome) 425
Compliance, drug. See Adherence, drug
Compound heterozygotes 848, 851
definition 872
Compulsive water drinking 41, 681
Computed tomography (CT)
acute kidney injury 138
pituitary gland 360. See also Imaging 
techniques
Conception 436
Confusional state, acute. See Delirium
Congenital adrenal hyperplasia (CAH) 60, 
352, 370, 417, 423
diagnosis 370, 419, 441, 450
hirsutism 441
hyperkalaemia 60
hypertensive forms 761t
hypoglycaemia 345
hypokalaemic alkalosis 56
lipoid 426t
sodium wasting 35, 60
subtypes 353t
treatment 370
Congenital adrenal hypoplasia 430, 455
Congenital analbuminaemia 37
Congenital chloride-losing diarrhoea 55
Congenital disorder of glycosylation (CDG) 
477
Congenital erythropoietic porphyria (CEP) 
534t, 545
biochemical findings 537t
molecular genetics 537t, 545
Congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus 
40–41, 43
Congenital septo-optic dysplasia 39–40,  
367
Congestive cardiac failure 37, 749. See also 
Heart failure
Connective tissue diseases (CTDs) 585, 601t, 
638, 639t, 644–645
Conn syndrome, secondary diabetes 294
Continuous ambulatory peritoneal dialysis 
(CAPD)
chronic kidney disease 150
effect on plasma renin activity 147
effect on thyroid hormones 146
Continuous positive airways pressure (CPAP) 
92
Continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion 
(CSII) 311, 312t
Continuous venovenous haemodiafiltration 
(CVVHDF) 141
Continuous venovenous haemofiltration 
(CVVH) 141
Contraception
hormonal methods 447, 447t
injectable 447t, 449
oral. See Oral contraceptives (OCs)
non-hormonal methods 447
Convulsions
alkalosis and 83
poisoning-related 791–793. See also 
Seizures
Coombs test 530
Co-oximeters 91
Copeptin 748
Copper 190–191
accumulation. See Wilson disease
deficiency 190–191, 198–199, 689, 694
dietary 190
laboratory-based assessment 198–199
overload 191
plasma concentration, in Wilson disease 
266–267
retention, in primary sclerosing ­cholangitis 
256–257
tissue concentration, in Wilson disease 267
Coproporphyria, hereditary. See Hereditary 
coproporphyria (HCP)
Coproporphyrin 537t, 539
urinary
in Dubin–Johnson syndrome 246, 548
increased 548, 548t
Coproporphyrinogen oxidase 533–534, 535f
Cord blood, as stem cell source 600t
Cordocentesis 444t, 445
Coronary heart disease 737–738
risk
hormone replacement therapy and 
449–450
plasma cholesterol concentration and 
13, 14f. See also Cardiovascular disease 
(CVD)
Corrin ring 521, 523f
Corrosive poisoning 790t
Cortical bone 604
Corticosterone methyl oxidase deficiency 
35, 59
Corticotrophin. See Adrenocorticotrophic 
hormone (ACTH)
Corticotrophin releasing factor (CRF) 
350–351
Corticotrophin releasing hormone (CRH) 
350–351
deficiency 369
ectopic secretion 815t
labour role 446, 447
stress response 404, 404f, 405
tests 356
Cushing syndrome 365, 372
Cortisol
anti-inflammatory effects 407
anti-insulin effect 405, 407
in chronic kidney disease 147
in Cushing disease 365
in depression 678–679, 680
diurnal variation 8–9
in hyperthyroidism 389
in hypoglycaemia-associated autonomic 
failure 320
in hypothyroidism 395
midnight salivary 364
pituitary function assessment 357, 358
assay precision 355
basal hormonal investigations 353–354
borderline responses 355
dynamic test reproducibility 355
insulin stress test 354
normal ranges 355
short tetracosactide test 354
steroid therapy and 358
in post-traumatic stress disorder 679, 680
secretion 350–351
hypoglycaemia response 335
stress response 9, 405, 407
urinary free, Cushing syndrome ­screening 
363
Cortisol-binding globulin (CBG) 405, 
438–439
C-peptide
insulin biosynthesis 278–279
plasma concentration, measurement 303
forensic biochemistry 877, 877b
hypoglycaemia investigation 337f,  
338–339
in type 1 diabetes mellitus 284, 285
Cranial diabetes insipidus (CDI) 39
causes 39–40, 40b
hypertonic saline infusion 42
management 42
water deprivation test 42
Craniopharyngiomas 367
C-reactive protein (CRP) 598
analytical range 10
cardiovascular disease risk and 755
cerebrospinal fluid 667–668
in acute CNS infections 669
measurement, clinical applications 598, 
598t, 644
microalbuminuria and 164
post-mortem biochemistry 879t, 882
properties 572t
in rheumatoid arthritis 585, 644
Creatine kinase (CK) 646–647, 652, 747
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
critical difference 15t
effect of exercise 9, 652
ethnic origin differences 8
increased activity, causes 9, 652, 652b
statins 653
plasma measurement, muscle disease 
­investigation 651–653
Creatine kinase-BB (CK-BB) 652
in cerebrospinal fluid 667
Creatine kinase-MB (CK-MB) 652, 747
as biomarker of acute myocardial damage 
744, 745f, 747–748
Creatine kinase-MM (CK-MM) 652
Creatinine 132
plasma concentration. See Creatinine, 
plasma concentration
post-mortem biochemistry 879t
renal tubular handling 169t
urinary, assessment of calcium ­metabolism 
100
Creatinine, plasma concentration
age-related changes 8
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
894	
Index
Creatinine, plasma concentration (Continued)
in chronic kidney disease 143
critical difference 15t
effect of food intake 9
interpretation of results 15
in obese patients 8
relationship with creatinine clearance 
132–133, 133f
renal function assessment 132–133, 133f
Creatinine clearance 132, 132t
calculation 134
in pregnancy 445
relationship with plasma creatinine 
concentration 132–133, 133f
Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease (CJD) 670–671
Crigler–Najjar syndrome 246, 494
Critical difference 15, 15t
Critically ill patients, definitions 409, 409b
Crohn disease 220
faecal calprotectin concentrations 
225–226. See also Inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD)
Crossmatching 511–512
Crossover 849, 849f
definition 872
Cryofibrinogen 593, 593b
Cryofibrinogenaemia 593
Cryoglobulins 593, 593b
Cryoprecipitate 513
Cryoproteins 593–594, 593b
Cryptorchidism 455
Crystal arthritis 639–643
Crystals, urine 131
C-terminal telopeptide (CTX) assay 612f, 
613, 630
C-type natriuretic peptide (CNP) 30
Cubilin 154, 521
Cushing syndrome
ACTH-dependent. See 
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
(ACTH)-dependent Cushing 
syndrome
clinical features 363
depression and 678–679
diagnosis and differential diagnosis 
363–366, 364f, 441
corticotrophin releasing hormone test 
365, 372
imaging 366
management 366
obesity and 203
reassessment after pituitary surgery 366
secondary diabetes 293, 294
subclinical 370
Cutaneous porphyrias 534t, 542–547
bullous. See Bullous porphyrias
erythropoietic protoporphyria. See 
Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP)
X-linked dominant protoporphyria. See 
X-linked dominant protoporphyria 
(XLDPP)
Cyanide–nitroprusside test 472
Cyanide poisoning 805
antidote 794t, 805
Cyanosis 88
Cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP), 
parathyroid hormone and 95–96
Cyclical oedema 38
Cyclic citrullinated peptide (CCP), 
antibodies to 586, 644
Cyclophilin B 605
CYFRA 21-1 823t, 836t, 837
CYP2D6 776–777, 862
Cyproterone acetate 440
Cystathionine β-synthase deficiency, 
pyridoxine challenge 479
Cystatin C 135
cerebrospinal fluid 663f, 663t, 666
Cysteamine 483
Cysteine 183
structure 171f
Cystic fibrosis (CF)
DNA analysis 863–864, 864f
hepatobiliary complications 268–269
hypokalaemia 55
molecular therapies 481
screening 217–218
sweat test 863
Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance 
regulator (CFTR) 863
gene mutations 863
Cystine 170f
stones 170–171, 175t, 177
structure 171f
urinary excretion, normal 171
Cystinosis 174, 483, 492
Cystinuria 170–171
clinical manifestation 170–171
mode of inheritance 171
treatment 171
Cytochrome c, reduced 656
Cytochrome c oxidase (COX) 655, 655f
Cytochrome P450
paracetamol metabolism 795, 795f
pharmacogenetic studies 776–777, 862
Cytochrome P450 aromatase deficiency 423, 
424t
Cytochrome P450 oxidoreductase deficiency 
(ORD) 420, 423, 424t, 425, 426t
Cytokines 572–575
endocrine hormones vs. 572, 574t
inflammatory 566, 574
major groups 406, 573t
stress response 406
Cytokine therapy, as cause of hypothyroidism 
397
D
Data transfer errors 13
Dawn phenomenon 320–321
D-dimer measurement 508–509, 509t, 
748–749
Decontamination, intestinal 794
Decorin 606–607
Deferasirox 553–554
Deferiprone 553–554
Dehydration, brain cell response 45
Dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA)
in females 439
production, in puberty 414
Dehydroepiandrosterone sulphate (DHEAS)
in females 439
elevated, in hirsutism 441
production, in puberty 414
Delayed puberty 368–369, 429–430
boys 420, 430
causes 430b
delayed growth and 369, 430
endocrine investigations 428t
Delayed-type hypersensitivity reactions 575
'Deleted in colonic carcinoma' gene (DCC) 
868
Delirium 676
causes 676, 677t
Delta checks 16
Demand management, laboratories 25
Demeclocycline, nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus and 41
Dementia 677–678, 688
cerebrospinal fluid analysis 670–671, 688
Demyelinating diseases 671
Denaturation, DNA 852
Denaturing high performance liquid 
chromatography (DHPLC), mutation 
screening 857
Denosumab 619
Densitometry, bone. See Bone densitometry
Dental caries 208
Dent disease 172
Deoxypyridinoline 611–612, 612f
Deoxyribonucleic acid. See DNA 
(deoxyribonucleic acid)
Deoxyuridine suppression test 524
Depression 678–679
adrenal function and 678–679, 680
features 678
growth hormone secretion abnormalities 
681
in metabolic syndrome and diabetes 679
thyroid function and 678, 680
Depressive adjustment disorder 678
De Quervain thyroiditis 399
Desamino-8-d-arginine vasopressin. See 
Desmopressin (dDAVP)
Desferrioxamine 544, 553–554, 628
iron overdose treatment 794t, 798
test, dialysis patients 626–627, 635
17,20-Desmolase 437–438
Desmopressin (dDAVP) 41
polyuria management 42
replacement therapy 371
stimulation test 364
water deprivation test 42, 357
DEXA (dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry) 
220, 615–616
Dexamethasone suppression test
high-dose 365
low-dose 363–364
overnight 364
depressed patients 679
Dextromethorphan 482
Dextrose saline 36t
Diabetes insipidus (DI) 39, 354, 360, 369, 
488
after pituitary surgery 359
causes 39–40, 40b
cranial. See Cranial diabetes insipidus 
(CDI)
investigations 354
hypertonic saline infusion 357
water deprivation test. See Water 
deprivation test
nephrogenic. See Nephrogenic diabetes 
insipidus (NDI)
polyuria 39–40, 40f
water deficiency 44
Diabetes mellitus 273–274
alcohol-related/pancreatic causes 293
articular disorders 643
biochemical measurements 299–303
β-Cell function measurement 303
glucose measurements 283b, 283t, 299
hyperinsulinaemic clamps 303
insulin resistance 301–303
intravenous glucose tolerance testing 
(IVGTT) 303
ketone testing 299–300, 322
oral glucose tolerance test. See Oral 
glucose tolerance test (OGTT)
post-mortem 878b, 880, 881f
recent glycaemic control 300–301
as cardiovascular disease risk factor 754, 
754f
classification 282–295, 285b
complications 322–326
acute 322
chronic 322–323
	
  Index	
895
effect of intensive glycaemic control 319
macrovascular 296, 297–298, 307
mechanisms of diabetic tissue damage 
296–298
microvascular 296, 297
pregnancy-related 331b. See also specific 
complications
definitions 282–283
depression and 679
diagnosis 282–295, 299
diagnostic criteria 282, 283b, 283t, 284b
emotional stress and 322
endocrine associations 295–296
feet in 324–325
gestational. See Gestational diabetes mellitus
growth 296
high-risk individuals 301
homeostasis model assessment (HOMA) 
303
hypertriglyceridaemia in 729–730
hypoglycaemia in 339–341
classification 339–340, 340b
definition 339–340
incidence 340
management 341
pathophysiology and risk factors 340, 
340b
tissue damage 297
hypophosphatemia 116
iatrogenic 294
impotence and 458
inadequately controlled 298–299
insulin resistance. See Insulin resistance
management 302f, 305–332
brittle diabetes 326
cardiovascular risk, pharmacological 
management 307–309
complications 322–326. See also specific 
complications
diet 306
exercise 306–307
general aspects 305–309
glucose-lowering therapy. See  
Glucose-lowering therapy, diabetes
in hospital setting 330–331
hypoglycaemia 340–341
intercurrent illness 321–322
obstacles to achieving glycaemic control 
318–322
patient education 307
in pregnancy 331–332
'sick day rules' 321–322
smoking cessation 307
therapeutic diets 209t
type 1 diabetes. see under Diabetes 
­mellitus, type 1
type 2 diabetes. see underDiabetes 
mellitus, type 2
maturity onset diabetes of the young. See 
Maturity onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY)
mechanisms of tissue damage 296–298
microalbuminuria 164
nutrition 296, 306
oral contraceptives and 448–449
pathogenesis 296–297
polyuria 39
post-mortem biochemistry 878b, 880, 881f
research investigations 303
role of intracellular metabolic pathways for 
glucose 277–278
screening 301, 302f
secondary 285b, 287, 293–295
tropical 293–295
Diabetes mellitus, type 1 283–286, 583
aetiology 284–286
complications
effect of intensive glycaemic control  
319
microalbuminuria 322
nephropathy 322
retinopathy, screening 325. See also 
Diabetes mellitus, complications
dyslipidaemia and 290
environmental cofactors 284–286
genetic associations 286, 286t
honeymoon period 283–285, 310
hypertension and 289
incidence 282
latent autoimmune diabetes of adults 
(LADA) 283–284
management
immunotherapy 318
insulin use 310–313. See also Insulin 
therapy
intercurrent illness 322. See also Diabetes 
mellitus, management
microalbuminuria 164
oral contraceptives and 448–449
patient education 307
pregnancy and 291–292, 331–332
Diabetes mellitus, type 2 286–291
abnormalities of non-insulin-mediated 
glucose disposal 276, 289
accelerator hypothesis 283–284
amylin role 288
associations 289–290
dyslipidaemia 290, 307
hypertension 289–290
metabolic syndrome 289–290, 679
obesity 286, 286f, 289
complications
effect of intensive glycaemic  
control 319
microalbuminuria 322
nephropathy 322
retinopathy, screening 325. See also 
Diabetes mellitus, complications
genetic factors 287
glucoregulatory defects 287–289, 287t
glucose transporters in 276, 289
heterogeneity 286–287
insulin-requiring/insulin-treated  
patients 288
insulin resistance 286–287, 288
lipotoxicity and glucotoxicity 290–291
management
bariatric surgery 291, 317–318
dietary 306
exercise 307
insulin 313, 317
intensive glycaemic control 319
intercurrent illness 321
liver disease and 263
metformin. See Metformin
patient education 307
maturity onset diabetes of the young. See 
Maturity onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY)
microalbuminuria 164
natural history 289, 289f
oral contraceptives and 448–449
pancreatic β-Cell deficiency/dysfunction 
286–288
pregnancy and 331–332
prevalence 282
prevention studies 291
resolution following bariatric surgery 206, 
286–287, 291
Diabetic amyotrophy 324
Diabetic coma 326–327, 687
Diabetic hand syndrome 643
Diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) 69, 76, 299, 
326–329
alcoholic ketoacidosis vs. 326–327, 330
post-mortem biochemistry 878b, 880, 881f
biochemical features 327, 327b
ketone testing 299, 327
management 327–329
bicarbonate 328–329
cerebral oedema 329
fluids 328
general measures 327–328
insulin 328
potassium, magnesium and phosphate 
replacement 328
mechanisms 326, 327f
normoglycaemic 326–327
potassium depletion 55, 328
resolution 329
Diabetic nephropathy 322
end-stage disease 323
management 323
microalbuminuria as marker of risk 164, 
322–323
Diabetic neuropathy 323–324, 643, 690t, 
691–692
pathophysiology 691–692
presentations 691, 691b
focal and multifocal neuropathies 691
symmetrical polyneuropathies 691
Diabetic retinopathy 325–326
screening 325, 325b
in pregnancy 331
Diagnosis 2–3. See also specific diseases
Diagnostic odds ratio (DOR) 20
Dialysis
inherited metabolic disease ­management 
483. See also Haemodialysis; 
Peritoneal dialysis
Dialysis-treated patients
desferrioxamine test 626–627, 635
hypercalcaemia 625–626, 626b
hyperphosphataemia 626, 626b
sexual dysfunction 146
Diamond–Blackfan syndrome 524
Diamorphine. See Heroin
Diaphysis 604
Diarrhoea
congenital chloride-losing 55
magnesium-related 120–121
potassium depletion 53–54
Diazoxide 314, 342
Dicarboxylic acids, measurement in urine 657
DIDMOAD syndrome 39–40
Diet(s)
in aetiology of disease 208
cancer and. see under Malignancy
cardiovascular risk factors 208, 756–757
dental caries and 208
effect on urinary protein excretion 155
ketogenic 478, 478f
therapeutic 208–209, 209t. See also Dietary 
management
Dietary assessment 193
Dietary management
chronic kidney disease 148
diabetes mellitus 306
hypercalciuria 176
hyperlipidaemia 209t, 734
obesity 205
renal stones 178–179
calcium-containing 176. See also 
Nutritional management
Dietary pattern, cardiovascular disease risk 
and 757
Dietary reference value (DRV), definition 181t
Dietary supplements 208–209
896	
Index
Diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid (DTPA), 
radiolabelled, glomerular filtration 
rate measurement 135–136
Differentiated thyroid cancer (DTC) 399
DiGeorge syndrome 491, 578
Digitoxin, therapeutic drug monitoring 
777–778
Digoxin
poisoning 792t, 798
clinical features 798
management 794t, 798
therapeutic drug monitoring 773, 773f, 
774, 777–778
Digoxin-like interfering substances (DLIS) 
778
Dihydrocodeine abuse 801t
Dihydrofolate 522f
Dihydropteridine reductase deficiency 477
Dihydrotestosterone (DHT) 262, 452
biological actions 452t, 456
effect on hair follicles 441
in fetal sex development 413
human chorionic gonadotrophin 
­stimulation test 422
1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D (1,25(OH)2D) 
94–95, 97
action
defects 621
sites of 98
cancer and 98
in chronic kidney disease 144
in chronic kidney disease–mineral and 
bone disorder (CKD–MBD)  
624–625
inactivation 97
measurement 98, 197, 621–622, 621t
in osteomalacia 620–621, 623
phosphate regulation 110
synthesis
defects 621
fetal 490
sites 97
synthetic analogues 98. See also Calcitriol 
therapy
Di-iodotyrosine (DIT) 376
Dilutional acidosis 78
2,3-Dimercaptopropane sulfonate (DMPS) 
799
2,3-Dimercaptosuccinic acid (DMSA) 799
Dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DDP-4) inhibitors 
317
adverse effects 317
hypoglycaemia 317, 341
2,3-Diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) 550
concentration, effect of changes on 
­oxygen–haemoglobin dissociation 
curve 90, 90f
effect of acidosis 76
effect of alkalosis 82
effect of phosphate deficiency 110
measurement 531
production 517, 518f
Diploid, definition 872
Direct antiglobulin test 530
Direct calorimetry 195
Disaccharidases 221, 221f
Disaccharides 220–221, 221f
intestinal hydrolysis, differential tests 222, 
223f
Disease management 3–4. See also specific 
diseases
Disease modifying anti-rheumatic drugs 
(DMARDs) 638
Disease progression, monitoring 3–4.  
See also specific diseases
Disease severity, assessment 3
Disopyramide
hypoglycaemia association 346
therapeutic drug monitoring 778
Disorder of sex development (DSD) 412, 
416–428
classification 423–428, 424t
definition 416
evaluation of external genitalia 417–418, 418f
evaluation of internal anatomy 418
general examination of newborns with 
suspected DSD 417
investigations
adolescents with DSD 419–420, 419f
anti-Müllerian hormone 420, 422t
human chorionic gonadotrophin 
­stimulation test 422, 423f
inhibins 421–422
insulin-like factor 3 420
newborns with DSD 418–419
role of clinical geneticists 422–423
steroid measurement and its 
­interpretation 420, 421f
management, general principles 417
terminology 416, 417t
XX DSD. See XX disorders of sex 
development
XY DSD. See XY disorders of sex 
­development. See also specific disorders
Disseminated intravascular coagulation 
(DIC) 501–503, 503f, 509–510
Distal convoluted tubule (DCT) 125, 125f, 
126
function 129
tests 136
magnesium homeostasis 118
Diuresis 129
primary renal sodium loss 34
Diuretic(s)
abuse 35
acute dilutional hyponatraemia 
­management 51
chloride depletion 55
hyperlipidaemia association 731
hypertension management in diabetes 
mellitus 309
potassium-sparing, potassium retention 59
thiazide. See Thiazide diuretics
Diurnal variation
aldosterone:renin ratio 762
bone turnover markers 613
calcium concentration 100, 100f
effect on test results 8–9
parathyroid hormone 95
phosphate concentration 100f, 113
urinary protein excretion 155
DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) 844, 845, 846
chips 856–857
denaturation 852
detection of specific sequences 852–855
double-stranded, antibodies to 587
methylation 847, 851–852
mitochondrial. See Mitochondrial DNA 
(mtDNA)
probes 852–855
recombinant 852, 853f
repair 847
defects 868–869
restriction enzymes. See Restriction 
endonuclease(s)
sequencing 857–858, 857f
next generation 859–860. See also entries 
beginning gene/genetic
DNA analysis
applications 860–869
cancer genetics 867–869
diagnosis of index cases 860
haemoglobinopathy investigation 558
multifactorial and polygenic disease 
866–867
prenatal diagnosis 860–861
screening 861
single gene disorders 862
techniques. See Genetic analysis, 
techniques
Döhle bodies 504, 505f
Dominant, definition 872
Dopamine
control of prolactin secretion 351, 681
inhibition of thyroid-stimulating hormone 
release 379, 379f
Dopamine agonist therapy
acromegaly 363
monitoring response 362
prolactinomas 361
side effects 362
Dopamine infusion test, acromegaly 
­diagnosis 362
Dopamine receptor antagonists 681
Dopa-responsive dystonia (DRD) 698
Dosulepin, therapeutic drug monitoring 780
Double-stranded DNA, antibodies to 587, 
638, 644–645
Downstream, definition 872
Down syndrome 678
screening 443–444, 444b, 861
Doxepin, therapeutic drug monitoring 780
Doxercalciferol 98, 627
d-penicillamine, cystinuria treatment 171, 
171f
Drinking 31–32
Drowning, post-mortem biochemistry 880
Drug(s)
absorption 768, 768f
adherence. See Adherence, drug
affecting aldosterone:renin ratio 762, 762b
affecting catecholamine and metadrenaline 
measurements 763–764, 764t
affecting thyroid function 381–382, 381t
distribution 768, 768f
effect on test results 8t, 9
effect on TmP/GFR 112, 112t
elimination 768–769, 768f
half-life 768f, 769, 773, 773t
indications for measurement in suspected/
actual poisoning 792t. See also 
Poisoning
inherited metabolic disease management 
482–483
interactions. See Drug interactions
protein binding 769
safe prescribing, in acute porphyria 541
steady-state concentrations 773, 773t
dose requirements, calculations 
774–775, 786
effect of loading doses 774–775, 775f
therapeutic index 770
toxicity, monitoring 771
urine 131. See also Therapeutic drug 
monitoring (TDM). specific drugs
Drug abuse 800–803
maternal 485
screen 792t
Drug-induced conditions
acute pancreatitis 229t
amiodarone-induced thyroid dysfunction 
390t, 393
antacid-induced hypophosphataemic 
osteomalacia 621t, 622, 623
aplastic anaemia 524
delirium 676, 677t
diabetes mellitus 294
erectile impotence 459b
	
  Index	
897
gynaecomastia 458t
hyperlipidaemia. See Hyperlipidaemia
hyperprolactinaemia 361
hypoglycaemia. See Hypoglycaemia
hypolipidaemia 732
liver damage 254–256, 263t
statin-induced elevation of creatine kinase 
activity 653
tubular damage 161
Drug interactions 771, 772t
statins 653, 736
Drug-metabolising enzymes, ­polymorphisms 
861
Dry reagent sticks 299
DTPA (diethylenetriaminepentaacetic acid), 
radiolabelled, glomerular filtration 
rate measurement 135–136
Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DEXA) 
220, 615–616
Dual oxidase (DUOX) 376
Dubin–Johnson syndrome 246, 548
in pregnancy 263
Duchenne muscular dystrophy 650–651
creatine kinase activity 652
diagnosis 653
DNA analysis 864–865, 864f, 865f
gene mapping 845f
Dukes staging system 830, 830t
Duodenal ulcers, Helicobacter pylori infection 
and 215
Duodenum
calcium absorption 94
iron absorption 519
phosphate absorption 111. See also 
Gastrointestinal tract
Dupuytren contracture 643
Dynamic function tests 63–64
Dysalphalipoproteinaemias 722t, 728
Dysbetalipoproteinaemias 722t
decreased beta lipoproteins. See 
Hypobetalipoproteinaemia
increased beta lipoproteins 722t. See also 
specific disorders
Dysgerminomas 838
Dyskinesia 697
Dyslipidaemia
cardiovascular disease risk and 753
in chronic kidney disease 142, 149
classification 722t
diabetic 290, 298, 307, 308
management 308. See also 
Hyperlipidaemia. specific disorders
Dyslipoproteinaemias
drug therapy 735t
primary 722t, 723–729. See also specific 
disorders
Dyspepsia 214
Dyspnoea
in heart failure 749
in hyperthyroidism 389
Dysrhythmias, hypomagnesaemia and 119
Dysthymia 678
Dystonia 698
Dystrophin 864
Dystrophin gene mutations, analysis 
864–865, 864f, 865f
DYT1 dystonia 698
E
Eating disorders 207–208. See also specific 
disorders
'Ecstasy' 801–802, 801t
Ectopic hormone secretion. See Hormone(s)
Ectopic pregnancy 229–230
diagnosis 442
Ectopic thyroid tissue 390t, 393
EDTA (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid), 
radiolabelled, glomerular filtration 
rate measurement 135–136
Education
continuing, therapeutic drug monitoring 
staff 776
diabetes 307
Effective osmolality 27
Efficiency of test 16–17, 17t
Ehlers–Danlos syndrome 632–633, 633t
Eicosanoids 705
function 703t, 705
synthesis 705, 706f
Eicosapentaenoic acid 705
Eicosatrienoic acid 705
Elastase 223
faecal test 218
Elastic lamina 741, 741f
Elderly
hyperthyroidism 389
renin secretion 762
testosterone deficiency 457
thyroid function 379
Electrolyte abnormalities, parenteral 
nutrition-associated 211
Electrolytes
in acute kidney injury 140
body fluid composition 27, 28t
requirements, infants vs. adults 487t
urine, sodium deficiency 35. See also specific 
electrolytes
Electronic crossmatch 511–512
Electronic laboratory handbook 23
Electronic patient records, integration of 
laboratory information systems 23
Electron transport flavoprotein (ETF) 
647–649, 649f
measurement of activity 657–658
Electrophoresis
haemoglobin, haemoglobinopathy 
­investigation 557, 558f
lipoprotein 734
mutation detection 857, 857f
paraprotein identification 589, 590f, 591f
Elimination rate constant 769
Elimination techniques, poisoning 795
Elliptocytosis, hereditary 526
Ellsworth–Howard test, modified 109, 122
Emergencies, in diabetes mellitus 326–330
Emotional stress. See Stress
Encephalopathy 683–688
autoimmune 688, 688t
causes 684, 684b, 684t
clinical examination 684
definition 683–684
hepatic 259, 686, 686t
laboratory investigations 685, 685t
septic 687–688
toxic and metabolic 685–687
uraemic 686
Wernicke 187, 686
'Encode' project 845–846
Endocrine disorders
in anorexia nervosa 207, 207b
articular system and 643
autoimmune 583–588, 601t
in bulimia nervosa 208
in chronic kidney disease. See Chronic 
kidney disease (CKD)
diabetes-associated 295–296
hypertension and 759, 760t
hypoglycaemia due to 345
peripheral neuropathy and 693
in post-traumatic stress disorder 679
in psychiatric disease 680–681
in secondary diabetes 293–294. See also 
specific endocrine abnormalities
Endocrine-disrupting chemicals 453
Endocrine tumours
pancreas 226–227
secondary diabetes 294. See also specific 
endocrine tumours
Endogenous factors, affecting test results 
8, 8t
Endogenous faecal calcium 94
Endoscopic retrograde 
­cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) 
218, 245, 256–257
Endoscopy 214
Endothelial dysfunction, potential causes 
741, 741b
Endothelial lipase (EL) 716–717
Energy
deficiency disorders 463
deficient intake
hypoglycaemia due to 347. See also 
Protein–energy malnutrition (PEM)
expenditure, laboratory-based assessment 
195–196, 195f, 196f
metabolism, in red blood cells 517, 518f
requirements 181–183
carbohydrate 181–182
fat 182–183
Enhancer, definition 872
Enoyl-CoA hydratase 649f
measurement of activity 657–658
Enteral feeding 210
in severe sepsis/septic shock 410
Enterocytes
carbohydrate digestion and absorption 
221–222, 221f
cholesterol absorption 711, 713
fat absorption 224, 711, 713
vitamin B12 absorption 521
Enterohepatic circulation
bile acids 236, 236f, 711
bilirubin and urobilinogen 237–238, 238f
Enterokinase 223
Enteropathy, protein-losing 224
Environment, laboratory 22
Enzyme(s)
analysis, in inherited metabolic disease 475
drug-metabolising, polymorphisms 861
plasma, liver function tests 239–241
red blood cell defects. See Red blood cell(s)
replacement therapy 478–479
restriction. See Restriction endonuclease(s)
serum, pancreatic function testing 
217–218. See aslo specific enzymes
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA), investigation of chronic 
CNS infections 669–670
Eosin-5 maleimide (EMA) binding test 531
Eosinophil(s) 563t, 565
count, reference ranges 498t, 563t
morphological features 504f
Ephrin (Eph) family of signalling proteins 
608–609
Epidermal growth factor receptor gene 
(EGFR), mutation analysis in lung 
cancer 837
Epigenetic, definition 872
Epinephrine. See Adrenaline
Epiphysis 604
Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infection, ­diagnosis 
500–501
Equilibrium dialysis 383
Erectile impotence. See Impotence
Ergocalciferol 96
Errors, analytical 16
sources 7–13
898	
Index
Erythrocytes. See Red blood cell(s)
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 499
as marker of acute phase response 598, 644
Erythrocytosis, in malignant disease 816
Erythropoiesis 516f, 517
iron requirements 519, 519t
Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP) 534t, 
546–547
biochemical findings 537t
chronic complications and their 
management 547
molecular genetics 537t
skin symptoms and signs 546–547, 546f
treatment 547
Erythropoietin
in chronic kidney disease 147
ectopic secretion 815t
recombinant 149
Escitalopram, therapeutic drug monitoring 
780
Essential amino acids 183, 183b
Essential fatty acids (EFAs) 182–183, 183f
deficiency 183. See also Fatty acid(s)
Essential hypernatraemia 44
Essential hypertension 758–759, 761t. See 
also Hypertension
Established renal failure (ERF), in diabetes 
mellitus 323
Estimated average requirement (EAR), 
definition 181t
Ethambutol, therapeutic drug monitoring 782
Ethanol. See Alcohol
Ethinylestradiol 439, 447–448
Ethnic origin, effect on test results 8
Ethosuximide, therapeutic drug monitoring 
778
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA), 
radiolabelled, glomerular filtration 
rate measurement 135–136
Ethylene glycol, poisoning 685, 792t, 801f
antidotes 794t
hyperoxaluria and 176, 800
Ethyl glucuronide (EtG) 258
Ethyl sulphate (EtS) 258
Etidronate 617–618, 632
European liver fibrosis score (ELF) 244–245
Evaluation, laboratory services 23, 23b, 23f
Evidence-based clinical biochemistry 25
Exenatide 316
Exercise
in diabetes mellitus 306–307, 321
effect on bone density 615
effect on cardiovascular disease risk 754
effect on creatine kinase activity 9, 652
effect on test results 9
hypoglycaemia and 321, 340
hypophosphataemia and 116
weight loss and 205
Exercise-induced proteinuria 155–156
Exercise-related amenorrhoea 369
Exercise test, forearm 654, 659
Exercise testing, assessment of growth 
hormone reserve 356
Exogenous factors, affecting test results 8–9, 8t
Exome, definition 872
Exon 845
definition 872
skipping 481
Expansional acidosis 78
Expression analysis 871
Expressivity, definition 872
External genitalia
ambiguous 456
evaluation 417–418, 418f
neonates. See Neonates; See also 
Disorder of sex development (DSD)
females, development 413–414
males, development 413
External masculinization score (EMS) 417, 
418f
External quality assurance (EQA) 21
tumour marker measurements 826
Extracellular fluid (ECF) 27–28, 28t
expansion, dilutional acidosis 78
potassium 28t, 32–33
sodium 28–30, 28t, 128
volume reduction calculation 35, 62
Extractable nuclear antigens (ENAs), 
antibodies to 587, 587t
Extrapontine myelinolysis 51
Extrarenal fluids 34, 34t
Extrarenal sodium loss 34, 34b
Eye disease, diabetic. See Diabetic 
retinopathy
Eye examinations, diabetic retinopathy 
screening 325
Eyes, in Graves disease. See Graves disease, 
ophthalmology
Ezetimibe 711, 735t
F
Fabry disease 465, 695
manifestations 695
Facioscapulohumeral muscular dystrophy 
653
Factitious hypoglycaemia 341
Factor V 507, 508f
liver function test 242
Faecal tests
fat excretion 225
intestinal inflammation 225–227
occult blood 226, 829–830
pancreatic function 218
False negatives 16, 16t, 17t
False positives 16, 16t, 17t
Familial amyloid polyneuropathy (FAP)  
696
Familial benign hyperphosphatasia 610
Familial combined hyperlipidaemia (FCH) 
713–714, 722t, 724, 752
Familial defective apolipoprotein B-100 
(FDB) 727
Familial expansile osteolysis 633t, 634
Familial hyperaldosteronism 55–56
Familial hypercholesterolaemia (FH) 722t, 
726–728, 752
autosomal recessive 722t, 727–728
classic 722t, 726–727
diagnostic criteria 727b
genetic testing 734, 866–867
tendon xanthomata 726, 726f, 727f
Familial hyperproinsulinaemia 279, 280t
Familial hypertriglyceridaemia 713–714, 
722t, 724–725
Familial hypobetalipoproteinaemia (FHBL) 
722t, 724
Familial hypocalciuric hypercalcaemia 
(FHH) 102, 102t, 103–104, 121, 491
Familial hypokalaemic periodic paralysis 
(FHPP) 53
Familial lipoprotein lipase inhibitor 725
Familial pseudohyperkalaemia 58, 60
Familial renal iminoglycinuria 172
Family history, cardiovascular disease risk 
factors 752
Family studies 541, 541t
Fanconi anaemia 524
Fanconi syndrome 80, 174, 622b
causes 174, 174b
Farnesoid X-activated receptor (FXR) 720
Fast, diagnostic 474–475
Fasting states, glucose homeostasis 333–334, 
334f
Fat
absorption 224–225
clinical aspects 224–225
investigation 225
dietary 182–183, 224
digestion 224, 711
faecal excretion 225. See also 
Triglyceride(s)
Fat-soluble vitamins 184–187, 192, 224
functions 703t. See also specific vitamins
Fatty acid(s) 704
cis 704f
dietary, cardiovascular disease risk and 
756
essential. See Essential fatty acids (EFAs)
free. See Free fatty acids
function 703t
metabolism 234–235. See also Fatty acid 
oxidation
non-esterified. See Free fatty acids
saturated 704, 704f
structure 704f
trans 189–190, 704f
transport into mitochondrial matrix 
647–649, 649f
unsaturated 704, 704f
very long chain. See Very long chain fatty 
acids (VLCFAs)
Fatty acid-binding protein (FABP),  
heart-type 745f, 748
Fatty acid oxidation 647–649, 649f, 657, 704
defects 656–657
investigation 656–658
muscle pain and 650–651
flux measurements 657
screening 461
Fatty acid transport proteins (FATPs) 718
Fatty liver. See Steatosis
Fatty streak 742, 743, 743f
Favism 526
Febuxostat 642
Fed states, glucose homeostasis 333–334, 
334f
Feet, in diabetes mellitus 324–325
Felonious hypoglycaemia 341
Female(s)
puberty
endocrinology 414
physical signs 415, 415f
precocious 428
reproductive function 433–450
hormones regulating 436–437
physiology 433–436
reproductive steroid hormones. See 
Ovarian steroid hormones; See also 
Menstrual cycle; Pregnancy
sex development 412, 413–414, 413f, 
849–850
sexual dysfunction, in chronic kidney 
disease 146
Female infertility 440–441
in chronic kidney disease 146
investigations 440
Ferricyanide 656
Ferrihaemate 162–163
Ferritin 519
in cerebrospinal fluid 666–667
in haemochromatosis 265–266
measurement 520
in rheumatoid arthritis 644
Ferrochelatase (FECH) 533–534, 535f
decreased activity 546
Ferroportin 519, 520f
gene mutations 265
	
  Index	
899
Fertile eunuch syndrome 455
Fetal haemoglobin. See Haemoglobin F 
(HbF)
Fetal heart rate (FHR), intrapartum 
­monitoring 445
α-Fetoprotein. See AFP (α-fetoprotein)
Fetoscopy 444t
Fetus
DNA, analysis 860–861. See also Prenatal 
diagnosis
intrapartum monitoring 445
maternal drug abuse 485
screening for malformation 443–444
biochemical screening 443–444, 443f
current practice 443–444
ultrasound 443
sex development 412–414, 413f
thyroid function 379
tissue sampling techniques 444, 444f, 444t
well-being, monitoring 445
Fibre, dietary 192
cardiovascular disease risk and 757
definition 192
high intakes 192
intake in diabetes 306
protective effect against cancer 192, 208
Fibric acid derivatives (fibrates) 720, 734, 735t
management of diabetes-related 
cardiovascular risk 308
Fibrin 408, 507, 508f
Fibrin degradation products (FDPs), 
measurement 508–509
Fibrinogen 408, 507, 508f
cardiovascular disease association 753
measurement 508, 509t
properties 572t
stress response 408
Fibrinolysis 507
Fibroblast growth factor 9 (FGF9) 412–413
Fibroblast growth factor 21 (FGF21), in 
respiratory chain dysfunction 655
Fibroblast growth factor 23 (FGF23) 97, 
110–111, 112–113, 143
in chronic kidney disease–mineral and 
bone disorder (CKD–MBD) 624–625, 
626
in hyperphosphataemia 113–114
in hypophosphataemia 116
in hypophosphataemic osteomalacia 623
plasma measurements 626
in tumour-induced osteomalacia 816
Fibrocalcific pancreatic diabetes 293
Fibrofatty lesion, atherosclerosis 743, 743f
Fibrogenesis imperfecta ossium 634
Fibronectin 447, 607, 607t
Fibrosis
in carcinoid syndrome 808–809
hepatic 244
scoring systems for assessment of 
fibrinogenesis 244, 244t
serum tests 244–245
idiopathic pituitary 367
FiO2 (fraction of inspired gas comprising 
oxygen) 87
Fish consumption 756
Fish eye disease 716, 722t, 729
Fish oils 734, 735t, 756
Flat bones 604
Flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) 187, 
197–198
Flavin mononucleotide (FMN) 187
Flecainide, therapeutic drug monitoring 778
Fliers 10, 16
Flora, commensal 218, 561
Flow cytometry 499–500, 500f
haemolysis investigation 531
Fluid balance
in acute kidney injury 140
charts 36, 36t
Fluid replacement therapy
acute kidney injury, prerenal 138
diabetic ketoacidosis 328
hypernatraemia 45
hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state 
329–330
sodium deficiency 36, 36t
Fluid requirements, infants vs. adults 487t
Fluid restriction, hyponatraemia 
­management 51
Fluid resuscitation, shocked patients 410
Flumazenil 794t, 803
Fluoride, dietary 208
Fluoxetine
overdose 804
therapeutic drug monitoring 780
Flushing, in carcinoid syndrome 226
Fluvoxamine
overdose 804
therapeutic drug monitoring 780
Flux measurements, fatty acid metabolism 
657
Focal neuropathies 691
Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis 158, 
159
Folate 521, 522f
absorption 521
dietary sources 519t, 521
requirements 521, 522f
roles 521, 523t
status, laboratory determination 521
Folate deficiency 501, 689, 694
causes 521
features 521
in malignant disease 816, 816t
Follicle stimulating hormone (FSH) 436
fluctuations during menstrual cycle 
435–436, 435f
measurement in infertile women  
440–441
in men with cirrhosis 262
secretion 436
assessment 352–353
effect of oestrogens 439
spermatogenesis role 262
Follicular lymphoma 506–507, 507f
Food
additives 189
contaminants 190
enrichment 209–210
intake
assessment 193
effect on test results 8t, 9. See also 
Diet(s). entries beginning dietary
Foot ulcers, diabetic 324
Forearm exercise test 654, 659
Forensic biochemistry 874–882
assay request form 875–876, 876b
chain of custody documents 876, 876b
commonly requested investigations 875t
definition 874
poisoning with endogenous agents 874, 
876–878
γ-hydroxybutyrate (GHB) 876–877, 
876b, 877b
insulin 877, 877b
magnesium 875t, 877–878, 877b
sodium 878, 878b
practical problems 874
samples and sampling 875–876. See also 
Post-mortem biochemistry
10-Formyl tetrahydrofolate 521, 522f
Forssman antibodies 500
14-3-3 Proteins 665, 670–671
Fractional excretion of sodium (FENa) 878, 
878b
Fractional excretion of water (FEH2O) 878, 
878b
Fractional urinary magnesium (FEMg), 
estimation 119
Fraction of inspired gas comprising oxygen 
(FiO2) 87
Fractures
alkaline phosphatase activity and 610
osteoporotic. See Osteoporotic fractures
in Paget disease 630
Fragile-X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome 
700
Fragile-X syndrome, gene mapping 845f
Frameshift mutation 846–847
definition 872
Framingham Heart Study 751
Frasier syndrome 425
Frataxin 699
Fredrickson classification, hyperlipidaemias 
721–722
Free fatty acids
daily production and elimination 68t
in diabetic tissue damage 297
insulin resistance and 290–291
metabolism 68t, 69
type 2 diabetes and 290–291. See also Fatty 
acid(s)
Free hormone measurements
theoretical considerations 383
thyroid hormones. See Thyroid 
hormone(s)
Fresh frozen plasma (FFP) 513
Friedreich ataxia 699
Froin syndrome 663–664
Frozen shoulder 643
Fructosamine 301
post-mortem biochemistry 879t
Fructose 220–221
absorption 221, 221f
intolerance 270
hereditary 270, 464
Fructose 1,6-diphosphatase deficiency 78, 
270
Fruit consumption, cardiovascular disease 
risk and 757
Fruit juices, potassium content 57, 57t
Full blood count (FBC) 497–499, 498t
haemoglobinopathy investigation 557
psychiatric disorder investigation 676t
Full crossmatch 512
Fulminant hepatic failure (FHF) 253,  
267t
encephalopathy and 686
hypoglycaemia and 345
Fulminant hepatitis 251
Fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase deficiency 
495
Fume fever 790t
Functional assessment, nutritional status 
194–195
Functional renal failure (FRF). See 
Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS)
Fungal poisoning 806, 806t
G
Galactosaemia 269, 270f, 462–463, 475,  
495
investigations 470, 471, 475
Galactose 220–221
absorption 221, 221f
metabolism 270f
inherited disorders 495
900	
Index
Galactose 1-phosphate uridyltransferase 
(GALT) 269, 270f
deficiency. See Galactosaemia
red cell activity, analysis 475
α-Galactosidase deficiency. See Fabry disease
Gallstones 228, 229t
Gametes
definition 872
formation of 849–850
Gametogenesis 849–850
Gangliosides 705
Garrod, Archibald 844–845
Gastrectomy, vertical sleeve 206, 206f
Gastric acid
loss of 83–84
protein digestion 223
secretion 215, 216
Gastric banding 206, 206f
Gastric cancer 216
Helicobacter pylori infection and 215, 216
tumour markers 831
Gastric emptying 204
Gastric hypochlorhydria 216, 219
Gastric juice, fluid composition 34t
Gastric stretching 204
Gastric ulcers 215, 216
Gastrin 215, 216
Gastrinoma 216
in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 811
Gastrin releasing peptide, ectopic secretion 
815t
Gastroduodenal ulcers 216
Gastrointestinal stromal tumours 831–832
Gastrointestinal tract 214–230
calcium fluxes 94, 94f
commensal organisms 218, 561
disease
autoimmune 583, 601t
diet and 208. See also specific diseases
hormones, tumour marker characteristics 
823t
hyperthyroidism manifestations 388
hypothyroidism manifestations 394
innate immune system 561
neuroendocrine tumours 226–227
normal microflora 218–219
phosphate fluxes 110f, 111
potassium loss from 53–54. See also entries 
beginning intestinal
Gastrostomy, percutaneous endoscopic 210
Gaucher disease, enzyme replacement 
therapy 478
Gaussian distribution 13, 13f
GBL (γ-butyrolactone) 876–877
Gender
assignment 416
body fluid distribution in relation to 28t
dysphoria 416
effect on test results 8, 8t
Gender differences
alkaline phosphatase 493f
cardiovascular disease risk 751–752
plasma phosphate concentration 113, 113t
urinary protein excretion 155
Gender identity 416
disorder 416
Gender role 416
Gene(s) 844–852
definition 844–846
expression 846, 847f
in families and populations 850–851. See 
also Inheritance
mapping 845, 845f
mutation. See Gene mutations
structure 845, 846f
tracking, mutant genes 858–859, 858f
Gene mutations 846–849, 848f
analysis. See Mutation analysis
definition 872
point mutations. See Point mutations
Generalized anxiety disorder 676–677
Gene therapy 869–871
β thalassaemia 554
in cancer 871
erythropoietic porphyrias 545
haemophilia 870
inherited metabolic diseases 481
stem cells in 870–871
vectors 870
Genetic analysis
applications. See DNA analysis, 
applications
techniques 855–860
detection of mutations. See Mutation 
analysis
detection of specific DNA sequences 
855–857
Genetic diseases 848–849
bone 632–634, 633t
variable expression 851–852. See also 
Inherited metabolic diseases (IMDs). 
specific diseases
Genetic screening 861
hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer 831
multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 812
Genitalia, external. See External genitalia
Genome, definition 872
Genotype frequency, calculation 851
Genotyping
lipid disorders 734. See also Genetic 
analysis
Gentamicin, therapeutic drug monitoring 
781
Geophagia 54
Germ cell, definition 872
Germ cell tumours 832–834
cerebrospinal fluid investigations 670
in children 838
diagnosis 832
long-term surveillance 834
monitoring 833–834, 833f, 834f
prognosis 833, 833t
screening 832
Gestational diabetes mellitus 291–292, 
331–332, 446
recommendations for screening and 
diagnosis 292b
Gestational hypertension 38, 156, 764
Gestational trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN) 
834–835
diagnosis 442, 835
hyperthyroidism and 394
monitoring 442, 835
prognosis 835
screening 835
GHB (γ-hydroxybutyrate), forensic 
biochemistry 876–877, 876b, 877b
Ghrelin 205
following bariatric surgery 206
Gibbs–Donnan effect 27–28
Gigantism 363
Gilbert syndrome 245, 246, 247, 494
Gitelman syndrome 55
hypomagnesaemia 120t
non-respiratory alkalosis 84
Glasgow Coma Scale (GCS) 684, 684t
Gleason score 841
Gliadin, antibodies to 583. See also Coeliac 
disease
Glial fibrillary acid protein (GFAP) 665
Glicentin-related pancreatic polypeptide 
(GRPP) 205
Globin chains, haemoglobin 550
genetic control of synthesis 551–552, 552f
Glomerular basement membrane (GBM), 
antibodies to 585, 585t, 586f
Glomerular filtration 125, 127
Glomerular filtration rate (GFR) 127
albumin 153–154, 160
estimated (eGFR) 134
definition of CKD using 134–135, 135t
factors affecting 127b
measurement 131–136, 132t
creatinine clearance. See Creatinine 
clearance
inulin clearance 132, 132t
isotopic techniques 135–136
plasma creatinine concentration 
132–133, 133f
in neonates 487, 488
non-respiratory alkalosis 82
potassium retention and 59
in pregnancy 445
sodium 28, 128. See also TmP/GFR
Glomerular membrane 153, 153f
Glomerular proteinuria 154, 156–160
mechanisms 157–158
pathophysiological consequences 159–160
tubular proteinuria vs. 160, 160t, 161
Glomerulonephritis 130, 157
classification 158–159
membranoproliferative 158, 159
urinary sediment 131
Glomerulosclerosis, focal segmental 158, 159
Glomerulo-tubular balance 28, 128
Glomerulus 125, 125f, 126f
capillary wall 153, 153f
damage, in diabetic nephropathy 322
function 127
development 486–487
injury 157
Glucagon
secretion
abnormalities in diabetes 295
ectopic 815t
hypoglycaemia response 334
test. See Glucagon test
Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) 205, 316
actions 316, 333–334
Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) analogues 
316–317
adverse effects 317
hypoglycaemia 317, 341
mechanism of action 316
Glucagon-like peptide-2 (GLP-2) 205
Glucagonoma 227
Glucagon test 338, 354
assessment of growth hormone reserve 356
Glucocerebrosidase deficiency, enzyme 
replacement therapy 478
Glucocorticoid(s)
cytokine interactions 407
effect on biochemical variables 8t
effect on calcium/bone metabolism 99, 615
hyperlipidaemia association 731
inhibition of thyroid-stimulating hormone 
release 379, 379f
resistance, primary 761t
secretion 352
effect of radiotherapy 819
stress response
cortisol 9, 405, 407
immune function and 406–409
Glucocorticoid receptor (GR) 405
Glucocorticoid replacement therapy
following pituitary surgery 359
Cushing syndrome 366
monitoring 370
	
  Index	
901
Glucokinase 277, 277f
loss of function mutations 277
Gluconeogenesis 68–69, 71, 78f, 274, 
333–334
effect of alcohol 321
neonates 488–489, 489f
regulation 274
sites 274. See also Glucose metabolism
Glucose
absorption 221, 221f
blood. See Glucose, blood
cerebrospinal fluid. See Cerebrospinal fluid
dietary 220–221
emergency hypoglycaemia management 
341
homeostasis. See Glucose homeostasis
hyperkalaemia management 61
infusion, diabetic ketoacidosis 
management 328
intolerance. See Glucose intolerance
intracellular, fate of 277–278, 277f
measurements
in diabetes mellitus 282, 283b, 283t, 
299
post-mortem 879t, 880, 881f
metabolism. See Glucose metabolism
oxidation 69, 278. See also Glucose 
metabolism
plasma concentration. See Glucose, plasma 
concentrations
renal tubular handling 168, 169t
resistance 276
storage form. See Glycogen
tolerance. See Glucose tolerance
urine
measurement 299. See also Glycosuria
Glucose, blood
concentration
high. See Hyperglycaemia
low. See Hypoglycaemia
normal 273. See also Glucose, plasma 
concentrations
measurement 283t, 299
demonstration of hypoglycaemia 336
factors that may interfere with 300t
in inherited metabolic disease 469–470
in poisoning 875t
in pregnancy 446
psychiatric disorder investigation 676t
in shocked patients 410
sources 274
Glucose, plasma concentrations
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
critical difference 15t
determinants 274
effect of food intake 9
in hypoglycaemia 334
measurement
diabetes mellitus diagnosis 282, 283b, 
283t, 299
factors that may interfere with 300t
in neonates 488–489
in pregnancy 446
Glucose 6-phosphatase 277, 277f
Glucose 6-phosphatase deficiency 78, 277
Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase 277f, 
278, 526–528
Glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
deficiency 278, 494, 526
drugs/chemicals associated with significant 
haemolysis 526, 527t
gene mapping 845f
heterogeneity 851
tests 531
Glucose-dependent insulinotropic 
polypeptide (GIP) 316, 333–334
Glucose–galactose malabsorption 222
Glucose homeostasis 273–282
effects of oral contraceptives 448–449
in fed and postabsorptive states 333–334, 
334f. See also Glucose metabolism; 
Insulin
Glucose intolerance
in cirrhosis 263, 295
gestational 446
in malignancy 818
rare conditions associated with 294, 295t. 
See also Diabetes mellitus
Glucose-lowering therapy, diabetes 309–318
alpha-glucosidase inhibitors 317
bariatric surgery 291, 317–318
DDP-4 inhibitors. See Dipeptidyl 
peptidase IV (DDP-4) inhibitors
immunotherapy 318
insulin. See Insulin therapy
intensive glycaemic control 319
islet cell transplantation 318
meglitinides. See Meglitinides
metformin. See Metformin
pancreatic transplantation 318
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
γ analogues. See Thiazolidinediones
sulfonylureas. See Sulfonylureas; Diabetes 
mellitus, management
Glucose metabolism
brain 274–275, 334, 662, 687
complete 69
disorders
encephalopathy and 687. See also specific 
disorders
hepatic role 234
incomplete 68–69
intracellular metabolic pathways 277–278, 
277f
normal 274–278. See also Gluconeogenesis
Glucose tolerance
impaired. See Impaired glucose tolerance 
(IGT)
in pregnancy 446
Glucose tolerance test (GTT)
acromegaly diagnosis 362, 372
intravenous 303
oral. See Oral glucose tolerance test 
(OGTT)
Glucose transporters (GLUTs) 275–276, 
276t
assessment of function 303
GLUT1 276, 276t, 289
deficiency 478, 478f
GLUT2 170, 275–276, 276t
GLUT3 275–276, 276t
GLUT4 276, 276t, 333
GLUT5 275–276, 276t
α-Glucosidase 654–655
inhibitors 317
Glucotoxicity 291
animal models 278
'Glue sniffing' 788, 803
Glutamate, metabolism 70, 71, 72f
Glutamate dehydrogenase 71, 490
Glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) 
antibodies 284, 583
Glutamine 183
parenteral 211
supplementation 410
synthesis 71
γ-Glutamyltransferase 241
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
critical difference 15t
liver function tests 241, 248
alcoholic liver disease 241, 257
predictive value, examples 17, 18
in muscle disease 653
Glutaric aciduria type I 464
Glutathione metabolism, red blood cells 517, 
518f
enzyme defects 526–528, 531
Glutathione peroxidase 191, 199
Glutathione S-transferase (GST) 241
Glycaemic control
intensive 319
obstacles to achieving 318–322
tests 300–301
Glycaemic index (GI), cardiovascular disease 
risk and 756
Glycated haemoglobin. See HbA1c (glycated 
haemoglobin)
Glycation, non enzymatic, diabetic 
neuropathy pathophysiology 692
Glycine
encephalopathy 670
high plasma concentrations 482
Glycine therapy 482–483
14C-Glycocholate breath test 219
Glycogen 274, 334
histocytochemistry 654
Glycogenolysis 234, 277f, 278, 333–334
enzyme investigations 654–655
neonates 488–489, 489f
Glycogen phosphorylase 277f, 278
Glycogen storage diseases 270
investigations, plasma lactate 
concentrations 474. See also specific 
diseases
Glycogen synthase 274
Glycolysis 68–69, 68t, 77, 78f, 274–275
enzyme investigations 654–655
muscle 647, 648f
red blood cells 517, 518f
disorders 528
in tumours 818
Glycopeptide antibiotics, therapeutic drug 
monitoring 781
Glycophosphatidylinositol-anchored HDL-
binding protein 1 (GPIHBP1) 721
Glycosaminoglycans, urinary analysis 474
Glycosphingolipids 705
Glycosuria 131, 136, 169–170
hereditary renal 170
Glycosylated hydroxylysine 611
Glycosylation 235, 477
congenital disorder of 477
Glycyrrhetinic acid 56
Glycyrrhizic acid 56
GM2 gangliosidoses 700
Goals, analytical 11t, 12
Goitre
in chronic kidney disease 146
in Graves disease 390
toxic multinodular. See Toxic multinodular 
goitre
Gonadal dysgenesis, 46XY
complete (Swyer syndrome) 425
partial 425
Gonadal steroid hormones. See Sex 
hormone(s)
Gonadotrophin(s)
fluctuations during menstrual cycle 9, 
435–436, 435f
in normal puberty 414
pregnancy-related changes 445
secretion 436
assessment 352–353, 356–357. See also 
specific gonadotrophins
902	
Index
Gonadotrophin deficiency 360, 368–369
amenorrhoea 353, 368f, 369
associated syndromes 430
delayed puberty 368–369, 430
investigations 352–353, 356–357, 368
females 353, 368, 368f
following pituitary surgery 359
interpretation of borderline testosterone 
concentrations 368
males 352–353
treatment 368. See also Hypogonadism
Gonadotrophin-dependent precocious 
puberty 428–429, 428b
Gonadotrophin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
351–352, 436
in psychiatric disorders 680
in puberty 414, 434
delayed 430
stimulation test 454, 460
Gonadotrophin-secreting adenomas 367
Goodpasture syndrome 585, 585t
Gordon syndrome 60–61, 60t, 760t, 761t
Gout 639–642
acute 640
chronic tophaceous 641
diabetes association 298
diagnosis 641, 641f
treatment 641–642
GPR54 414
Graft rejection 599, 599b
Graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) 599, 599b
Granular casts, urine 131
Granulomatous disease
chronic 579
hypercalcaemia and 103, 104
Granulomatous hypophysitis 367
Graves disease 389, 390t
autoantibodies to thyroidal antigens
thyroid peroxidase 386, 583
thyroid stimulating hormone receptor 
387, 583
diagnosis 390, 391f
natural history 391
ophthalmology 390, 390f, 390t
antibodies and 386, 387
management 391–392
pregnancy and 380, 387, 391
skin lesions 390
thyroid involvement 390
treatment 391–392
post-surgery/post-radioiodine 
hypothyroidism 396
Green tea 757
Group B streptococcal pneumonia, neonatal 
486
Growth
delayed, delayed puberty and 369, 430
in diabetes mellitus 296
effects of malignant disease treatments 
818–819
increased velocity in normal puberty 416
retardation, in chronic kidney disease 
144–145, 145b
role of vitamin A 185
Growth factors 573t
Growth hormone (GH)
in acromegaly 362
in chronic kidney disease 144–145
effect of stress 9
effect on calcium/bone metabolism 99
effect on insulin 435
primary insensitivity (Laron syndrome) 
368
in puberty 434
delayed 430
reserve, assessment 355–356, 359
secretion 351
abnormalities in psychiatric disease 681
assessment 356
ectopic 815t
effects of malignant disease therapies 
818–819
hypoglycaemia response 335
stress response 405
Growth hormone (GH) deficiency 367–368
adult 281–282, 360, 368
effect on insulin sensitivity 281–282
growth hormone therapy. See Growth 
hormone (GH) therapy
hypoglycaemia due to 345
investigations 354, 355–356, 357, 359, 360
prevention/reversal of microvascular 
complications in diabetes 297
re-evaluation of growth hormone status in 
young adults 356
weight gain 203
Growth hormone releasing hormone 
(GHRH) 351
in acromegaly 362
analogues, in malignant disease 819
in assessment of growth hormone reserve 
356
ectopic secretion 815t
tests 356
Growth hormone (GH) therapy
adults, biochemical responses 620
growth hormone deficiency 367–368
malignant disease-related 819
re-evaluation in young adults 356
non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia 344
Guillain–Barré syndrome 671–672, 692
antibodies associated with 692t
Gunther disease. See Congenital 
erythropoietic porphyria (CEP)
Gut. See Gastrointestinal tract
Gut-associated lymphoid tissue (GALT) 562
Gynaecomastia 457–458
causes 457, 457b, 458t
in dialysed males 146
investigation 458, 458f, 458t
Gyromitrin 806
H
Haem 517, 550
increased gut content 548
lyophilized 540
pigments in cerebrospinal fluid 661, 
666–667
detection 667
synthesis 533–534, 535f
abbreviations 535b
inherited disorders. See Porphyria(s)
therapy, acute porphyrias 540–541
Haem arginate 540–541
Haematinic studies 500
Haematocrit
ECF volume reduction calculation 35, 62
sodium deficiency 35
Haematological malignancies 504–507
hypercalcaemia and 102–103. See also specific 
haematological malignancies
Haematology 497–501
blood cell morphology. See Blood cell 
morphology
definition 497
Haemochromatosis 265–266, 519
alcoholism and 257
articular manifestations 643
as cause of diabetes mellitus 293
definition 265
gene mutations 265
heterogeneity 851
investigations 265–266
transferrin 242, 265–266
juvenile 265
male hypogonadism and 262, 456
neonatal 495
treatment 266, 643
Haemodialysis
acute kidney injury 141
chronic kidney disease 148–149
poisoning management 795
principles 149, 150f
thyroid hormone concentrations and 146
Haemodilution, in fresh-water drowning 880
Haemofiltration
chronic kidney disease 150
inherited metabolic disease 483
Haemoglobin 163, 498, 517
abnormal. See Haemoglobinopathies
buffering 67, 67f
concentration
adult ranges 498t
measurement 498
electrophoresis, haemoglobinopathy 
investigation 557, 558f
fetal. See Haemoglobin F (HbF)
free, haemolysis investigation 530
function 550–551
oxygen transport 88–89, 88f, 517, 
550. See also Oxygen–haemoglobin 
dissociation curve
glycated. See HbA1c (glycated 
haemoglobin)
mean cell haemoglobin (MCH) 498
mean cell haemoglobin concentration 
(MCHC) 498
metabolism in haemolytic anaemias 525, 
526f
in neonates 485
post-mortem biochemistry 880
structural variants 554–557. See also Sickle 
cell disease
structure 550–551
synthesis
genetic control 551–552, 552f
inherited disorders. See 
Haemoglobinopathies
Haemoglobin A2 556, 557, 558
Haemoglobinaemia 525
Haemoglobin Bart's hydrops fetalis 552–553, 
552t, 558
Haemoglobin Boston 556–557
Haemoglobin Bristol 556–557
Haemoglobin C (HbC) 556
Haemoglobin Chesapeake 556–557, 557t
Haemoglobin D
Punjab 556
Haemoglobin E (HbE) 556
Haemoglobin F (HbF) 485, 550
hereditary persistence of 554
Haemoglobin H (HbH) 558
inclusions 529
Haemoglobin H (HbH) disease 552t, 553
Haemoglobin Kansas 556–557, 557t
Haemoglobin Köln 556–557, 557t
Haemoglobin Lepore 554, 557
Haemoglobinopathies 550–559, 851
laboratory diagnosis 557–559, 557t, 558f
screening 500, 530
antenatal/preconceptional 558–559
sickle cell disease. See Sickle cell disease
thalassaemias. See Thalassaemia(s)
Haemoglobin S (HbS) 555, 557t
Haemoglobinuria 162–163, 163t, 525, 530
march 529
Haemolysis 524–525
classification of disorders 527b
	
  Index	
903
definition 524–525
diagnosis 529–531
clinical evidence 529
laboratory investigations 529–531
extravascular 524–525
intravascular 163, 524–525, 529
laboratory features 525
Haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes and low 
platelets (HELLP) syndrome 263, 
445, 465–466, 764
Haemolytic anaemia 516–517
acquired 527b, 528–529
immune haemolytic anaemia 527b, 528. 
See also Autoimmune haemolytic 
anaemia
non-immune haemolytic anaemia 527b, 
528–529
autoimmune. See Autoimmune haemolytic 
anaemia
causes 525
chronic 528
haemoglobin metabolism 525, 526f
inherited 525–528, 527b
enzyme defects 526–528, 527b
haemoglobinopathies. See 
Haemoglobinopathies
membrane defects 525–526, 527b
in malignant disease 816
microangiopathic. See Microangiopathic 
haemolytic anaemia
pathological features 525
traumatic 528–529. See also Haemolysis
Haemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) 
512–513
Haemolytic uraemic syndrome 501–503, 
503f, 529
Haemopexin 525, 526f, 530
Haemophilia 509
gene therapy 870
Haemopoiesis 515–516, 516f
Haemoproteins 533
Haemorrhage
intracranial 661–662, 670
thirst following 32
Haemorrhagic shock 409
Haemosiderinuria 525, 530
Haemosiderosis 265
Haemostasis 507–510. See also entries 
beginning coagulation
Hair
excessive growth in females. See Hirsutism
hyperthyroidism manifestations 389
hypothyroidism manifestations 395
Hair follicles, effect of dihydrotestosterone 
441
Hallucinations 674
Haploid cell, definition 872
Haplotype, definition 872
Haptocorrins 217
Haptoglobin 525, 529–530
properties 572t
Harderoporphyria 542
Harris–Benedict equation 196, 196f
Hartmann's solution 36t
Hartnup disorder 171–172, 172b, 188
Hashimoto disease 386, 399
diagnosis 399, 583
Hashimoto encephalopathy 688
Haversian canal system 604–605
HbA1c (glycated haemoglobin)
cardiovascular disease risk and 754
diabetic complications risk and 296
measurement
diabetes mellitus diagnosis 282, 283,  
284b
factors affecting 301
post-mortem biochemistry 879t, 880
testing of recent glycaemic control 
300–301
hCG. See Human chorionic gonadotrophin 
(hCG)
Health-associated reference interval 14
Heart failure 749–750
congestive 37, 749
natriuretic peptides as biomarkers. See 
Natriuretic peptides (NPs)
prevalence 749
in thyroid crisis 388
Heart rate, energy expenditure and 195–196
Heart-type fatty acid-binding protein 745f, 
748
Heat stroke 882
Heavy chain diseases 595–596
Heavy metals
poisoning 798–799
antidotes 794t
tubular damage 161
Height, assessment of nutritional status 
193–194, 193t
Heinz bodies 529
Helicobacter pylori infection 214
diagnosis 216
HELLP ('haemolysis, elevated liver enzymes 
and low platelets') syndrome 263, 445, 
465–466, 764
Henoch–Schönlein purpura 158
Heparan sulphate proteoglycans (HSPRG) 
713
Hepatic artery 232, 232f
Hepatic encephalopathy 259, 686, 686t
Hepatic extraction ratio 243–244
Hepatic (hepatocellular) jaundice 246
Hepatic lipase (HL) 716
deficiency 722t, 729
Hepatic myelopathy 689
Hepatic porphyrias 268. See also 
Porphyria(s)
Hepatic regeneration 234
Hepatic secretory proteins, measurement 
194–195
Hepatitic flare 255
Hepatitis
acute. See Hepatitis, acute
alcoholic 251, 254t, 257, 800
autoimmune. See Autoimmune hepatitis 
(AIH)
chronic. See Hepatitis, chronic
fulminant 251
Hepatitis, acute 250–253
differential diagnosis 251
viral 252–253, 252t
differential diagnosis 251
outcome 252–253
Hepatitis, chronic 253–256
active 253
differential diagnosis 254–256, 254t
persistent 253
Hepatitis A 252, 252t
Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection 252t
diagnosis 254–255, 254t, 255f
Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection 252t
diagnosis 254t, 255
Hepatitis D virus (HDV) infection 252t
Hepatitis E virus (HEV) infection 252t
Hepatoblastoma 838
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) 264, 818
acute hepatic porphyria-associated risk 539
in children 838
diagnosis 836
epidemiology 835
monitoring 836
prognosis 836
screening of high-risk groups 836
tumour markers 264, 835–836, 838
Hepatocellular disease
neonates 495. See also Liver disease
Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a (HNF-1A), 
gene mutations 293
Hepatocytes 232–234, 233f
thyroid hormone entry 377
Hepatocyte transplantation, inherited 
metabolic disease management 480
Hepatoerythropoietic porphyria (HEP) 
542–543, 545
Hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) 139, 261
differential diagnosis 261, 261t
Hepatotoxicity
detection 247
psychotropic drugs 682
Hepcidin 265, 519, 520f, 524
assays 520
Hereditary coproporphyria (HCP) 534t, 
537t, 538
homozygous 542
pathophysiology 538
screening 541t. See also Porphyria(s), acute
Hereditary elliptocytosis 526
Hereditary haemochromatosis. See 
Haemochromatosis
Hereditary non-polyposis colon cancer 
(HNPCC), genetic pre-screening 831
Hereditary persistence of fetal haemoglobin 
(HPFH) 554
Hereditary renal glycosuria 170
Hereditary renal hypouricaemia 173–174
Hereditary spherocytosis 525–526
diagnosis 531
Hereditary stomatocytosis (HS) 526
Hereditary xanthinuria 177–178
Heredopathica atactica polyneuritiformis 
694–695
Heroin
abuse 802
withdrawal, in neonates 485
Heterophilic antibodies, immunoassay 
interference 385, 826b
Heterozygote
compound. See Compound heterozygotes
definition 872
Hexoaminidase deficiency 700
Hexokinases 277, 277f
Hexosamine synthetic pathway 277f, 278
Hexosaminidase A deficiency 689
High bone mass disorders 634
High density lipoprotein (HDL) 706–707, 708
assembly 714, 714f
atherosclerosis association 715
characteristics 708t
metabolism 714–715, 714f
disorders 722t, 728–729, 728b
role in reverse cholesterol transport 
714f, 715
in nephrotic syndrome 160, 160t
in pregnancy 446
subclasses 708, 708t
in Tangier disease 696
in type 2 diabetes 290
High density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol
cardiovascular disease risk and 752–753
effect of hormone replacement therapy 
449
effect of menopause 449
effect of oral contraceptives 448
inherited disorders affecting 728–729,  
728b
measurement 732
High-dose dexamethasone suppression test 365
High-dose hook effect 10, 826b
904	
Index
High molecular weight protein markers, 
renal tubular damage 161–162
Hip circumference 194
Hirsutism 441–442
rare causes 442b
Histamine 574–575, 574t
Histocytochemistry
carbohydrate metabolism disorders 654
respiratory chain defects 655, 655f
HIV infection 579
HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors. See Statin 
therapy
Holotranscobalamin 521, 524
Homeostasis model assessment (HOMA) 303
Homocystinuria, pyridoxine challenge 479
Homogentisic acid oxidase deficiency. See 
Alkaptonuria
Homozygote, definition 872
Homozygous acute porphyrias 542
Hook effect
high-dose 10, 826b
prolactinomas 362
Hookworm infestation, iron deficiency 
­anaemia 519–520
Hormone(s)
appetite control 204–205
cytokines vs. 572, 574t
ectopic secretion 814, 815t
definition 827
gastrointestinal tract, tumour marker 
characteristics 823t
kidney functions involving 144, 144t. See 
also specific hormones
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
adrenal disease, monitoring 370–371
pituitary disease, monitoring 370–371
postmenopausal women 447–448, 
449–450, 618
adverse effects 449
biochemical responses 619, 619f
heart disease and 449–450
hyperlipidaemia association 731
metabolic effects 449
osteoporosis management 450, 618. See 
also specific hormones
Hormone sensitive lipase (HSL) 713, 717
Horseshoe kidney 124
Hot spots 847
definition 872
Human anti-mouse antibodies (HAMA), 
assay interference 826b
Human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG) 436
in ectopic pregnancy 229–230, 442
ectopic secretion 815t
in gestational trophoblastic neoplasia 835
hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism 
treatment 457
in ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome 441
pregnancy diagnosis 442
stimulation test 422, 423f, 455, 460
thyroid-stimulating activity 379, 380, 394
as tumour marker 822t, 824t, 826t
germ cell tumours 832, 833, 834
hepatoblastomas 838
Human epidermal growth factor receptor-2 
(HER-2) 823t
Human epididymis protein 4 (HE4) 823t
Human Genome Project (HGP) 845
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 
infection 579
Human leukocyte antigen (HLA) 566, 566f, 
569–570
antigen presentation 570
class I 569, 569t
class II 569–570, 569t
genes 569, 569f
Human placental lactogen, ectopic secretion 
815t
Humoral hypercalcaemia of malignancy 
(HMM) 102, 104
Humoral immunity
primary immunodeficiencies 577–578. See 
also Antibodies; B lymphocytes
Humoral paraneoplastic syndromes 814
Hungry bone syndrome 627, 629
Huntington disease 699
DNA analysis 865–866
Hurler syndrome (mucopolysaccharidosis 
type I) 462, 474t
Hyaline membrane disease 485
signs 485–486
Hyaluronan 606–607
Hyaluronate 636–637
serum tests for hepatic fibrosis 244
Hybridization, molecular 852–855
Hydatiform mole 835
Hydration, oral, hypernatraemia 
management 45
Hydrocephalus 670
Hydrochloric acid, loss of, non-respiratory 
alkalosis and 83
Hydrofluoric acid poisoning, antidote 794t
Hydrogen breath test 219
Hydrogen ion(s)
activity 65–66
concentration 65, 66
measurement 73
relationship with PCO2 85, 85f
definitions 65–66
excretion. See Hydrogen ion excretion
generation 128
in neonates 488
physiological role 65–66
production 68–70, 68t
secretion into tubular lumen, mechanisms 
169, 169f
turnover 68, 68t
Hydrogen ion excretion 70–72, 72f
in chronic kidney disease 143
non-respiratory acidosis 75
respiratory acidosis 81
respiratory alkalosis 84
Hydrogen ion homeostasis 66–73
buffering. See Buffering
hydrogen ion excretion. See Hydrogen ion 
excretion
hydrogen ion production 68–70, 68t
hydrogen ion turnover 68, 68t
in neonates 488
role of liver 72, 73. See also Acid–base status
Hydrogen ion homeostasis, disorders 66, 74–87
acidosis. See Acidosis
alcohol-associated 77
alkalosis. See Alkalosis
clinical assessment 73
interpretation of acid–base data 85–86, 85f
laboratory assessment 73–74
mixed. See Mixed acid–base disorders
in pre-term neonates 488
Hydrogen peroxide, in thyroid hormone 
synthesis 375f, 376
Hydrostatic pressure 28
3-Hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-CoA reductase
inhibitors. See Statin therapy
3-Hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenases 
647–649, 649f
measurement of activity 657–658
Hydroxyapatite 605
β-Hydroxybutyrate
in ketoacidosis 77, 299, 327
plasma measurements, hypoglycaemia 
investigation 339
post-mortem biochemistry 879t, 880, 881f
testing methods 299–300
γ-Hydroxybutyrate (GHB), forensic 
biochemistry 876–877, 876b, 877b
25-Hydroxycholecalciferol. See 
25-Hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D)
Hydroxycobalamin 476–477, 476f
5-Hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5HIAA) 809, 
809f
in carcinoid syndrome 809
measurement 809
interfering substances 810b
17α-Hydroxylase 437–438
deficiency 353t, 370, 425, 760t
combined 17,20-lyase deficiency 425, 
426t. See also Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (CAH)
1α-Hydroxylase deficiency 621
11β-Hydroxylase deficiency 353t, 423, 424t, 
760t. See also Congenital adrenal 
hyperplasia (CAH)
21-Hydroxylase deficiency 353t, 370, 419, 
423, 424t
late-onset 370
sodium wasting 35. See also Congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)
Hydroxylysine 605
glycosylated 611
Hydroxylysylpyridinoline 611–612, 612f
1-Hydroxymethylbilane (HMB) 533, 535f
1-Hydroxymethylbilane synthase (HMBS) 
533, 535f
17-Hydroxyprogesterone, measurement, 
newborns with disorder of sex 
development 418–419
Hydroxyproline 611
11β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (11β-
HSD) 29, 56
3β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase deficiency 
353t
sodium wasting 35
type 2 424t, 425, 426t. See also Congenital 
adrenal hyperplasia (CAH)
3β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase isomerase 
437
17β-Hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase type 3 
(17β-HSD3) deficiency 425, 426t
5-Hydroxytryptamine. See Serotonin
24,25-Hydroxyvitamin D 97t
25-Hydroxyvitamin D (25(OH)D) 97, 97t, 98
plasma concentration
low, osteomalacia and 621, 623
measurement 197, 621–622, 621t
seasonal variation 9, 197
1α-Hydroxyvitamin D2 98
1α-Hydroxyvitamin D3 98
Hyperacute rejection 599b
Hyperaldosteronism
atrial natriuretic peptide and 38–39
biochemical investigation 762, 765–766
confounding factors 762, 762b
interpretation of results 766
patient preparation 765–766
sample preparation 766
screening procedure 766
differential diagnosis 761t
familial 55–56
forms of 761–762
glucocorticoid-suppressible 760t, 761
hypokalaemic alkalosis 55–56
idiopathic 761
localization of adenoma 762
primary 760–762
Hyperammonaemia, in inherited metabolic 
diseases 462, 464, 466, 469, 470
neonatal investigation 470, 471f
	
  Index	
905
Hyperamylasaemia 217–218, 218t
Hyperbilirubinaemia 237
in acute hepatitis 251
in chronic hepatitis 254
conjugated 246
further investigation 245
neonatal/childhood 494–495, 494b
inherited 245–246
significance 238–239
unconjugated 246
in neonates. See Neonates; Bilirubin; 
Jaundice
Hypercalcaemia 100–105
as cause of acute pancreatitis 229t
causes 101–103, 101b
in infants and children 104b
uncommon 103, 103t
clinical features 101b
in dialysis-treated patients 625–626, 626b
differential diagnosis 101b
encephalopathy and 687
familial hypocalciuric 102, 102t, 103–104, 
121, 491
investigation 103–104, 105f
of malignancy 102–103, 104, 814
in myeloma 594
neonatal 490–491
parenteral nutrition-associated 211
treatment 104–105
Hypercalciuria 175–176
Hypercapnia
encephalopathy and 686–687
hypoxaemia and 89
systemic effects 81
Hypercholesterolaemia 722t
acquired, causes 730b
familial. See Familial 
hypercholesterolaemia (FH)
in hypothyroidism 730
polygenic 728
selective screening 4. See also 
Hyperlipidaemia
Hypercortisolaemia, in depression 679, 680
Hypercortisolism, articular manifestations 643
Hyperemesis gravidarum, thyroid function 
and 380
Hyperglucagonaemia, in diabetes 295
Hyperglycaemia
cerebrospinal glucose concentrations 662
in chronic liver failure 234
diabetic neuropathy pathophysiology 691
hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state. See 
Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state 
(HHS)
parenteral nutrition-associated 211
potassium and 32–33
prevention 273–274, 275f. See also Insulin
psychotropic drugs causing 682
rebound 320–321
stress 273–274, 297–298
in type 2 diabetes mellitus 287
Hyperglycaemia-induced hyponatraemia. See 
Hyponatraemia
Hyperglycinaemia, non-ketotic 482
Hypericum perforatum, drug interactions 
208–209, 771, 772t
Hyperinsulinaemia
neonatal 490
in type 2 diabetes 287–288
Hyperinsulinaemia syndrome. See Metabolic 
syndrome
Hyperinsulinaemic clamps 303
Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia, 
endogenous 343
Hyperinsulinism, neonatal 489–490
Hyperkalaemia 32, 57–61
in acute kidney injury 140
causes 58–60
in chronic kidney disease 143
clinical effects 57–58, 58b
definition 57–58
laboratory investigation 60–61
management 61
periodic paralysis 59
redistribution
in vitro 58, 58b
in vivo 58–59, 58b
renal tubular acidosis with. See Renal 
tubular acidosis (RTA), type 4
secondary renal sodium loss and 35
Hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis 59, 654
Hyperlactataemia 69, 78, 91
Hyperlipidaemia 722t
acquired (secondary) 729–732
causes 730b
drug-related 731–732
psychotropic drugs 682
effect of hormonal contraceptives 448
extravascular manifestations 723t
familial combined 713–714, 722t, 724, 752
following renal transplantation 731
in liver disease 731
management 734–736
therapeutic diets 209t, 734
treatment targets 734
in nephrotic syndrome 160, 160t, 730
of pregnancy 446
WHO classification 721–722, 722t. 
See also Hypercholesterolaemia; 
Hypertriglyceridaemia
Hyperlipoproteinaemia, remnant 725–726, 
726f
Hypermagnesaemia 121
Hypernatraemia 44–46
acute 38, 44
causes 44, 44b
definition 39
encephalopathy and 687
in hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state 329, 
329b, 330
management 45–46
mild 44
neonatal 487–488
salt poisoning 878, 878b
spurious 44
water deficiency
with thirst 44
without thirst 44–46, 45f
water deficit calculation 62
Hyperosmolal fluids 36
Hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state (HHS) 
329–330
laboratory values, initial 329b
management 329–330
presentation and clinical features 329
Hyperoxaluria 175, 176–177
in ethylene glycol poisoning 176, 800
Hyperparathyroidism
articular manifestations 643
in chronic kidney disease–mineral and 
bone disorder (CKD–MBD) 624–625
classification 96
clinical presentation 101–102
familial 101, 102t
molecular genetics 101, 102t
neonatal severe 102, 102t
primary 96, 101–102
bone disease in. See Metabolic bone disease
in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 
101, 102t, 810–811
in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 
101, 102t
secondary 96
treatment 627–628, 629
Hyperparathyroidism–jaw tumour syndrome 
101, 102t, 813
Hyperphenylalaninaemia 464, 466, 477.  
See also Phenylketonuria (PKU)
Hyperphosphataemia 113–115
benign transient 240, 247, 493, 610, 851
isoenzyme analysis 240, 240f
causes 113–114, 113b
in chronic kidney disease 142
consequences 114
diagnostic approach 114
in dialysis-treated patients 626, 626b
therapeutic approach 114–115
Hyperphosphatasia
familial benign 610
familial/idiopathic (juvenile Paget disease) 
633t, 634
Hyperphosphaturia, syndromes of 112
Hyperproinsulinaemia, familial 279, 280t
Hyperprolactinaemia
in anxiety states 681
in chronic kidney disease
females 146
males 145, 146b
differential diagnosis 360–361, 361f
in hypothyroidism 395
management 440
oligomenorrhoea/amenorrhoea and 361, 440
presentation 361
psychotropic drugs causing 681
secondary diabetes 294
Hyperpyrexia, malignant 654
Hyperreninaemic hypoaldosteronism 59, 
60–61
Hypersensitivity reactions 574
type I 574–575, 580
investigation 582
mediators 574, 574t. See also Allergies
type II 575
type III 575
type IV 575
Hypertension 757–765
in acute porphyria 539
as cardiovascular disease risk factor 753
causes 758–759
secondary. See secondary causes (below)
in chronic kidney disease 142, 759
definition 757–758
diabetes in 298
management 308–309
dietary salt intake and 756
haemolytic anaemia associated with 529
laboratory assessment 759
malignant 764
management 764–765. See also 
Antihypertensive therapy
microalbuminuria and 164
oral contraceptive use and 449
portal 259
in pregnancy 38, 156, 764
presentation 758
primary 758–759, 761t
pulmonary, sickle cell patients 556
renal hypokalaemic alkalosis with 54b, 
55–56
renovascular 759–760
secondary causes 758, 758t, 759, 761t
inherited endocrine disorders 760t
investigation 759
phaeochromocytoma. See 
Phaeochromocytoma
primary aldosteronism. See 
Hyperaldosteronism
in sodium excess 36, 38
906	
Index
Hyperthermia
in poisoning 793
post-mortem biochemistry 880–882
Hyperthyroidism 374–375, 388–394
anxiety disorders vs. 677
articular manifestations 643
biochemical parameters increased by 375, 
375b
cardiovascular system manifestations  
388
causes 389–394, 390t. See also specific causes
central nervous system manifestations  
389
in chronic kidney disease 147
clinical features 388–389, 388t
in elderly 389
florid 388
gastrointestinal system manifestations 388
hypokalaemic paralysis and 654
iodine intake and 376
locomotor system manifestations 389
neonatal 387, 583
non-thyroidal illness vs. 394
overt primary, interpretation of thyroid 
function tests 385
peripheral nervous system manifestations 
389, 693
renal manifestations 389
reproductive system manifestations 389
respiratory system manifestations 389
secondary 385
skeletal manifestations 389
skin and hair manifestations 389
subclinical 385, 394
indications for treatment 394, 394b
thyroiditis-associated 398–399
treatment
Graves disease 391–392
in pregnancy 380, 391
thyroid stimulating hormone-secreting 
pituitary tumour 393
toxic adenoma 392
toxic multinodular goitre 392. See also 
Graves disease
Hypertonic saline infusion 42, 63–64
assessment of posterior pituitary function 
357
hyponatraemia
acute dilutional 51
chronic dilutional 47, 49f, 51
infusion protocol 63, 63t
pre-infusion preparation 63, 63t
Hypertonic sodium chloride solution 38
Hypertrichosis, in bullous porphyrias 543
Hypertriglyceridaemia
acquired, causes 730b
alcohol intake and 731
as cause of acute pancreatitis 229t
in chronic kidney disease 730–731
in diabetes mellitus 729–730
familial 713–714, 722t, 724–725
lipoprotein lipase gene mutations 716
management of diabetes-related 
cardiovascular risk 308. See also 
Hyperlipidaemia
Hyperuricaemia 639–642
asymptomatic 640
in chronic kidney disease 143
in malignant disease 816
Hyperuricosuria 177
Hyperventilation
anxiety-related 677
non-respiratory acidosis 73, 74–75
respiratory acidosis 81
Hyperviscosity 589t, 594, 595
Hypervolaemic hyponatraemia 46, 46b, 51
Hypoadrenalism, assessment
clinical approach 358–359. See also 
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
(ACTH)–adrenal axis, assessment
Hypoalbuminaemia
early onset ataxia with oculomotor apraxia 
and 700
in nephrotic syndrome 159
role in ascites development 259
Hypoaldosteronism
hyperreninaemic 59, 60–61
hyporeninaemic. See Hyporeninaemic 
hypoaldosteronism
syndromes of 59–60, 59t
Hypobetalipoproteinaemia 722t, 723–724
familial 722t, 724
Hypocalcaemia 105–109
causes 106–108, 106b
clinical features 105–106
differential diagnosis 106b
hypomagnesaemia and 119
investigation 108–109, 108f
neonatal 108, 491, 491b
parathyroidectomy-associated 108, 627, 629
treatment 109
Hypocapnia
as cause of anxiety 677
systemic effects 84
Hypochromic red cells 501, 502f, 520
Hypodipsic hypernatraemia 44–46, 45f
Hypogammaglobulinaemia 579–580
transient, of infancy 579
Hypoglycaemia 333–348
in acute liver failure 234
alcohol-induced 321, 346–347
autoimmune 344
autonomic failure associated with 320
blood glucose measurements during 
spontaneous symptoms 336
causes 341–348. See also specific causes
in cirrhosis 263
classification 335, 336b
counter-regulatory mechanisms 273, 274b
dawn phenomenon 320–321
deficient energy intake-associated 347
definition 334–335
in diabetes. See Diabetes mellitus, 
hypoglycaemia in
drug-induced 346
autoimmune hypoglycaemia 344, 344b
insulin. See insulin-induced (below)
sulfonylureas 315, 340–341, 346
emergency treatment 341
encephalopathy and 687
endocrine deficiency-associated 345
exercise-induced 321, 340
factitious/felonious 341
inherited metabolic disease-associated 348, 
469–470
insulin-induced 340
alcohol ingestion and 346–347
correction 320
investigation 336–341, 337f
demonstration of hypoglycaemia 336–338
identification of cause 338–339
in patients with diabetes mellitus 339–341
in persons without diabetes 336
liver disease-associated 345
neonatal 489–490, 490b
neuroendocrine response 320, 334–335
non-insulinoma pancreatogenous 343
non-islet cell tumour 282, 345
as obstacle to achieving glycaemic control 
in diabetes 319–321
parenteral nutrition-associated 211
postprandial 347
provocation tests 336–338
reactive 347
renal impairment-associated 344–345
response, normal 320, 334–335
response in diabetic patients 320
septicaemia-associated 347
Somogyi effect 320–321
surreptitious 341
symptoms 335, 335b
tumour-related 282, 343
islet cell tumours. See Insulinomas
unawareness 320, 340
Hypoglycaemia-associated autonomic failure 
(HAAF) 320
Hypoglycaemic agents
as cause of hypoglycaemia 346
surreptitious administration 341
screening, hypoglycaemia investigation 
339–340. See also Glucose-lowering 
therapy, diabetes. specific hypoglycaemic 
agents
Hypogonadism
hypogonadotrophic. See 
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism
male 455–457
clinical features 455
defective hormone synthesis and 
hormone receptor defects 456
in hereditary haemochromatosis 262, 
456
primary 455
secondary 455–456
treatment 456–457
primary 431
Hypogonadotrophic hypogonadism 414, 430, 
455–456
acquired causes 456, 456b
congenital causes 455–456
idiopathic 456
treatment 457
Hypokalaemia 32, 52–57
causes 52–56
clinical effects 52, 52b
definition 52
effect on aldosterone:renin ratio 762
hypomagnesaemia and 119, 120
laboratory investigation 56–57
management 57, 57t
non-respiratory alkalosis 83
periodic paralysis 52–53
redistribution
in vitro 52, 52b
in vivo 52, 52b
in respiratory alkalosis 84
sodium intake and 38. See also Potassium 
depletion
Hypokalaemic periodic paralysis 52–53, 654
Hypokinesia 697
Hypolipidaemia, acquired 732
Hypomagnesaemia 118–121
causes 118
acquired 118, 119b
genetic 118, 120t
consequences 119
diabetes association 298
diagnostic approach 119–121
hypokalaemia and 119, 120
therapeutic approach 121, 121b
Hyponatraemia 46–51
acute. See Acute dilutional hyponatraemia
cerebral salt wasting 50
chronic. See Chronic dilutional 
hyponatraemia
classification 46b
definition 39, 46
diabetes association 298
	
  Index	
907
encephalopathy and 687
hyperglycaemia-induced 46
expected sodium depression estimation 
62
hypervolaemic 46, 46b, 51
hypovolaemic. See Hypovolaemic 
hyponatraemia
laboratory investigation 50–51
low osmotic load 49–50
management 51
neonatal 487
psychotropic drugs causing 681
sick cell syndrome 49
sodium deficit calculation 62
spurious 46
in syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic 
hormone secretion (SIADH) 48–49, 
49b
Hypoosmolal fluids 36, 36t
Hypoosmolal hyponatraemia 46
Hypoparathyroidism 106
autoimmune 106
genetic causes 106, 107t
neonatal hypocalcaemia 491
Hypophosphataemia 115–117
alkaline phosphatase activity and 610
chronic 694
consequences 116, 116t
in diabetic ketoacidosis 328
diagnostic approach 116
diet and 111
mechanisms 115–116, 115t
in refeeding syndrome 211–212
in rickets 492, 623. See also 
Hypophosphataemic rickets
syndromes of 112
therapeutic approach 116–117
Hypophosphataemic osteomalacia. See 
Osteomalacia, phosphopenic
Hypophosphataemic rickets 492, 622, 622b, 
623
autosomal dominant 112, 113
autosomal recessive 113
treatment 623
X-linked 112, 622, 623
Hypophosphatasia 623–624, 624t
Hypophysitis 367
Hypopituitarism
diseases leading to 367
order of progression 354
thyroid stimulating hormone 
measurement 352. See also specific 
hormone deficiencies
Hyporeninaemic hypoaldosteronism 35, 56, 
59–61, 59t
in diabetes mellitus 326
Hypotension
arginine vasopressin response 31
hypermagnesaemia and 121
Hypothalamic disorders
amenorrhoea 353, 356–357, 368f, 369
polydipsia 41, 46
Hypothalamic messengers, appetite control 
203–204
Hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal axis
abnormalities in psychiatric disease 680
stress response 404–405
Hypothalamo–pituitary axis 349
control of testicular function 452–453, 453f
physiology 350–352, 351f
Hypothalamo–pituitary–gonadal axis 433
abnormalities in psychiatric disease 680
evaluation 454–455
stress response 405
Hypothalamo–pituitary–thyroid axis, 
abnormalities in psychiatric disease 680
Hypothalamus
anatomy 350, 350f
appetite control 203
deficiency states 367–369
Hypothermia
in poisoning 793
post-mortem biochemistry 880–882
Hypothyroidism 394–398
articular manifestations 643
biochemical parameters decreased by 
375b
biochemical parameters increased by 375, 
375b
cardiovascular system manifestations  
394
causes 396–397, 396t. See also specific causes
central nervous system manifestations 
394–395
in childhood, skeletal effects 395
in chronic kidney disease 146, 147, 361
clinical features 394–395, 394t
congenital 394–395, 396–397
causes 397b
neonatal screening 466, 861
gastrointestinal system manifestations 394
in Hashimoto thyroiditis 399
hyperprolactinaemia and 361
hypoglycaemia and 345
iodine and 397
lipid abnormalities 730
lithium-induced 397, 681
locomotor system manifestations 395
obesity and 203
overt primary, interpretation of thyroid 
function tests 385
peripheral nervous system manifestations 
394–395, 693
postpartum 399
post-radioiodine 396
post-surgery 396
psychiatric manifestations 678, 680
renal manifestations 395
reproductive system manifestations 395, 
440
respiratory system manifestations 395
secondary 385, 397
as side effect of interferon therapy 255
skeletal manifestations 395
skin and hair manifestations 395
subclinical 385, 398
treatment 398, 398b
treatment. See Thyroid hormone 
replacement therapy
Hypouricaemia, hereditary renal 173–174
Hypoventilation 87
non-respiratory alkalosis 82
respiratory alkalosis 84
Hypovolaemia
arginine vasopressin response 31
secondary renal sodium loss and 35
Hypovolaemic hyponatraemia 46, 46b, 51
sodium deficit calculation 62
Hypoxaemia 88
hypercapnia and 89
in poisoning 788–789
in respiratory acidosis 81
Hypoxanthine, post-mortem biochemistry 
879t
Hypoxanthine-guanine phosphoribosyl 
transferase 640f
deficiency 640
Hypoxia, tissue 90–92
causes 90t
detection 91
Hypoxia response elements (HREs) 516
Hypoxic–ischaemic encephalopathy 687
I
Iatrogenic diabetes 294
Ibandronate 618
Idiogenic osmoles 45
Idiopathic oedema 38
Idiopathic pituitary fibrosis 367
Idiotype 568
Ileal fluid, composition 34t
Ileal segments, urinary diversions 55
Ileum
fluid and electrolyte absorption 54–55
microflora 218
phosphate absorption 111
Imaging techniques
acute kidney injury 138
aldosterone-producing adenoma 762
assessment of renal function 130
carcinoid tumours 810
central nervous system disorders 668–669
chronic pancreatitis 218
gastrinoma localization 216
insulinoma localization 342
phaeochromocytoma localization 764
pituitary gland 360
thyroid gland. See Thyroid gland. See also 
specific imaging techniques
Imipramine, therapeutic drug monitoring 
780
Immediate hypersensitivity reactions 
574–575
Immediate spin crossmatch 512
Immobilization, as cause of hypercalcaemia 
103t
Immune complex reactions 575
Immune deficiency 575–580
infection and 576, 577b, 577t
investigation 576–577, 578f
functional assays 602–603
primary 577–579
secondary 579–580
causes 579t
Immune response 560–561
antigens 561
clonality 561
effects of stress 406–409
exaggerated/persistent. See 
Hypersensitivity reactions
in malnutrition 195
neonates 575–576, 576t
primary 560, 568, 568f
secondary 560, 568, 568f
Immune system 560–575
acute phase proteins. See Acute phase 
proteins
adaptive. See Adaptive immune system
complement. See Complement
cytokines. See Cytokines
development of immunity 575–576, 576f
diseases 575–588
allergies. See Allergies
autoimmune diseases. See Autoimmune 
diseases
B cell malignancies. See B cell 
malignancies
clinical features 601t
immune deficiency. See Immune 
deficiency
infections. See Infection(s)
investigations 601t, 602–603
sepsis. See Sepsis
innate 561–562, 562f
mechanisms of immunological damage 574
Immunity, acquired 560. See also Adaptive 
immune system
Immunization 560
Immunofixation 590, 591–592, 592f
908	
Index
Immunoglobulin(s) 561, 566–569, 588
age-related changes 575–576, 576f
class switching 568
constant domains 567
heavy chain gene 567, 567f
intrathecal synthesis 664
in intrauterine infections 485, 485t
liver function tests 243
monoclonal. See Monoclonal proteins
polyclonal 568, 588
properties 568t
structure 566, 567f
total, quantification 602
Immunoglobulin A (IgA) 568
deficiency 577
paraproteins 590, 591t
properties 568, 568t
Immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy 158
Immunoglobulin D (IgD)
paraproteins 582t, 589–590, 591
properties 568t, 569
Immunoglobulin E (IgE) 569
concentrations, raised 581
measurement 602
allergy investigation 581, 581t, 582t
properties 568t
specific 581
Immunoglobulin E (IgE)-mediated 
hypersensitivity 574, 580
mediators 574t. See also Allergies
Immunoglobulin G (IgG) 568, 568f
antigen-specific, quantification 602
in autoimmune hepatitis 256
cerebrospinal fluid 663, 663f, 663t
oligoclonal banding 664, 665f, 669–670, 
671
clearance 154t
liver function tests 243
neonates 575–576, 576f
paraproteins 591t, 592f
properties 568, 568t
subclasses 568
measurements 602
urine protein selectivity studies 159
Immunoglobulin M (IgM) 568, 568f
in intrauterine infections 485, 485t
liver function tests 243
paraproteins 590, 591t, 595
properties 568t
X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome 578
Immunological markers, renal function 130
Immunometric assays (IMAs), thyroid 
stimulating hormone 383
Immunomodulating therapies, shocked 
patients 411
Immunophenotyping 562–564
Immunoreactive trypsinogen (IRT)  
217–218
Immunosuppressive therapy
hyperlipidaemia association 732
therapeutic drug monitoring 783–785
transplant patients 600t
infection secondary to 599b
renal transplantation 150
Impaired fasting glycaemia (IFG), diagnosis 
282–283, 283t
Impaired glucose tolerance (IGT)
as cardiovascular disease risk factor 754, 
754f
in chronic kidney disease 148, 148b
diagnosis 282–283, 283t
Impotence 458–459
causes 458, 458b, 459b
in chronic kidney disease 145, 145b
investigation 458–459, 459b
treatment 459
Imprecision, analytical 9–10, 11, 11t
Imprinting 851–852
definition 872
Inborn errors of metabolism. See Inherited 
metabolic diseases (IMDs)
Incretin effect 279, 316
Incretin mimetics 316
Indian childhood cirrhosis 267t, 268
Indirect antiglobulin test (IAT) 511
111Indium white cell technique 225
Individual screening 4–5, 861
Indocyanine green, clearance tests 244
Inducible degrader of low density lipoprotein 
receptor (IDOL) 720
Infancy, transient hypogammaglobulinaemia 
of 579
Infantile hypercalcaemia (Williams 
syndrome) 491
Infants
aldosterone reference ranges 766
hypercalcaemia, causes 104b
inherited metabolic disease presentation 
464
maternal diabetes-associated complications 
331b
mortality rates 484
poisoning 788
sudden infant death syndrome 882, 882t
thyroid function 379
vitamin K deficiency bleeding 186–187. 
See also Neonates
Infection(s) 597–598
in acute kidney injury 140
cardiovascular disease risk and 755
as cause of acute pancreatitis 229t
central nervous system
acute 669
chronic 669–670
diagnosis and monitoring 598
haemolytic anaemia-associated 527b, 528
immune deficiency and 576, 577b, 577t
impaired resistance in chronic energy 
deficiency 201
intrauterine 484–485, 485t
recurrent, investigations 601t
renal stone formation 177
secondary to immune suppression 599b. 
See also Bacterial infections
Infectious mononucleosis 500–501, 505f
Inferior petrosal sinus sampling (IPSS), 
adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
365–366
Infertility
definition 440
female. See Female infertility
male. See Male infertility
Inflammation
cardiovascular disease risk and 755
cerebrospinal fluid markers 667–668
microalbuminuria as risk factor 165
post-mortem biochemistry 882
stages 571–572
stimulators 571–572
stress and 406–409
Inflammatory arthritis 637–638. See also 
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) 215
bone mineral density 220
faecal calprotectin concentrations 225–226
Inflammatory cytokines 566, 574
Inflammatory diseases
as cause of hypopituitarism 367
central nervous system 701. See also specific 
diseases
Inflammatory mediators 571–572, 572t
Information systems 23
Inheritance 466–468, 850–851, 850f
autosomal dominant 467, 467f, 850, 850f
autosomal recessive 466–467, 467f, 850, 
850f
mitochondrial 467–468, 468f, 850
X-linked 467, 468f, 850, 850f
Inherited metabolic diseases (IMDs)  
461–483
clinical presentation 461–466
during adulthood 465
in later infancy 464
neonatal. See Neonates
postpartum 466
during pregnancy 465–466
at puberty 464–465
at weaning 464
diagnostic strategies 468–476
cerebrospinal fluid examination 670
confirmatory investigations 475–476
essential laboratory investigations 
469–471
functional and loading tests 474–475
second-line investigations 472–474
DNA analysis 862–866
diagnosis of index cases 860
enzyme analysis 475
hepatic 265–270
hypoglycaemia association 348
inheritance. See Inheritance
management 476–483
blockage of site of action of toxic 
metabolites 482
enzyme replacement therapy 478–479
gene therapy 481
inhibition of product breakdown 478
molecular therapies 481
nutritional support 476–478
organ transplantation 479–480
product replacement strategies  
476–478
substrate depletion 483
substrate deprivation 483
toxic metabolite reduction strategies 
481–482
toxic substance removal strategies 
482–483
newborn screening 466. See also Neonatal 
screening
pathophysiology 461–466
prenatal diagnosis 476. See also specific 
diseases
Inhibin(s) 436–437
measurement, in disorder of sex 
development (DSD) 421–422
as tumour markers 823t, 838, 841–842
Inhibin A 421–422, 436
tumour marker characteristics 823t
Inhibin B 414, 421–422, 436
tumour marker characteristics 823t
Innate immune system 561–562, 562f
Inositol triphosphate 93
Insertional mutagenesis 870
Insulin 234, 278–281
actions 279–281, 280t, 333
antibodies 295
in autoimmune hypoglycaemia 344, 
344b
hypoglycaemia investigation 339
antihyperglycaemic actions 275f
appetite control 204
biosynthesis 278–279
abnormalities 279, 280t
deficiency
diabetic ketoacidosis development 326, 
327f
in type 1 diabetes mellitus 283
	
  Index	
909
in type 2 diabetes mellitus 286–288. See 
also Diabetes mellitus
effect of food intake 9
effect on potassium distribution 32
exogenous administration, forensic 
biochemistry 877, 877b
GLUT4 responsiveness 276
hyperkalaemia management 61
internalization 281
in liver failure 234
in obese patients 8
pharmacokinetics 279
plasma concentrations 279
hypoglycaemia investigation 337f, 
338–339
receptor. See Insulin receptor
requirements in pregnancy 331, 446
resistance. See Insulin resistance
second messenger systems 281
secretion 279
abnormalities 279, 285, 286–287
effects of menopause 449
postprandial 333–334
in protein–energy malnutrition 201
therapy. See Insulin therapy
tolerance test. See Insulin stress test (IST)
Insulin-binding antibodies 295, 301
Insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE) 877
Insulin-like factor 3 (INSL3), measurement 
in disorder of sex development 420
Insulin-like growth factor(s) (IGFs) 279–280, 
281–282
in non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia 
343–344
physiological role 281
Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) 281, 351
in acromegaly 362
in diabetic retinopathy 282
effect on TmP/GFR 111–112
in growth hormone deficiency 354
assessment 356
in sex steroid regulation 435
Insulin-like growth factor 2 (IGF-2) 281
ectopic secretion 815t
in tumour-related hypoglycaemia 282, 
343–344
Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-binding 
proteins, in non-islet cell tumour 
hypoglycaemia 343–344
Insulinomas 227, 341–343
clinical features 342
diagnosis 342
localization 342
treatment 342–343
Insulin receptor 279–280, 281, 281f
antibodies, in autoimmune hypoglycaemia 
344, 344b
gene mutations 281
Insulin resistance 278, 679
in chronic kidney disease 148
in cirrhosis 263
definition 288
in diabetes mellitus
type 1 285–286
type 2 286–287, 288
ghrelin concentrations and 205
in malignancy 818
in obesity 289
severe 294–295
tests 301–303. See also Metabolic syndrome
Insulin stress test (IST) 354, 355, 371–372
assessment of growth hormone reserve 
355–356
contraindications 354, 355–356
Insulin therapy 310–313
administration 311–313
continuous subcutaneous insulin infusion 
311, 312t
diabetic ketoacidosis management 328
effect of exercise 306
effect on blood glucose concentration, 
factors affecting 319t
gestational diabetes 292
hospital setting 330
hyperosmolar hyperglycaemic state 
329–330
hypoglycaemia associated with. See 
Hypoglycaemia, insulin-induced
insulin analogues 310
intermediate-acting insulin 310
long-acting insulin analogues 311
premixed insulin analogues 310–311
regimens 311, 312t
regular insulin 310
type 1 diabetes 310–313
intensive 319
type 2 diabetes 313, 317
variable infusion rates (sliding scales) 328
Insulin tolerance test (ITT). See Insulin stress 
test (IST)
Interactions, drug. See Drug interactions
Intercalated cells 126
Interface hepatitis 254
Interference 11
Interferons 573t
Interferon therapy, hypothyroidism as side 
effect 255
Interindividual variation 10, 11t
Interleukin (IL) 573t
Interleukin-1 (IL-1) 573t
stress response 406
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) 573t
stress response 406, 408
Intermediate-acting insulin 310
Intermediate density lipoprotein (IDL) 
706–707, 708, 708t, 714
Intermediate syndrome 799
Internal quality control (IQC) 21
tumour marker measurements 826
International normalized ratio (INR) 242
in poisoning 875t
Intersex 416. See also Disorder of sex 
development (DSD)
Interstitial nephritis 160–161
hyperkalaemia 60
Interstitial space 27
Intestinal absorption
calcium. See Calcium
carbohydrates. See Carbohydrate(s), 
absorption
cholesterol 710–711
disorders. See Malabsorption
folate 521
iron 519
magnesium 117, 118, 118f
oxalate, increased 176
phosphate 110f, 111
proteins. See Protein(s), absorption
triglycerides 224, 711
vitamin B12 521
Intestinal carcinoid tumours 226
Intestinal decontamination 794
Intestinal inflammation, faecal tests 225–227
Intestinal microflora 218–219, 561
Intestinal permeability 225
Intoxication, inherited metabolic disease 
presentation 462–463
Intracellular fluid (ICF) 27–28, 28t
potassium and 28t, 32–33
water and 30–32
Intracellular signalling, calcium role 93
Intracranial haemorrhage 661–662, 670
Intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI)  
457
Intrahepatic cholestasis of pregnancy 
262–263, 445
Intraindividual variation 10, 11t
Intrapartum fetal monitoring 445
Intrathecal immunoglobulin synthesis  
664
Intrauterine infections 484–485, 485t
Intrauterine poisoning 788
Intravascular haemolysis 163
Intravascular space 27
Intravenous glucose tolerance testing 
(IVGTT) 303
Intrinsic acute kidney injury. See Acute 
kidney injury (AKI)
Intrinsic biological variation 9–10, 11t, 15
Intrinsic factor 215, 217, 521
autoantibodies 217, 523, 583
Intron 845
definition 872
Inulin clearance 132, 132t
Invasive moles 835
In vitro fertilization (IVF) 441
preimplantation genetic diagnosis 444, 
444t
Iodide, incorporation into thyroglobulin 375, 
375f
Iodine
deficiency 376, 397
as cause of hypothyroidism 397
excess, effects 376
hyperthyroidism 390t, 393
hypothyroidism 397
thyroid hormone synthesis and 376
Iodine-131 therapy. See Radioiodine therapy
Iodothyronine deiodinases 377, 378f
deficiency in congenital hypothyroidism 
396–397
Ion exchange chromatography, in 
investigation of amino acid disorders 
472
Ion–semiconductor sequencing 860
Ipecacuanha, syrup of 794
Iron 517–519
absorption 519, 520f
deficiency
clinical consequences 520. See also Iron 
deficiency anaemia
dietary sources 519t
excretion 265
functions 517–519
overload 265–266
alcoholic liver disease 257
transferrin concentration 242. See also 
Haemochromatosis
poisoning. See Iron poisoning
requirements 519, 519t
serum, measurement 520
status, laboratory investigation 520
transport and storage 519
Iron deficiency anaemia 517–519
causes 519–520
clinical features 520
laboratory investigation 520
in rheumatoid arthritis 644
in malignant disease 816t
morphological features 501, 502f
Iron poisoning 792t, 798
analysis 792t, 798
clinical features 798
mechanisms 798
treatment 794t, 798
Iron response elements (IREs) 519
Iron response proteins (IRPs) 519
Irreversibly sickled cells (ISCs) 555
910	
Index
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) 675
faecal calprotectin concentrations 226
prevalence 214
small bowel bacterial overgrowth 219
Islet cell antibodies (ICA) 284, 583
Islet cell transplantation 318
Islet cell tumours 226–227
as cause of hypercalcaemia 103t. See also 
Insulinomas
Isoelectric focusing (IEF), oligoclonal band 
detection 664, 665f, 669–670, 671
Isoleucine, metabolism 480f
Isoniazid, therapeutic drug monitoring 782
Iso-osmolal fluids, sodium deficiency 
management 36, 36t
Isotope uptake studies, thyroid gland. See 
Thyroid scintiscanning
Isotopic techniques, glomerular filtration rate 
measurement 135–136
J
Jamaican neuritis 694
Jaundice 237, 238
acholuric 245
in Crigler–Najjar syndrome 246
differential diagnosis 245
in Gilbert syndrome 246
hepatic (hepatocellular) 246
in inherited metabolic diseases 470
neonatal (physiological) 247, 493–494
post-hepatic (cholestatic) 246
pre-hepatic 245. See also 
Hyperbilirubinaemia
J-chain 568
Jejunal segments, urinary diversions 55, 59
Jejunocolic anastomosis 213
Jejunum
fluid and electrolyte absorption 54–55
phosphate absorption 111
Jod–Basedow phenomenon 376, 393
Joints 636–637
cartilaginous 636
disorders. See Articular disorders
synovial 636–637, 637f
Juvenile haemochromatosis 265
Juvenile Paget disease 633t, 634
K
Kaliuresis 57
Kallmann syndrome 360, 368, 430, 455
Kava (Piper methysticum) 208–209
Kayser–Fleischer rings 255, 266, 698–699
Kearns–Sayre syndrome 655, 656
Kell antibody 511
Kenny–Caffey syndrome 107t
Kernicterus 246, 247, 493
Keshan disease 191
Ketoacidosis 76–77
alcoholic 76–77, 330, 800
diabetic ketoacidosis vs. See Diabetic 
ketoacidosis
diabetic. See Diabetic ketoacidosis
Ketoacids, metabolism 68t, 69
Ketogenesis 69
in alcoholic ketoacidosis 330
Ketogenic diet 478, 478f
Ketone bodies 327, 657
effects of fasting 339, 339f
utilization by brain 274–275
Ketones
metabolism in neonates 489
post-mortem biochemistry 880, 881f
Ketone testing 299–300, 322, 327
in inherited metabolic diseases 469, 470
Ketonuria 327
in inherited metabolic diseases 469, 470
Ketosis 469, 470
Key performance indicators, laboratory 
medicine 24–25, 24t
Kidd antibodies 511
Kidney(s)
anatomy 124–127
anomalies in children with disorder of sex 
development 417
bicarbonate excretion, non-respiratory 
alkalosis 82–83
blood flow. See Renal blood flow
calcium fluxes 94–95, 94f. See also Calcium, 
analysis of tubular handing
control of potassium output 33
control of sodium output 28–30, 128
control of water output 30–31
damage, diabetic 298–299
development 486–487
diseases affecting 130. See also Renal 
disease
function. See Renal function
gross anatomy 124
hydrogen ion excretion. See Hydrogen ion 
excretion
hyperthyroidism manifestations 389
hypothyroidism manifestations 395
magnesium homeostasis 117–118, 118f. 
See also Magnesium, renal tubular 
reabsorption
microstructure 124–127, 125f
parathyroid hormone actions on 96
phosphate reabsorption 110f, 111–113
protein conservation 152–155
responsiveness to arginine vasopressin 31, 
32f
stress response 406. See also entries beginning 
renal
Kisspeptin 414
KIT protein 831–832
Kleinhauer test 512–513, 513f
Klinefelter syndrome 431, 455
Klotho 143
Korsakoff psychosis 187, 686
K-RAS mutation analysis
colorectal cancer 831
lung cancer 837
Krebs–Henseleit cycle 235
Kringles 710
Kussmaul breathing 74–75
Kwashiorkor 201
L
Labioscrotal fusion 413–414, 417, 418f
Laboratory error, forensic investigation 
874–875, 875b
Laboratory medicine, quality aspects 21–26
clinical quality indicators 24–25, 24t
demand management 25
evaluation/audit of services 23, 23b, 23f
information systems 23
personnel 22
premises and environment 22
quality assurance. See Quality assurance
quality management systems 22
quality standards 21–23
regulation of laboratories 22, 22b
Labour 446–447
fetal monitoring 445
pre-term 447
Lactase 221, 222
deficiency 220, 222
Lactate
blood measurements
in inherited metabolic diseases 473–474
in poisoning 875t
in respiratory chain dysfunction 655
cerebrospinal fluid. See Cerebrospinal fluid
metabolism 68–69, 68t, 77, 278
normal plasma concentration 77
post-mortem biochemistry 879t, 880
Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) 654–655
in cerebrospinal fluid 667
tumour marker characteristics 822t
Lactic acid 77
isomers 78
Lactic acidosis 77–78
causes 77, 77b
inherited metabolic disorders 463, 463b, 
473, 483
metformin-associated 78, 313–314
type A 77b, 78
type B 77b, 78
Lactose 220–221
Lactose tolerance test 222
Lambert–Eaton syndrome 814
Lamellar bone 604–605
Lamina densa 153, 153f
Lamina rara externa 153, 153f
Lamina rara interna 153, 153f
Lance–Adams syndrome 687
Landsteiner's law 510
Laparoscopy, evaluation of internal  
anatomy in disorder of sex 
development 418
Large intestine. See Colon
Laron syndrome 368
Lasofoxifene 618
Latent autoimmune diabetes of adults 
(LADA) 283–284
Latex agglutination test 500
Laxative abuse 55
LDL. See Low density lipoprotein (LDL)
Lead
poisoning 792t, 798–799
tubular damage 161
Leber hereditary optic neuroretinopathy 
465, 656
Lecithin, fetal lung production 444–445
Lecithin–cholesterol acyltransferase (LCAT) 
708, 709, 715, 716
in atherosclerosis 716
deficiency
familial 716, 722t, 729
partial 716, 722t, 729
in nephrotic syndrome 160
Lectin pathway, complement activation 570, 
571f
Leprechaunism 281, 295
Leptin 204–205
deficiency 202, 204–205
effect on bone metabolism 99
Lesch–Nyhan syndrome 640
gene mapping 845f
Leukaemia 588
acute 504–505, 505f
myelomonocytic, renal potassium loss 
56
chronic 505–506
lymphocytic 506f, 591t, 595–596
myeloid 505, 506f
Leukocyte adhesion defects 579
Leukocytes. See White blood cells (WBCs)
Leukocytosis 503–504
cerebrospinal fluid 662
Leukoerythroblastic anaemia 524
Leukopenia 504
Leukotrienes 705, 706f
Levothyroxine therapy. See Thyroid 
hormone replacement therapy
	
  Index	
911
Leydig cell(s) 451
in chronic kidney disease 145–146
development 412–413, 413f
hyperplasia 429
hypoplasia 425, 426t
tumours 841–842
Liddle syndrome 56, 760t, 761t
Lifestyle modifications, osteoporosis 
management 617
Li–Fraumeni syndrome 868
Ligase-mediated allele detection 855–856, 
856f
Light chain proteinuria 163–164, 163t
Lignin 192
Likelihood ratios 19–20
Linkage 849, 849f
definition 872
Linkage analysis 858, 858f
polymorphic markers 858, 859f
Linkage disequilibrium 849
definition 872
Linoleic acid 182–183, 183f
α-Linolenic acid 182–183, 183f, 756
Lipase(s) 224, 716–718
lipoprotein. See Lipoprotein lipase
lysosomal acid 717
pancreatic 217–218, 224
pancreatic function testing 217–218
acute pancreatitis 229. See also specific lipases
Lipase maturation factor 1 717
Lipid(s) 703–706
function 703t
major classes 703t
nuclear 706
plasma
cardiovascular disease risk and 
752–753
pregnancy-related changes 446
rafts 703–704. See also specific lipids
Lipid disorders 736
investigation 732–734. See also 
Dyslipidaemia. specific disorders
Lipid-lowering agents 734
management of diabetes-related 
cardiovascular risk 308. See also Statin 
therapy
Lipid metabolism
in chronic kidney disease 148, 730–731
effects of hormonal contraceptives 448
effects of hormone replacement therapy 
449
effects of menopause 449
hepatic 234–235
in malignancy 818
stress response 405, 407
Lipid oxidation hypothesis 741–743, 742f
Lipid preparations, parenteral nutrition 211
Lipodystrophy 295
Lipolysis
in adipose tissue 713
effects of hypoglycaemia 339, 339f
Lipoprotein(a) 707t, 708, 710
measurement, investigation of lipid 
disorders 733
Lipoprotein(s) 703, 706–708
assembly 711–713, 712f, 714, 714f
classes 706–707, 708t
disorders
classification 721–723, 722t. See also 
specific disorders
high density. See High density lipoprotein 
(HDL)
intermediate density 706–707, 708, 708t, 
714
low density. See Low density lipoprotein 
(LDL)
metabolism. See Lipoprotein metabolism
in nephrotic syndrome 160, 160t
plasma, cardiovascular disease risk and 
752–753
pregnancy-related changes 446
separation techniques 733–734
structure 706–707, 707f
very low density. See Very low density 
lipoprotein (VLDL)
Lipoprotein-associated phospholipase A2 
(LpPLA2) 717–718
Lipoprotein lipase 713, 716
deficiency 725
inhibitor, familial 725
Lipoprotein metabolism 711–715, 712f
endogenous pathway 713–714
enzymes involved in 716–718
exogenous pathway 713
hepatic cholesterol trafficking 714
lipolysis in adipose tissue 713
receptors involved in 718–720
transfer proteins involved in 718
Lipoprotein-related receptor 5 (LRP5) 607
Lipoprotein X 708, 731
Liposomes, in gene therapy 870
Lipotoxicity 290–291
Liraglutide 316, 317
Lithium
metabolic complications 681
hypercalcaemia 103t
hypothyroidism 397, 681
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus and 41,  
42
poisoning 792t, 804–805
therapeutic drug monitoring 770–771,  
780
Liver
anatomy 232–234, 232f, 233f
biotransformation 235
cancer, primary. See Hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC)
carbohydrate metabolism 234
cholesterol metabolism 236, 236f, 703, 711
cholesterol trafficking 714
circulation 232
drug-induced damage 254–256, 263t
effects of parenteral feeding 212
encephalopathy 259
excretion 235
fatty. See Steatosis
function
psychotropic drugs interfering  
with 682
tests. See Liver function tests
glucose output 274
effect of insulin 279–280. See also 
Gluconeogenesis
insulin actions 280t
insulin clearance 279
lipid metabolism 234–235
lobes 232, 232f
macroscopic structure 232, 232f
microscopic structure 232–233, 233f
physiological functions 234–236
protein metabolism 235
regeneration 234
role in hydrogen ion homeostasis 72, 73
secretory proteins, measurement 194–195
ultrastructure 233–234, 233f. See also entries 
beginning hepatic
Liver disease 250–272
alcoholic. See Alcoholic liver disease
autoimmune 584–585, 584t, 601t
chronic
assessment of prognosis 248
carbohydrate metabolism 234
encephalopathy and 686
monitoring response to therapy 247
peripheral neuropathy and 693
progression from viral hepatitis 252
sexual dysfunction 261–262
sodium retention 37. See also Cirrhosis
classification 250, 251b
drug-induced 254–256, 263t
hypoglycaemia associated with 345
inherited metabolic disorders 265–270
lipid abnormalities 731
monitoring response to therapy 246–247
neonatal 493–496
in inherited metabolic diseases 470,  
471b
neoplastic 264. See also Hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC)
normal liver function tests 248
in older children 495–496
parenteral nutrition-induced 212
peripheral neuropathy and 693
in pregnancy 263
protoporphyric 547
severity assessment 248, 248t. See also 
specific diseases
Liver failure
acute. See Acute liver failure (ALF)
encephalopathy and 259, 686, 686t
Liver function tests 231, 236–245
abnormal, in asymptomatic patients 
247–248
in acute hepatitis 250–251
viral 252
in acute liver failure 253
applications 236
bacterial infection-associated abnormalities 
264–265
bile acids 243
bilirubin and bile pigment metabolism 
237–239, 248
in chronic hepatitis 254
clearance tests 243–244
in hepatic encephalopathy 686
in inherited metabolic diseases 470
in neoplastic liver disease 264
normal, in presence of overt liver disease 
248
parenteral nutrition-associated 
abnormalities 264
plasma enzyme activities 239–241
in alcoholic liver disease 258
alkaline phosphatase. See Alkaline 
phosphatase (ALP)
aminotransferases. See 
Aminotransferases
γ-glutamyltransferase. See 
γ-Glutamyltransferase
glutathione S-transferase 241
in pregnancy 262–263
plasma proteins 241–243
acute phase reactants 243
albumin 242
α1-antitrypsin 242
caeruloplasmin 243
coagulation factors 242
α-fetoprotein 242
immunoglobulins 243
transferrin 242–243
pregnancy-related changes 262–263
in primary biliary cirrhosis 256
quantitative evaluation 243–244
role in assessing prognosis 248–249
serum tests for hepatic fibrosis 244–245
uses 245–247
Liver–kidney microsomal (LKM) antibodies 
255–256
912	
Index
Liver transplantation 248, 270–272
acute graft rejection 271
acute liver failure management 253, 270
acute porphyria management 541
immediate postoperative period 271
indications 270
inherited metabolic disease management 479
intermediate follow-up 271
laboratory criteria 253
late graft failure 272
long-term monitoring 271–272
pre-operative assessment 271
Liver X-receptor (LXR) 718, 720
Lobule, hepatic 232–233, 233f
Locomotor system
hyperthyroidism manifestations 389
hypothyroidism manifestations 395
Locus, definition 872
Locus coeruleus, in stress response  
403–404, 405
Lofepramine
overdose 804
therapeutic drug monitoring 780
Long-acting insulin analogues 311
Long bones 604
Long chain hydroxyl-acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase deficiency 
(LCHADD) 465–466, 473
Loop of Henle 125, 125f
function 128–129, 128f
Lorenzo's oil 465
Loss of heterozygosity (LOH)
definition 872
in tumours 868, 868f
Low birth weight. See Birth weight, low
Low density lipoprotein (LDL) 706–707, 708
characteristics 708t
metabolism 714
in nephrotic syndrome 160, 160t
oxidation, in atherogenesis 741–743, 742f
in pregnancy 446
receptor. See Low density lipoprotein 
receptor (LDLR)
Low density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol
effect of hormone replacement therapy 449
effect of menopause 449
effect of oral contraceptives 448
measurement 732–733
Low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) 
714, 718–719, 719f, 866
gene mutations, familial 
hypercholesterolaemia 727, 866
inducible degrader of 720
Low density lipoprotein receptor-related 
protein 719
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test 
363–364
Lower reference nutrient intake (LRNI), 
definition 181t
Low molecular weight protein markers, renal 
tubular damage 162, 163t
Low osmotic load hyponatraemia 49–50
LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) abuse 801t, 
802
l-type amino acid transporters (LATs) 377
Lumbar puncture 660
traumatic 661
Lumbosacral radiculoplexus neuropathy 691
Luminal digestion
carbohydrates 221
triglycerides 224
Lung(s)
disease, effects on oxygen uptake into 
blood 89
function 87–88. See also entries beginning 
respiratory
Lung cancer, tumour markers 836–837, 836t
Luteinizing hormone (LH) 351–352, 436
changes in men with cirrhosis 262, 262t
effect of oestrogens 439
fluctuations during menstrual cycle 
435–436, 435f
measurement in infertile women 440–441
ovulation test 440
in puberty 414
pulsatility 436
assessment 357
receptor defects 425, 426t, 429
secretion, assessment
females 353
males 352–353
spermatogenesis role 262
stress response 405
testosterone secretion and 452
Luteinizing hormone releasing hormone 
(LHRH). See Gonadotrophin-
releasing hormone (GnRH)
17,20-Lyase 437–438
17,20-Lyase deficiency 425, 426t
Lymphadenopathy 562
Lymph nodes 562
Lymphocytes 563t, 566
B. See B lymphocytes
count
raised 503–504
reference ranges 498t, 563t
functional assays 602–603
morphological features 504f
T. See T lymphocytes
Lymphocytic hypophysitis 367
Lymphocytosis 503–504
Lymphoid malignancies 588–597
B cells. See B cell malignancies
Lymphoid tissue 562, 562t, 563f
Lymphoma 588, 595–596
non-Hodgkin 506–507, 591t, 595
Lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD) abuse 
801t, 802
Lysine
dietary 183
metabolism 70
structure 170f
Lysine vasopressin 42
Lysosomal acid lipase (LAL) 717
Lysosomal storage disorders 475, 475b
substrate deprivation therapy 483
Lysosomes, enzyme screening 475
Lysozyme
clearance 154t
as marker of tubular function 162
Lysylpyridinoline 611–612, 612f
M
M2 antibodies 256
Macroamylasaemia 217–218
Macroprolactin 437
Macroprolactinaemia 362, 437
Macroprolactinoma 360–361
assessment of remaining pituitary function 
361
management 361
Macula densa 28–29, 126
Maculopathy, diabetic 325
Magnesium
body content and distribution 117, 117t
body fluid composition 28t
depletion
renal potassium loss 56. See also 
Hypomagnesaemia
dietary intake 117
homeostasis 117–118, 118f
intestinal absorption 117, 118
metabolism 117–121
in chronic kidney disease 144
poisoning, forensic biochemistry 877–878, 
877b
renal tubular reabsorption 117–118
assessment 119–120, 123
retention test 119, 123
supplementation 121, 121b
inhibition of calcium stone formation 177
urinary excretion 117, 118
measurement 119
Magnesium, plasma concentration 117, 117t, 
877–878
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
in chronic kidney disease 144
critical difference 15t
measurement, diagnostic approach to 
hypomagnesaemia 119
in poisoning 877–878
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
acute kidney injury 138
evaluation of internal anatomy in disorder 
of sex development 418
pituitary gland 360
Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) 
569
locus 569f. See also Human leukocyte 
antigen (HLA)
Malabsorption 219–225
carbohydrates 222
investigation 222
clinical features 219–220, 220t
fat 224–225
following bariatric surgery 206
laboratory investigations 220t
proteins 223
vitamin B12 523
Malaria 503
blood film 503, 503f
haemolytic anaemia 528
Maldigestion 219–225
clinical features 220
Male(s)
hypogonadism. See Hypogonadism, male
puberty
delayed 420, 430
endocrinology 414
physical signs 415f, 416
precocious 428, 429
reproductive function 451–460
evaluation 454–455. See also 
Spermatogenesis; Testes
sex development 412–414, 413f, 451–452
sex hormone changes in cirrhosis 262, 262t
sexual dysfunction in chronic kidney 
disease 145
Male infertility
assisted reproduction techniques 457
in chronic kidney disease 145–146
Malignancy
cerebrospinal fluid examination 670
endocrine sequelae of tumours and their 
treatment 818–820, 819t
haematological. See Haematological 
malignancies
haematological sequelae 816, 816t
hypercalcaemia of 102–103, 104, 814
hyperuricaemia in 816
lymphoid 588–597
B cells. See B cell malignancies
metabolic changes 813–818
paraneoplastic syndromes. See 
Paraneoplastic syndromes; Cancer
	
  Index	
913
Malignant hyperpyrexia 654
Malignant hypertension 764
Malnutrition 200–201
in adults 200, 201
assessment
hepatic secretory proteins 194–195
immune response 195
in children 200, 201
hypophosphataemia 115
nutrition support, in at-risk individuals 
210b
protein–energy. See Protein–energy 
malnutrition (PEM)
Malnutrition Universal Screening Tool 
(MUST) 193–194
Maltase 221
Maltose 221
Maltotriose 221
Management, demand on laboratories 25
Management, disease 3–4. See also specific 
diseases
Manganese 191
deficiency 191, 199
dietary sources 191
laboratory-based assessment 199
toxicity 191, 199
Mannose binding lectin (MBL) 570
Mannose therapy, congenital disorder of 
glycosylation 477, 477f
Maple syrup urine disease 467, 472
Marasmus 201
March haemoglobinuria 529
Mason-type diabetes. See Maturity onset 
diabetes of the young (MODY)
Mass spectrometry (MS), acylcarnitine 
analysis 657, 658f
Maternal complications, diabetes in 
pregnancy 331b
Maternal drug abuse 485
Maternal well-being, monitoring 445
Matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) 743
Maturity onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY) 292–293
genetic factors 287, 292–293
MODY 1 292–293
MODY 2 277, 292–293
MODY 3 293
MODY 4 293
MODY 5 293
McCune–Albright syndrome 428–429
MDMA 
(3,4-methylenedioxymethamfetamine) 
abuse 801–802, 801t
MDRD (Modification of Diet in Renal 
Disease) 12, 134
Mean cell haemoglobin (MCH) 498
Mean cell haemoglobin concentration 
(MCHC) 498
Mean cell volume (MCV) 498
Mechanical ventilation 92
shocked patients 410
Meconium aspiration 486
MedicAlert Foundation 540
Medicines and Healthcare Regulatory 
Authority (MHRA), blood transfusion 
regulation 514
Medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
deficiency (MCADD) 461, 463, 464, 
657
mutation analysis 476
neonatal screening 466
urinary organic acid analysis 473
Medullary erythropoiesis 515
Medullary interstitial cells 127
Medullary thyroid carcinoma
calcitonin as biomarker 400, 812, 842
in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 
400, 812
treatment 813
Megalin 154
Megaloblastic anaemia 520–524
morphological features 501, 502f, 520. See 
also Folate deficiency; Vitamin B12 
deficiency
Megestrol acetate 818
Meglitinides 315
adverse effects 315
hypoglycaemia 340–341
Meiosis 849
definition 872
Melanocortins 203
α-Melanocyte-stimulating hormone, stress 
response 404
Melanoma, tumour markers 837
MELAS (myopathy, encephalopathy, lactic 
acidosis and stroke) 656
Membrane attack complex 571t
Membrane-stabilizing activity, drugs 803, 
804f
Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis 
158, 159
Membranous nephropathy 158, 159
Menaquinone 186, 186f
Menarche 416, 434
premature isolated 429
Mendel, Gregor 844–845
Menin 101, 811
Meningitis, cerebrospinal fluid investigations 
668, 668t, 669
Menkes disease 190–191
Menopause
metabolic effects 449. See also 
Postmenopausal women
Menorrhagia, in hypothyroidism 395
Menses, onset of. See Menarche
Menstrual cycle 434
effect on test results 9
aldosterone:renin ratio 762
hormone fluctuations 435–436, 435f
hyperthyroidism manifestations 389
sodium retention and 38
uterine changes 436
variation in bone turnover markers and 
613. See also Amenorrhoea
Mental illness. See Psychiatric disorders
Mercury, tubular damage 161
MERRF (myoclonus, epilepsy with ragged 
red fibres) 656
Mesangial cells 125
Messenger RNA (mRNA) 846, 847f
definition 872
Metabolic acidosis. See Acidosis, 
non-respiratory
Metabolic bone disease 604–635
in children 632, 632t
following renal transplantation 628
genetic 632–634, 633t
osteomalacia. See Osteomalacia
osteoporosis. See Osteoporosis
Paget disease of bone. See Paget disease 
of bone
parenteral nutrition-associated 212–213
in primary hyperparathyroidism 628–629
clinical, biochemical and histological 
features 628–629
treatment 629
renal. See Chronic kidney disease–mineral 
and bone disorder (CKD–MBD)
Metabolic disease
bone. See Metabolic bone disease
inherited. See Inherited metabolic diseases 
(IMDs)
Metabolic load, reduction 481
Metabolic response, stress. See Stress 
response
Metabolic syndrome 759
as cardiovascular disease risk factor 754, 
755f
definitions 754, 755t
depression and 679
prevalence 754
type 2 diabetes association 289–290, 679
Metadrenalines, measurement, 
phaeochromocytoma diagnosis 
763–764, 763t
factors affecting results 763–764, 764t
Meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) 
scintigraphy 764
Metalloproteinases 244
Metallothionein synthesis 190
Metaphysis 604
Metformin 313–314
contraindications 313, 314t
hypoglycaemia risk 341
mechanism of action 313
side effects 314
lactic acidosis 78, 313–314
vitamin B12 deficiency 523
Methadone
abuse 801t
therapeutic drug monitoring 785
withdrawal, in neonates 485
Methaemalbumin 525, 526f, 530
Methaemoglobin 788–791
Methaemoglobinaemia 790t, 805–806
management 794t, 806
Methanol 685, 800
antidote 794t, 800
poisoning 685, 792t, 800, 801f
Methionine, metabolism 70
Methotrexate, therapeutic drug monitoring 
783
Methylamfetamine 801
Methylcellulose 205
Methylcobalamin 521, 523f
3,4-Methylenedioxymethamfetamine 
(MDMA) abuse 801–802, 801t
O
6-Methylguanine DNA methyltransferase 
(MGMT) 869
Methylmalonic acidaemia 479, 480f
5-Methyl tetrahydrofolate 521, 522f
Meticillin-induced acute interstitial nephritis, 
salt wasting and 34
Metyrapone 352, 678–679
Metyrapone test 355
Microalbuminuria 152, 155
definition 164
in diabetes 322–323
as marker of risk 164–166
non-renal conditions associated with 166, 
167b. See also Proteinuria
Microangiopathic haemolytic anaemia 
501–503, 503f, 528–529
in malignant disease 816
Microarrays 856–857
Microflora, intestinal 218–219, 561
α1-Microglobulin
as marker of tubular damage 162, 162t
tubular reabsorption 154
urinary excretion 160t
β2-Microglobulin 594, 823t
cerebrospinal fluid 667
as marker of tubular damage 162, 162t
plasma 135
urinary excretion 160, 160t
Micronutrients 184
parenteral nutrition 211. See also Trace 
elements; Vitamin(s)
914	
Index
Microprolactinoma 360–361
Microsatellites 859, 859f
definition 872
Microscopic polyangiitis 639t
Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein 
(MTP) 711–712, 720
defective 724
deficiency 700
Mid-arm circumference (MAC) 
measurements 194
Midnight salivary cortisol 364
Mifepristone 439
Miglitol 317
Miglustat 483
Milk, breast. See Breast milk
Milk-alkali syndrome 103t
Milwaukee shoulder 642
Mineral(s) 190
balance
in hyperthyroidism 389
in hypothyroidism 395. See also 
Electrolytes; Trace elements. specific 
minerals
Mineralocorticoid(s)
replacement therapy, monitoring 371
secretion 352
Mineralocorticoid activity
non-respiratory alkalosis 82–83
renal tubular acidosis, type 4 173
Mineralocorticoid excess 37b, 38
hypokalaemia 55–56
non-respiratory alkalosis 84
syndrome of apparent excess 760t, 761t
Minimal change disease 157–158, 159
Minimum inhibitory concentration (MIC) 
781
Minisatellite, definition 872
Missense mutations 848, 848f
Mitochondria
fatty acid transport into 647–649, 649f
oxidation reactions 647–649, 649f
measurement 655–656. See also Fatty 
acid oxidation
Mitochondrial disorders
investigation. see under Mitochondrial 
respiratory chain
neuropathy in 696, 696t
Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 656
inheritance 467–468, 468f, 850
mutations 656, 848–849
inherited metabolic disease 465, 
467–468
Mitochondrial encephalomyopathy 696
Mitochondrial isoenzyme of aspartate 
aminotransferase (mAST) 241
Mitochondrial respiratory chain
components 650f
defects, investigation 655–656
measurement of individual respiratory 
chain complex activity 656
measurement of mitochondrial 
oxidations 655–656
molecular biology techniques 656
Mitogen-activated protein kinases (MAPKs) 
407
Mitosis 849
definition 872
Mixed acid–base disorders 86–87
causes 86b
interpretation of acid–base data 85,  
85f, 86
Mixed meal test 338
Model for End Stage Liver Disease (MELD) 
scoring system 248
Modification of Diet in Renal Disease 
(MDRD) 12, 134
Molar pregnancy 835
Molecular chaperones, potential congenital 
nephrogenic diabetes insipidus 
therapies 43
Molecular clinical biochemistry 2, 844–873
applications of DNA analysis. See DNA 
analysis, applications
glossary 871
techniques 844
investigation of respiratory chain defects 
656. See also Genetic analysis, techniques. 
See also entries beginning gene/genetic
Molecular sieving theory 153–154
Moles, invasive 835
Molybdenum 191
deficiency 191
high dietary intake 191
laboratory-based assessment 199
Monoamine oxidase inhibitors 675
overdose 804
Monocarboxylate transporter 8 (MCT8)  
377
Monoclonal gammopathy of unknown 
significance (MGUS) 591t, 596, 692
Monoclonal proteins 568, 588–594, 589t
clinical significance 588–589, 588t, 589t
identification 589–591, 590f, 591f
laboratory investigation 589, 589b
prevalence 589
quantitation 592–593
transient 596
tumour marker characteristics 822t
typing 591–592, 591t, 592f
Monocytes 563t, 566
count
raised 503–504
reference ranges 498t, 563t
morphological features 504f
Monoglyceride(s) 704
absorption 224, 711
Monoglyceride lipase (MGL) 713
Mono-iodotyrosine (MIT) 376
Mononeuropathies 324
Monosaccharides 221
absorption 221, 221f
Monosodium urate (MSU) crystals 639,  
641f
Mood disorders 675, 675t. See also specific 
mood disorders
Morphine
abuse 801t
therapeutic drug monitoring 785
Moulds, food contaminants 190
Mouth 215
Movement disorders 697–699
Mucopolysaccharidoses 474, 474t
Mucopolysaccharidosis type I (Hurler 
syndrome) 462, 474t
Mucosa, innate immune system 561
Mucosal-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) 
562
Müllerian ducts 413, 451
development disorders 425
Müllerian inhibiting substance. See Anti-
Müllerian hormone (AMH)
Multidrug resistance (MDR) proteins, 
bilirubin and bile salt metabolism 
237–238
Multifocal neuropathies 691
Multi-organ dysfunction syndrome (MODS) 
409, 409b
Multiple endocrine neoplasia (MEN) 
810–813, 810b
genetic analysis 869
type 1 216, 226–227, 810, 810b
adrenal tumours 811
diagnosis 811–812
foregut carcinoid tumours 811
gastroenteropancreatic neuroendocrine 
tumours 811
genetics 869
genetic screening 812
parathyroid disease 101, 102t, 810–811
pituitary tumours 811
surveillance of patients and carriers 812, 
812t
tumourigenesis 811
type 2 226–227, 810, 810b, 812–813
clinical features 812, 812f
diagnosis 812–813
genetics 869
imaging 813
medullary thyroid cancer 400, 812
MEN2A 810b, 812
MEN2B 810b, 812, 812f
parathyroid disease 101, 102t, 813
surveillance 813
treatment 813
type 4 813
Multiple myeloma 507, 591t, 594, 594t, 692
Multiple sclerosis (MS) 671–672, 701
Multiplex ligation-dependent probe 
amplification (MLPA) analysis, 
dystrophin gene 864–865, 865f
Multiplex PCR. See Polymerase chain 
reaction (PCR)
Muscle
biopsy 651
cardiac. See Cardiac muscle
fibres 646, 646f
structure 647f
types 647t
functional anatomy and physiology 
646–649
pain. See Myalgia
phosphate uptake, increased 116. See also 
Skeletal muscle
Muscle disease 646–659
classification 650–651, 651b
investigation 650–651
biochemical 651–653
clinical evaluation 651
metabolic, genetically determined 
myopathies 654–658
non-metabolic, genetically determined 
myopathies 653–654
Muscle mass
assessment
functional tests 194
laboratory-based 196
plasma creatinine concentration and 133
Muscle weakness 651
in hyperthyroidism 389
in hypothyroidism 395
Muscular dystrophy 651b
Becker. See Becker muscular dystrophy
DNA analysis 864–865, 864f, 865f
Duchenne. See Duchenne muscular 
dystrophy
facioscapulohumeral 653
gene mapping 845f
investigation 653
Mushrooms, poisonous 806, 806t
Mutagenesis, insertional 870
Mutation, gene. See Gene mutations
Mutation analysis 848–849, 855–860
detection of known mutations 855–857, 856f
in inherited metabolic disease 476
next generation sequencing 859–860
scanning/screening methods 857–858, 857f
tracking of mutant genes 858–859, 858f, 
859f
	
  Index	
915
Myalgia 650–651
statin-induced 653
Myasthenia gravis 389
Mycophenolate mofetil 600t, 770
Mycophenolic acid (MPA), therapeutic drug 
monitoring 784–785
Myelin-associated glycoprotein (MAG) 692
Myelodysplasia (MDS) 506, 507f, 524
Myelofibrosis 506, 506f
Myeloma 507, 591t, 594, 594t, 692
Myelopathy, hepatic 689
Myeloproliferative neoplasms 506
Myocardial damage, acute 744–749
biomarkers 744–749, 745f
copeptin 748
creatine kinase-MB 744, 745f, 747–748
heart-type fatty acid binding protein 
745f, 748
myoglobin 745f, 748
post-mortem biochemistry 880
troponins. See Troponin(s)
Myocardial infarction 738, 739f
definition 739, 739b, 744
in diabetic patients 297–298, 330
non-ST elevation. See Non-ST elevation 
myocardial infarction (NSTEMI)
role of laboratory 739
ST elevation. See ST elevation myocardial 
infarction (STEMI); See also 
Myocardial damage, acute
Myocardial ischaemia 738, 744. See also 
Myocardial damage, acute
Myocardium, contraction 740–741
Myoclonus 697, 699
Myogenic reflex 152
Myoglobin 162, 740–741, 748
as biomarker of acute myocardial damage 
745f, 748
clearance 154t
Myoglobinuria 162–163, 163t, 653
Myopathy. See Muscle disease
Myosin 646, 647f, 740
Myotonic dystrophies, investigation 654
Myxoedema 36
primary 396
Myxoedema coma 397
'Myxoedema madness' 678
N
NAG (N-acetyl β-D-glucosaminidase) 
161–162, 162b
NAGS (N-acetylglutamate synthetase) 
deficiency 463f, 478
Naloxone 802
NAPQI (N-acetyl-p-benzoquinoneimine) 
795, 795f
Nateglinide 315
Natriuresis 34
chronic dilutional hyponatraemia 50
Natriuretic peptides (NPs) 29–30, 30f
atrial. See Atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP)
cerebral salt wasting 50
as heart failure biomarkers 749–750
clinical utility 749–750, 750f
critical values 749
factors influencing 749
Natural killer (NK) cells 563t, 566
Nausea, arginine vasopressin secretion and 
31
Negative feedback, pituitary hormone 
secretion 352
Negative predictive value 17t
Nelson syndrome 678–679
Neomycin 781
Neonatal hepatitis syndrome 247
Neonatal jaundice 247, 493–494
Neonatal period, definition 484
Neonatal screening 4, 466
aminoacidurias 172
congenital hypothyroidism 466, 861
cystic fibrosis 217–218
DNA analysis 861
medium chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase 
deficiency (MCADD) 466
phenylketonuria 19, 861
sickle cell disease 557–558
Neonatal severe hyperparathyroidism 102, 102t
Neonates
with ambiguous genitalia
evaluation 417–418, 418f
general examination 418–419
investigations 418–419. See also Disorder 
of sex development (DSD)
bilirubin metabolism 493
body water 487, 487f
calcium and phosphorus metabolism 
490–493, 490t
disorders 490–493. See also specific 
disorders
carbohydrate metabolism 488–490, 489f
haemolytic disease of the newborn (HDN) 
512–513
hyperbilirubinaemia, conjugated, 
pathological causes 494–495, 494b
hyperbilirubinaemia, unconjugated
pathological causes 494, 494b
physiological jaundice 247, 493–494
hypercalcaemia 490–491
hypernatraemia 487–488
hyperthyroidism 387
hypocalcaemia 108, 491, 491b
hypoglycaemia 489–490, 490b
hyponatraemia 487
immune response 575–576, 576t
inherited metabolic disease presentation 
462–464
defects in synthesis and breakdown 462
energy deficiency disorders 463
intoxications 462–463
seizure disorders 463–464, 464t
inherited metabolic disease screening 466. 
See also Neonatal screening
liver disorders 493–496
in inherited metabolic diseases 470, 471b
lupus syndrome 587
mortality rates 484
poisoning 788
premature. See Pre-term neonates
renal function 486–488
tests, interpretation 488
small for gestational age 484–485
thyroid function 379
tumour markers 837–838
vitamin K administration 186–187. See also 
Infants
Neopterin 667–668
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (NDI) 39
causes 39–40, 40b, 42
congenital 40–41, 43
management 42
water deprivation test 42
Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis 138
Nephrolithiasis 174
X-linked 172. See also Renal calculi
Nephrons 124–125, 125f
development 486–487
Nephropathy
diabetic. See Diabetic nephropathy
immunoglobulin A 158
membranous 158, 159
salt-losing 34, 34b
Nephrotic syndrome 156–160
causes 157t
definition 157
hyperlipidaemia in 730
sodium excess 37
Nephrotoxicity, aminoglycoside antibiotics 
161, 781
Nervous system
effect of acidosis 76. See also Central 
nervous system (CNS)
Nesidioblastosis 343
Neuroblastoma 838
Neuroendocrine tumours 808–810
gastroenteropancreatic, in multiple 
endocrine neoplasia type 1 811
gastrointestinal tract 226–227
pancreas 226–227. See also Carcinoid 
tumours; Multiple endocrine 
neoplasia (MEN)
Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1) 813, 868
Neuroglycopaenia 320
acute 335, 335b
chronic 335, 335b
subacute 335, 335b
Neurohypophysis. See Pituitary gland, 
posterior lobe
Neurological disease 683–701
ataxia. See Ataxia
encephalopathy. See Encephalopathy
inflammatory disorders of central nervous 
system 701
movement disorders 697–699
peripheral neuropathy. See Peripheral 
neuropathies
spinal cord disorders 688–689
causes 688b. See also specific disorders
Neurological paraneoplastic syndromes  
814
Neuromuscular hyperexcitability,  
alkalosis 83
Neuromyelitis optica (NMO) 30
Neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis 701
Neuron-specific endolase (NSE)
in cerebrospinal fluid 667, 670–671
as tumour marker 823t
lung cancer 836t, 837
Neuropathy, peripheral. See Peripheral 
neuropathies
Neuropeptide Y (NPY) 203
Neurophysin II 31
Neuroses 674
Neurotensin, ectopic secretion 815t
Neurotic disorders 675t
Neutropenia 504
Neutrophilia 503–504
Neutrophils 563t, 564–565
count
low 504
raised 503–504
reference ranges 498t, 563t
function tests 603
morphological features 504f
toxic changes 504, 505f
pseudo-Pelger 506, 507f
urine 131
Newborns. See Neonates
Niacin 188
deficiency 694
Nicotinamide 188
deficiency in carcinoid syndrome 
808–809
laboratory-based assessment 198
Nicotinic acid 188
Niemann–Pick C1-like 1 protein 710
Niemann–Pick disease, type C 270
Nitisinone (NTBC) 481–482, 482f
916	
Index
Nitrogen
balance, assessment 196
enteral feeding 210
total body, measurement 196
Nitrogenous waste product retention, in 
chronic kidney disease 143
Nitroprusside therapy, cyanide toxicity 805
Nitrous oxide exposure, vitamin B12 
deficiency association 523
Nocturia 43
in chronic kidney disease 147
Nocturnal polyuria 43–44
causes 43b
laboratory investigation 43–44, 44f
treatment 43–44
Nocturnal tumescence testing 459
Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) 
258
diabetes association 298
dyslipidaemia association 731
Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) 258
Non-collagenous proteins, bone 606
Non-esterified fatty acids (NEFAs). See Free 
fatty acids
Non-Hodgkin lymphoma 506–507, 591t, 595
Non-insulinoma pancreatogenous 
hypoglycaemia syndrome (NIPHS) 
343
Non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia 
(NICTH) 282, 343–344
Non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase 
inhibitors (NNRTIs), therapeutic 
drug monitoring 782
Non-respiratory acidosis. See Acidosis, 
non-respiratory
Non-respiratory alkalosis. See Alkalosis, 
non-respiratory
Non-seminomatous germ cell tumours 
(NSGCT) 832, 833t, 834
Nonsense mutations 481, 848, 848f
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 836, 
836t, 837
Non-starch polysaccharides (NSPs) 192
Non-ST elevation acute coronary syndrome 
(NSTEACS). See Acute coronary 
syndrome (ACS)
Non-ST elevation myocardial infarction 
(NSTEMI) 738, 744
treatment 744
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs 
(NSAIDs)
rheumatoid arthritis management 637
tubular damage 161
Noradrenaline, stress response 405, 407–408
Normal ranges 13–14, 13f
Normoglycaemia, maintenance of 273–274, 
274b, 275f
Normoglycaemic ketoacidosis 326–327
Northern blot, definition 872
Nortriptyline, therapeutic drug monitoring 
780
N-telopeptide (NTX) assay 612–613, 612f
in children 632
Nuchal translucency (NT) sign 443–444
Nuclear lipids 706
Nuclear matrix protein 22 test 827
Nucleic acids 845. See also DNA 
(deoxyribonucleic acid); RNA
Nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors 
(NRTIs), therapeutic drug monitoring 
782
Nucleosomes 846
Nucleotide metabolism, disorders 528
Nucleus, antigen distribution 587, 587f
Nucleus of the tractus solitarius (NTS), 
appetite control and 203, 204
Nutrition 180–199
'correct' intake 180–181
in diabetes mellitus 296, 306
requirements. See Nutritional 
requirements
Nutritional deficiencies
as cause of anaemia 517–520
depression and 679
peripheral neuropathy and 693–694. See 
also specific types
Nutritional disorders 200–213
eating disorders 207–208
malnutrition. See Malnutrition
management
dietary supplements 208–209
nutraceuticals 208–209
nutrition support. See Nutrition support
therapeutic diets 208–209, 209t. See also 
Dietary management; Nutritional 
management
obesity. See Obesity. See also specific disorders
Nutritional management
acute kidney injury 140
chronic kidney disease 148. See also Dietary 
management
Nutritional requirements 180–192
energy. See Energy, requirements
micronutrients 184. See also Trace 
elements; Vitamin(s)
protein 183
terminology 181t
Nutritional status, assessment 192–199
anthropometric measurements 193–194
clinical assessment 193
dietary assessment 193
functional assessment 194–195
laboratory-based assessment of individual 
nutrients 195–199
Nutrition support 209–213
enteral feeding 210
indications 209–210, 210b
inherited metabolic disease 483
parenteral. See Parenteral nutrition
O
Obesity 201–206
aetiology 202
assessment 193, 193t, 201–202
as cardiovascular disease risk factor 
753–754
complications 202t
effect on test results 8
epidemiology 202
genetics 202
management 205–206
non-surgical 205
surgical. See Bariatric surgery
therapeutic diets 209t
pleiotropic syndromes 202, 202t
secondary causes 203
type 2 diabetes risk 286, 286f
Observed results, comparison with reference 
limits 15
Obstructive acute kidney injury 137b, 139
Octreotide 342–343
Odanacatib 619
Oedema
cerebral, in diabetic ketoacidosis 329
idiopathic 38
laboratory investigation 38
in nephrotic syndrome 159
in pregnancy 37–38
sodium excess with 36, 37, 37b
Oesophagitis, reflux 214
Oesophagus 215
Oestradiol 438
in men 262
plasma concentration, men with cirrhosis 
262, 262t
secretion, in puberty 414
Oestrogen(s)
actions 439
biosynthesis 437–438, 438f
as cause of hypercalcaemia 103t
effect on biochemical variables 8t
effect on breast cancer 820
hormone replacement therapy 439, 447–448
hyperlipidaemia association 731
in men 262
metabolic effects 448
oral contraceptives 439, 447–448, 447t
plasma concentrations
fluctuations during menstrual cycle 9, 
435–436, 435f
in men with cirrhosis 262
structure 437, 438f
supplementation in acute porphyrias 540
transport and metabolism 438–439
Oestrogen-binding receptors 823t, 824t, 828
Oestrogen deficiency
effect on calcium/bone metabolism 99
in postmenopausal women 449
management. See Hormone replacement 
therapy (HRT)
in young women, causes 615, 615b
Oestrogen replacement therapy 371. See 
also Hormone replacement therapy 
(HRT), postmenopausal women
Oestrone 438
Olanzapine 681, 682
Oleander 798, 806, 806t
Oligoclonal bands 664–665, 665f, 669–670, 671
Oligomenorrhoea 439–440
Oligosaccharides 221
Oligospermia, in cirrhosis 262
Oliguria 44, 129
in acute kidney injury 136
in acute tubular necrosis, pathogenesis 
138, 139f
Oncogenes 867–869
definition 872
Oncogenic osteomalacia 112–113, 622–623
Oncotic pressure 28
Oocytes 433, 434f
assisted conception techniques 441
Ophthalmology of Graves disease. See Graves 
disease
Opiates, therapeutic drug monitoring 785
Opioids
poisoning 685, 792t, 802
therapeutic drug monitoring 785
Opioid syndrome 790t
Oppenheim dystonia 698
Opsonin 571t
Opsonization 565
Optic chiasm 350, 350f
Oral contraceptives (OCs) 447–450
hyperlipidaemia association 731
metabolic effects 448–449
vascular disease risk 448
Oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) 282, 
283b, 300
acromegaly, monitoring response to 
therapy 363
gestational diabetes screening 292b
Oral hypoglycaemic agents
as cause of hypoglycaemia 346
surreptitious administration 341
screening, hypoglycaemia investigation 
339. See also Glucose-lowering therapy, 
diabetes. specific hypoglycaemic agents
	
  Index	
917
Orchidometry 416
ORD (P450 oxidoreductase deficiency) 420, 
423, 424t, 425, 426t
Organic acids, urinary analysis 472–473, 473b
Organic anion transporting polypeptides 
(OATPs) 377
Organic disease, psychiatric manifestations 
675t, 676–680
Organophosphate poisoning 799
clinical features 799
management 794t, 800
mechanisms 799
Organ support, shocked patients 410–411
Organ system dysfunction 409, 409b
Organ transplantation 599, 599t
immunological complications 599, 599b
immunosuppressive therapy. See 
Immunosuppressive therapy
inherited metabolic disease management 
479–480. See also specific organs
Orlistat 205
Ornithine, structure 170f
Ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC) 
deficiency 463f, 465, 466, 480
Orotic acid, urinary analysis 473
Orthopaedic implants, blood metal 
concentrations and 799
Orthostatic proteinuria 155
Osmolal gap
calculation 62
in poisoning 875t
transurethral prostatectomy syndrome 46
Osmolality
definition 27
plasma 27, 30
measurement in poisoning 792t
serum, calculation 62
urine. See Urine osmolality
Osmoles, idiogenic 45
Osmoreceptor response 31
Osmoregulation
in pregnancy 41
water intake 31–32
water output 30–31, 31f
Osmotic demyelination syndrome 51
Osmotic fragility tests 530
Osmotic pressure 27
Osteitis fibrosa 628
Osteoarthritis (OA) 637
basic calcium phosphate crystals and 642
Osteoblasts 96, 605, 607, 608
defective function, osteomalacia and 623–624
Osteocalcin 606
age-related changes 610f, 632
as bone turnover marker 610–611, 610f
in Paget disease of bone 630
treatment response 631–632
Osteoclasts 605, 608
effect of calcitonin 98
maturation 96
in Paget disease 630
Osteocytes 605, 607–608
Osteocytogenesis 607–608
Osteodystrophy, renal. See Chronic kidney 
disease–mineral and bone disorder 
(CKD–MBD)
Osteogenesis imperfecta 632–634, 633t
Osteolysis, familial expansile 633t, 634
Osteolytic metastases, hypercalcaemia and 
102–103
Osteomalacia 620–624
acidosis and 623
calciopenic 620–622
causes 620b
laboratory investigation 621–622, 621t
responses to therapy 622
defective osteoblast function 623–624
oncogenic 112–113, 622–623
phosphopenic 116, 622–623, 622b
laboratory investigation 621t, 623
treatment 623
tumour-induced 816
Osteonectin 607
Osteopenia
definition 613–614
diabetes association 298
of prematurity 491–492, 492t
Osteopetrosis 633t, 634
Osteophytes 637
Osteopontin 607, 607t
Osteoporosis 613–620, 614f
causes 614–615, 615b
definition 613–614, 616
hormone replacement therapy and 450, 
618
investigation and diagnosis 615–617
biochemical investigation 616–617,  
616t
bone densitometry 615–616
risk factors 614, 614b
treatment 617–620
biochemical responses 619–620, 619f
calcium and vitamin D 617
lifestyle modifications 617
pharmacological management 617–619
Osteoporotic fractures 614
clinical risk factors 615
estimation of absolute risk 616
Osteoprotegerin 96, 608, 613
Osteosarcoma 630
Osteosclerosis 633t, 634
Otorrhoea, cerebrospinal fluid 666
Ovarian cancer 838–840
detection of residual disease 839
diagnosis 839
long-term surveillance 840
monitoring 839–840
prognosis 839
risk of malignancy index (RMI) 839,  
839t
screening 838–839
Ovarian failure
primary, as cause of amenorrhoea 440
in Turner syndrome 431
Ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) 
441
Ovarian steroid hormones 437–439
actions 439
biosynthetic enzymes and pathways 
437–438, 438f
secretion through menstrual cycle 
435–436, 435f, 438
structure 437, 437f
transport and metabolism 438–439. See also 
specific hormones
Ovaries 433–435, 434f, 435f
chemotherapy effects 819–820
development 413–414, 413f
polycystic. See Polycystic ovary syndrome 
(PCOS)
Overnight dexamethasone suppression test 
364
Ovulation 434, 435
onset of 414
tests 440
Oxalate
foods rich in 177b, 178–179
intestinal absorption, increased 176
urinary excretion, increased 175, 176–177
Oxalic acid crystals 639, 643
Oxcarbazepine, therapeutic drug monitoring 
778
Oxidation, fatty acids. See Fatty acid 
oxidation
Oxidative phosphorylation 68
Oxidative stress, diabetic neuropathy 
pathophysiology 692
Oximeters 91
3-Oxoacyl-CoA thiolase 649f
measurement of activity 657–658
2-Oxoglutarate 71, 72f
17-Oxosteroid reductase 438
Oxygen
fraction of inspired gas comprising (FiO2) 
87
partial pressure in arterial blood. See PaO2 
(partial pressure of oxygen in arterial 
blood)
Oxygen delivery
tissues 89, 91, 91f
measurement 90–91. See also Tissue 
oxygenation
Oxygen–haemoglobin dissociation curve 
88–89, 88f, 90, 90f, 550
normal vs. sickle haemoglobin 551f
Oxygen therapy, respiratory distress in 
neonates 486
Oxygen transport
role of haemoglobin 88–89, 88f, 517, 550
to tissues 89–90. See also Tissue 
oxygenation
Oxygen uptake
into blood 87–88
effects of pulmonary disease 89
into tissues 90, 90f. See also Tissue 
oxygenation
Oxyhaemoglobin, in cerebrospinal fluid 661, 
666
Oxyntomodulin (OXM) 205
Oxysterol 715
Oxytocin 352
labour role 447
pituitary function assessment 354
P
p53 868
P450. See Cytochrome P450
PaCO2 87
effects of pulmonary disease 89
laboratory assessment 73. See also PCO2 
(partial pressure of carbon dioxide)
Paediatrics 484–496. See also Children; 
Infants; Neonates
Paget disease of bone 629–632
aetiology 629
clinical features 630
epidemiology 629
investigations 630–631
biochemical tests 630–631
radiology 630
juvenile 633t, 634
natural history 629–630
pathology 630
treatment responses 631–632, 631f
Pain
abdominal, in acute porphyria 538, 541
in articular disorders 638–639
bone, pagetic 630
chronic, acute porphyria complication 539
muscle. See Myalgia
Pancreas 217–218
autoimmune disease 583, 601t
neuroendocrine tumours 226–227
transplantation 318
Pancreatic cancer, tumour marker 840
Pancreatic enzymes, serum measurement 
217–218
918	
Index
Pancreatic function tests 217–218
choice for pancreatitis 229
direct/invasive 217
non-invasive 217–218
Pancreatic juice, fluid composition 34t
Pancreatic lipase-related proteins 717
Pancreatic polypeptide (PP) 203, 204
Pancreatic triglyceride lipase (PTL) 716, 717
Pancreatic β-Cells
deficiency/dysfunction in type 2 diabetes 
286–288
destruction in type 1 diabetes 284–285
measurement of function 303
Pancreatitis 217
acute 228–229
as cause of diabetes mellitus 293
causes 228, 229t
choice of test for 229
chronic 217
as cause of diabetes mellitus 293
investigation. See Pancreatic function tests
Pancreozymin 217
Pancytopenia 504
Panhypopituitarism 360
Panic disorder 676–677
Pantothenic acid 189
deficiency 694
laboratory-based assessment 198
PaO2 (partial pressure of oxygen in arterial 
blood) 87, 88
effects of pulmonary disease 87, 89
Papaverine 459
Papillary thyroid cancer 399
Paracetamol
metabolism 795, 795f
overdose 792t, 795–806
acute liver failure 253
clinical features 795
management 794t, 795–796, 796f
toxic dose 795
Paraganglioma 763
Paralysis, periodic. See Periodic paralysis
Paraneoplastic syndromes 814–816
humoral 814
neurological 696–697, 697t, 814
Paraproteinaemia 163–164, 163t, 588–589, 
589t
in myeloma 594
transient 596. See also Monoclonal proteins
Paraproteinaemic neuropathies 692–693
Paraquat poisoning 792t
Parasellar tumours 367
Parasuicidal gestures 788
Parathyroid disease
carcinoma 101, 102t
in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 101, 
102t, 810–811
in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 101, 
102t, 813
Parathyroidectomy 627–628, 629
hypocalcaemia and 108, 627, 629
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) 95–96, 95f
actions on kidneys 96
in chronic kidney disease 144
in chronic kidney disease–mineral and 
bone disorder 625, 626
diurnal variation 95
effect of magnesium concentrations 118
effect on TmP/GFR 111
excess. See Hyperparathyroidism
in hypercalciuria 175
measurement
chronic kidney disease–mineral and 
bone disorder investigation 626
circulating PTH 96
during/after parathyroidectomy 629
hypercalcaemia investigation 103–104, 
105f
hypocalcaemia investigation 109
receptors 95–96
resistance in pseudohypoparathyroidism 
106–107, 107t
Parathyroid hormone–calcitriol–FGF23 axis, 
in chronic kidney disease–mineral and 
bone disorder 624–625
Parathyroid hormone-related peptide 
(PTHrP) 99
ectopic secretion 814, 815t
effect on TmP/GFR 111
hypercalcaemia of malignancy and 102
investigation of hypercalcaemia 104
Parathyroid hormone (PTH) therapy
biochemical responses 619
osteoporosis 618
Paraventricular nucleus (PVN), appetite 
control and 203, 204
Parenteral nutrition 210, 211–213
complications 211–213
composition of fluids 211
liver function test abnormalities and 264
monitoring 211, 212t
prolonged, as cause of cholestatic liver 
disease 495
in short bowel syndrome 213
Parkinson disease 697
Parkinsonism 697–699
Paroxetine
overdose 804
therapeutic drug monitoring 780
Paroxysmal nocturnal haemoglobinuria 
(PNH) 524, 529
diagnosis 531
Partial androgen insensitivity syndrome 
(PAIS) 419–420, 426t, 427–428, 456
Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA) 486
Patient access, results 23
Patient education, diabetes mellitus 307
Paul–Bunnell antibody 500
PCO2 (partial pressure of carbon dioxide) 
67, 73
laboratory assessment 73
lungs, alveolar vs. venous 67
in non-respiratory alkalosis 82
relationship with hydrogen ion 
concentration 85, 85f
in respiratory acidosis 81
restoration to normal 81–82
in respiratory alkalosis 84
PCR. See Polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
Pellagra 188
Pemphigoid 585
Pemphigus 585
Pendred syndrome 396
Pendrin 375–376, 375f
Penetrance, definition 851, 872
Penicillamine challenge test 267
Penicillamine therapy
adverse reactions 267
cystinuria 171, 171f
Wilson disease 267
Penicillins, renal potassium loss 56
Penile arterial blood pressure, measurement 
459
Penile prosthesis 459
Pentamidine, hypoglycaemia association 346
Pentose phosphate pathway 517, 518f
disorders 526–528
Pentose phosphate shunt 278
Pepsin 223
Peptide YY (PYY) 203, 204
Peptidyl disulfide isomerase (PDI) 605
Perchlorate 375
Perchlorate discharge test 388
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) 
210
Performance indicators, laboratory medicine 
24–25, 24t
Periodic paralysis
hyperkalaemic 59, 654
hypokalaemic 52–53, 654
Periodontal disease 208
Peripheral blood, as stem cell source 600, 
600t
Peripheral blood stem cell transplant 
(PBSCT) 600
Peripheral cyanosis 88
Peripheral nervous system
hyperthyroidism manifestations 389
hypothyroidism manifestations 394–395
Peripheral neuropathies 689–697
acute inflammatory neuropathies 692
bariatric surgery-associated 694
causes 690b
chronic inflammatory demyelinating 
polyneuropathies 692–693
in chronic kidney disease 693
diabetic. See Diabetic neuropathy
in endocrine disturbances 693
immune-mediated 692
investigations 690, 690b
in liver disease 693
metabolic 690b, 694–696
in mitochondrial disorders 696
nutritional 693–694
paraneoplastic 696–697, 697t
paraproteinaemic 692–693
porphyric 538, 695
signs and symptoms 690
small fibre painful axonal neuropathy 691
symmetrical 690
causes 690t
Peripheral oedema 36
Periportal hepatitis 254
Peritoneal dialysis
acute kidney injury management 141
chronic kidney disease management 150
continuous ambulatory. See Continuous 
ambulatory peritoneal dialysis 
(CAPD)
hyperkalaemia management 61
inherited metabolic disease management 
483
thyroid hormone concentrations and 146
Peritonitis, ascites and 264–265, 265t
Perls reaction 525, 530
Pernicious anaemia 217, 523, 583
antibody tests 523
Peroxisomal disorders, investigation 474
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
family 315, 720
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor γ 
analogues. See Thiazolidinediones
Persistent hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia 
of infancy (PHHI) 490
Personnel, laboratory 22
Petrosal sinus sampling, 
adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
365–366
Peyer's patches 562
pH 66
blood 66
urine 70–71, 131
Phaeochromocytoma 677, 763–764
biochemical investigation 763–764, 763t
as cause of hypercalcaemia 103t
inherited 763, 813
localization 764
management 764
	
  Index	
919
in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 813
prevalence 763
secondary diabetes 294
symptoms 763
Phagocytes
deficiency
associated infections 576, 577t
primary immunodeficiency 579
dysfunction in diabetes 297. See also 
Monocytes; Neutrophils
Phagocytosis 565
Phagosome 565
Pharmacodynamic(s) 767, 768f, 769
definition 767
monitoring 776–777
Pharmacogenetics 682, 776, 861–862
Pharmacogenomics 776, 861–862
Pharmacokinetics 767–769, 768f
definition 767
Phenformin-induced lactic acidosis 78
Phenobarbital
poisoning 792t
therapeutic drug monitoring 779
Phenobarbitone, effect on biochemical 
variables 8t
Phenotype, definition 872
Phenylalanine hydroxylase deficiency 479t, 
851. See also Phenylketonuria (PKU)
Phenylketonuria (PKU) 461, 462
heterogeneity 851
incidence 472
inheritance 466–467
management 481
maternal 466
neonatal screening 19, 861
Phenytoin
effect on biochemical variables 8t
poisoning 792t
therapeutic drug monitoring 770–771, 
774, 779, 779f
PHEX 112–113
Phobic anxiety disorders 676–677
Phosphate
acute deficiency syndrome 116, 116t
body fluid composition 28t
buffering 67
dietary 111, 114, 115
in chronic kidney disease 148–149
fluxes 110f
homeostasis 109, 110f
intestinal absorption 110f, 111
intracellular 110
renal tubular handling 110f, 111–113, 169
disorders 172. See also TmP/GFR 
(tubular maximum for phosphate/
glomerular filtration rate)
renal tubular loss, osteomalacia/rickets 
resulting from 622, 622b
replacement
diabetic ketoacidosis management 328
intravenous 117
supplementation, in phosphopenic 
osteomalacia 623
triple stones 177
urinary excretion, increased 116. See also 
Phosphorus
Phosphate, plasma concentration 113, 113t
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
in chronic kidney disease 144
in chronic kidney disease–mineral and 
bone disorder 626
critical difference 15t
diurnal variation 100f, 113
in osteopenia of prematurity 492, 492t
Phosphate metabolism 109–117
in chronic kidney disease 144
control, hyperphosphataemia management 
627
in neonates. See Neonates
renal, disorders 112–113
Phosphatonins 111, 112–113
Phosphocreatine 646–647
Phosphodiesterase-5 (PDE-5) inhibitors 459
Phosphofructokinase 278, 654–655
3-Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase 
deficiency 477–478
Phosphoglycerate kinase 654–655
Phosphoglycerate mutase 654–655
Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) 717–718
Phospholipids 704
digestion and absorption 224
function 703t
nuclear 706
structure 705f
Phospholipid transfer protein (PTP) 718
Phosphopenic osteomalacia. See 
Osteomalacia
Phosphoric acid, daily production and 
elimination 68t
Phosphorus
blood 109, 109b
distribution, body 109–113, 109b
intracellular 109–110
metabolism. See Phosphate metabolism; 
Phosphate
Phosphorylase a 654–655
Phosphorylase kinase 654–655
Phosphorylated tau 665
Photocoagulation, diabetic retinopathy 
treatment 325–326
Photosensitivity
porphyrin-induced 543
protoporphyrin-induced 546
treatment 547
Physical activity. See Exercise
Phytanic acid, accumulation 694
Phytanolyl-CoA hydroxylase deficiency 694
Phytomenadione 186, 186f
Phytosterolaemia 711
Phytosterols 704
Pick disease 670–671
Piecemeal necrosis 253, 254
Pigment epithelium-derived factor (PEDF) 
633
Pioglitazone 315, 316
contraindications 316
Piper methysticum (kava) 208–209
Pituitary adenomas 360
ACTH-secreting. See 
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone 
(ACTH)-dependent Cushing 
syndrome
gonadotrophin-secreting 367
growth hormone-secreting. See 
Acromegaly
in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 811
non-functioning 367
prolactin-secreting. See Prolactinoma
thyroid stimulating hormone-secreting 
366–367
Pituitary apoplexy 367
Pituitary disease
clinical assessment 360
deficiency states 367–369. See also 
Hypopituitarism
diagnostic techniques 360. See also 
Pituitary gland, assessment of 
function
hormone replacement therapy, monitoring 
370–371
hypersecretion states 360–367
monitoring of pituitary function 359–360. 
See also specific pituitary diseases
Pituitary fibrosis, idiopathic 367
Pituitary gland
adenomas. See Pituitary adenomas
anatomy 350, 350f
anterior lobe 350, 350f
physiology 350–351, 351f
assessment of function 352–360, 371–372
basal hormonal investigations 352–354, 
371
clomifene test 356–357
in disease states 359–360. See also specific 
pituitary diseases
dynamic tests of ACTH–adrenal 
function 354–355
gonadotrophin secretion 352–353, 
356–357
growth hormone reserve 355–356
luteinizing hormone pulsatility 357
posterior pituitary 357
protocols 357–358, 371–372
releasing hormone tests 356. See 
also Cortisol, pituitary function 
assessment. specific tests
deficiency states 367–369
imaging
in Cushing disease 366
techniques 360
insufficiency, hypoglycaemia due to 345
irradiation
acromegaly management 363
pituitary function assessment following 
359–360
posterior lobe 350, 350f
function tests 357
physiology 351f, 352
surgery. See Pituitary surgery
thyroid hormone uptake 377
tumours 367
adenomas. See Pituitary adenomas
craniopharyngiomas 367
Pituitary–gonadal axis 351–352
assessment 352–353
Pituitary surgery
acromegaly management 363
Cushing syndrome management 366
reassessment following 366
pituitary function assessment following 
359
Pituitary–thyroid axis 351
assessment 352
Placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP) 823t, 
832
Placental site trophoblastic tumours 835
Plant sterols 757
Plant toxins 806, 806t
Plaque, dental 208
Plasma bile acids (PBA), measurement 243
Plasma cells 588
Plasmacytoma, solitary 595
Plasma protein A, pregnancy-associated 
443–444
Plasma proteins 663t
buffering capacity 67
liver function tests. See Liver function tests
pregnancy-related changes 446. See also 
Protein(s). specific plasma proteins
Plasma renin activity (PRA). See Renin
Plasma viscosity, measurement 499
Plasma volume, pregnancy-related changes 
445
Plasmin 507
Plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 (PAI-1), 
cardiovascular disease risk and 753
920	
Index
Plasminogen kringle 4 710
Plasminogen kringle 5 710
Plasmodium falciparum malaria 503, 503f
haemolytic anaemia 528
Platelet(s)
cardiovascular disease association 753
count 498t, 499
haemostasis role 507, 515
transfusion 513
Platelet-activating factor acetylhydrolase 
(PAF–AH) 717–718
Platelet transfusion, in severe sepsis 410
Pleiotropic obesity syndromes 202, 202t
Podocytes 153, 153f
POEMS syndrome 693
Poikilocytosis 501
Point mutations 846–847
definition 872
Point-of-care testing 12, 25–26
advantages 25
areas of concern 26
therapeutic drug monitoring 775
Poisoning 787–807
accidental 788
adults 788
aetiology 788
antidotes 794, 794t
body temperature and 793
central nervous system complications 
791–793
childhood 788
definition 787
diagnosis 789–791
with endogenous agents. See Forensic 
biochemistry
factors involved 788f
indications for measurement of drugs and 
poisons 792t
infants 788
intrauterine 788
management 791–795
methaemoglobinaemia. See 
Methaemoglobinaemia
neonates 788
renal complications 793
specific poisons 795–806
alcohol (ethanol) 685, 792t, 799–800, 801f
antidepressants 803–804
benzodiazepines. See Benzodiazepine 
overdose
carbon monoxide. See Carbon monoxide 
poisoning
chloroquine 798
chromium 799
cobalt 799
cyanide. See Cyanide poisoning
digoxin 798
drug and substance abuse 800–803
ethylene glycol. See Ethylene glycol
iron. See Iron poisoning
lead 792t, 798–799
lithium 792t, 804–805
methanol. See Methanol
organophosphates. See 
Organophosphate poisoning
paracetamol. See Paracetamol
plant and fungal toxins 806, 806t
salicylate. See Aspirin
theophylline. See Theophylline
syndromes caused by (toxidromes) 789, 790t
types of lesion 788–789, 789t
Poisons centres 791, 807
Polarography 656
Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS)
diagnostic criteria 440
hirsutism 441
hyperprolactinaemia 361
management 440
oligomenorrhoea/amenorrhoea 439
ovarian hyperstimulation syndrome risk 
441
secondary diabetes 294
ultrasonographic images 435f
Polydipsia
primary
management 42
polyuria secondary to 41
psychogenic 41, 681
secondary, primary polyuria with 39–41
Polyethylene glycol (PEG)-uricase 642
Polygenic, definition 872
Polygenic hypercholesterolaemia 728
Polyglandular syndrome, autoimmune 106
Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 852–855, 
854f
definition 872
in investigation of CNS infections 668, 
669
multiplex 856–857, 856f
definition 872
in mutation analysis 855, 856f
cystic fibrosis 863–864, 864f
dystrophin gene 864–865, 864f
in prenatal diagnosis 860
real-time 855
reverse transcriptase 855
Polymeric feeds 210
Polymorphic markers, linkage analysis 858, 
859f
Polymorphisms 848
balanced, definition 871
definition 872
drug metabolising enzymes 861
single-stranded conformational 857, 857f
Polymorphs. See Neutrophils
Polymyositis 639t
Polyol pathway, diabetic neuropathy 
pathophysiology 691
Polyostotic fibrous dysplasia 633t, 634
Polysaccharides, non-starch 192
Polystyrene sulphonate resins 61
Polyunsaturated fatty acids 183f, 224. See also 
Fatty acid(s)
Polyuria 39–43, 129
definition 39
laboratory investigation 41–42
management 42–43
nocturnal. See Nocturnal polyuria
pregnancy and 41
primary, with secondary polydipsia 39–41
secondary to primary polydipsia 41
Pontine myelinolysis 51
Population screening 4, 861
Porphobilinogen (PBG)
in acute porphyria 230
synthesis 533, 535f
urinary, measurement 539
Porphyria(s) 533–549, 534t
abbreviations 535b
acute 230, 534, 534t, 538–542
anaesthesia and 542
autosomal dominant 538–542
chronic complications 539
clinical presentation 538–539
diagnosis 536f, 537t, 539
homozygous 542
management 539–540
managing asymptomatic relatives 541, 
541t
pathophysiology 538
pregnancy and 542
prevention 540
rare forms 542
safe prescribing 541
severely affected patients 540–541
acute intermittent. See Acute intermittent 
porphyria (AIP)
biochemical findings 537t
clinical manifestations 534
congenital erythropoietic. See Congenital 
erythropoietic porphyria (CEP)
cutaneous 534t, 542–547
bullous. See Bullous porphyrias
erythropoietic protoporphyria. See 
Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP)
X-linked dominant protoporphyria. See 
X-linked dominant protoporphyria 
(XLDPP)
hepatic 268
hepatoerythropoietic 542–543, 545
inheritance 467
laboratory investigations 536f
molecular genetics 534–538, 537t
overview 534
variegate. See Variegate porphyria (VP)
Porphyria cutanea tarda (PCT) 258, 534t, 
544–545
biochemical findings 537t
molecular genetics 537t, 544
treatment 544
Porphyric neuropathy 538, 695
Porphyrin-induced photosensitivity 543
Porphyrinogens 533–534, 535f
Porphyrins 533–534
adult reference ranges 537t
laboratory investigations 533–534, 536f, 
537t, 539
metabolism, disorders
secondary 547–548, 548t. See also 
Porphyria
Portal hypertension 259
Portal vein 232, 232f
Positional cloning, definition 872
Positive predictive value 17t
Postanalytical factors, affecting test results 
12–13
Post-heparin lipolytic activity (PHLA) 716, 
733
Post-hypercapnic alkalosis 81, 83
Postmenopausal women
bisphosphonate use 618
calcium intake 617
cardiovascular disease risk 751–752
hormone replacement therapy. See 
Hormone replacement therapy (HRT)
ovarian cancer screening, CA125 
measurement 838–839
Post-mortem biochemistry 874, 875b, 
878–880
interpretation 879t
little used/unvalidated tests 879–880, 879t
specific diagnostic problems 880–882
anaphylaxis/anaphylactic reactions 880
diabetes 878b, 880, 881f
drowning 880
hypothermia/hypothermia 880–882
inflammation 882
sudden death 882, 882t
vitreous humour 879–880, 879t
Post-obstructive natriuresis 34
Postpartum thyroiditis 399
Postprandial hypoglycaemia 347
Postprandial syndrome 347–348
Postrenal acute kidney injury 137b, 139
Post-traumatic stress disorder 679, 680
Posture, effect on test results 8t, 9
aldosterone:renin ratio 762
urinary protein excretion 155
	
  Index	
921
Potassium
body fluid composition 28t
concentrations
plasma. See Potassium, plasma 
concentration
stool water 34t, 53–54
urine 33
vitreous humour, post-mortem 879
content of oral preparations 57, 57t
depletion. See Potassium depletion
dietary intake 57
excess. See Hyperkalaemia
extracellular fluid and 28t, 32–33
extrarenal fluid composition 34t
homeostasis, effect of acidosis 76
infusion 57
intracellular fluid and 28t, 32–33
metabolism
in chronic kidney disease 143
disorders 52–61. See also Hyperkalaemia; 
Hypokalaemia
renal control of output 33
renal tubular handling 169t
retention 59, 59b
in synovial fluid, post-mortem 879–880
Potassium, plasma concentration 32
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
critical difference 15t
effect on aldosterone:renin ratio 762
in hyperkalaemia 57–58
in hypokalaemia 52
in poisoning 875t
Potassium bicarbonate 57, 57t
Potassium chloride 57, 57t
Potassium citrate
hypercalciuria management 176
hyperoxaluria management 176–177
hypokalaemia management 57, 57t
inhibition of calcium stone formation 177
Potassium depletion 33
in diabetic ketoacidosis 55, 328
extrarenal causes 53–54, 53b
non-respiratory alkalosis 82–83
renal causes 54, 54b. See also Hypokalaemia
Potassium salts 57, 57t
Potassium-sparing diuretics, potassium 
retention 59
Prader orchidometer 416
Prader–Willi syndrome 202t, 852
Pralidoxime 799
Pravastatin 653
Prealbumin. See Transthyretin
Preanalytical factors, affecting test results 
7–10
Precision, analytical 11, 11t
Precocious puberty 428
causes 428, 428b
central (gonadotrophin-dependent) 
428–429, 428b
endocrine investigations 428t
variants of early puberty 429
Precursor supply, inherited metabolic disease 
management 476–477
Predictive value of tests 3, 16–20
definitions 16–17, 16t, 17t
disease prevalence and 18, 18t
example 17–18, 17t, 18f
practical application 19
Pre-digested feeds 210
Prednisolone therapy
autoimmune hepatitis 256
effect on cortisol assays 358
non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia  
344
Pre-eclampsia 38, 445, 446, 764
Pregnancy 442–447
acute fatty liver of 263, 445, 465–466
antinuclear antibodies in 587
biochemical changes 445–446
biochemical diagnosis 442
biochemical monitoring 443
carbon monoxide poisoning in 788
cholestasis of 262–263, 445
diabetes mellitus
complications 331b
management 331–332
type 1 291–292, 331–332
drug abuse during 485
ectopic. See Ectopic pregnancy
hypertension in 38, 156, 764
inherited metabolic disease presentation 
465–466
intrauterine infections 484–485, 485t
liver function during 262–263
molar 835
polyuria and 41
porphyria patients 542
proteinuria in 156, 446
screening for fetal malformation. see under 
Fetus
sodium retention 37–38
thyroid function 379–380, 385, 445
urinary protein excretion 156. See also 
entries beginning gestational; Labour
Pregnenolone 437, 438f
Preimplantation genetic diagnosis 444, 444t
haemoglobinopathies 558–559
Prematurity 484
apnoea of 486
Premises, laboratory 22
Prenatal diagnosis 444, 860–861
inherited metabolic diseases 444, 476
Preproinsulin 278–279
Preproliferative retinopathy, diabetic 325
Prerenal acute kidney injury. See Acute 
kidney injury (AKI)
Prescribing, safe, in acute porphyria 541
Pre-term labour 447
Pre-term neonates 484
apnoea of prematurity 486
body water 487, 487f
osteopenia of prematurity 491–492, 492t. 
See also Birth weight, low
Prevalence, disease
predictive value of tests and 17t, 18. See also 
specific diseases
Priapism, in dialysed males 146
Primary aldosteronism (PA) 760–762. See also 
Hyperaldosteronism
Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) 256, 639t
Primary myxoedema 396
Primary sclerosing cholangitis (PSC) 
256–257
Primidone, therapeutic drug monitoring 779
Principal cells 126
Probability 16, 19–20
Probe
definition 872
hydridization 852–855
Probiotic 209
Procainamide, therapeutic drug monitoring 
778
Procalcitonin 99
as marker of acute phase response 598
Procollagen 605, 606f
Procollagen I amino-terminal extension 
peptide (P1NP) 611
Procollagen I carboxy-terminal extension 
peptide (P1CP) 611
Procollagen I extension peptides 611
Procollagen type III (PIIINP), plasma 
measurements 244
Product, alternate, inherited metabolic 
disease management 478
Product breakdown, inhibition in inherited 
metabolic disease management 478
Product replacement, inherited metabolic 
disease management 477–478
Progastrin releasing peptide (ProGRP) 836t, 
837
Progesterone
actions 439
biosynthesis 437, 438f
plasma concentrations
in ectopic pregnancy 442
fluctuations during menstrual cycle 9, 
435–436, 435f
ovulation assessment 440
pituitary function assessment 353
in spontaneous abortion 443
structure 438f
transport and metabolism 438–439
Progesterone-binding receptors 823t, 824t, 
828
Progestogen-only contraceptives 447t, 448, 
449
Progestogens
actions 439
hormone replacement therapy 448
metabolic effects 448
oral contraceptives 439, 447t, 448
structure 437
Proglucagon 316
Prognosis
use of biochemical tests 3. See also specific 
diseases
Progression, disease, monitoring 3–4
Progressive diaphyseal dysplasia 633t, 634
Prohormone convertase 404
Proinsulin 278–279, 281
abnormalities 279, 280t
measurement, hypoglycaemia investigation 
337f, 338–339
Prolactin 437
abnormalities in males with chronic kidney 
disease 145, 146b
actions 437
deficiency 351, 354
ectopic secretion 815t
effect of stress 9, 361
plasma concentration
females 440
pituitary function assessment 352
in prolactinoma 352
secretion 351
abnormalities in psychiatric disease 681
dynamic tests 361
modulators 437
synthesis 437
tumour marker characteristics 822t
Prolactinoma 360–362
management 361–362
presentation 361–362
Proliferative retinopathy, diabetic 325
Prolonged fast test 336–338
Prolyl peptidyl cis-trans isomerase B 605
Promoter, definition 872
Proopiomelanocortin (POMC) 203, 204, 
404, 814
obesity and 202
Propionic acidaemia 479, 480f
Propoxyphene abuse 801t
Propranolol, hypoglycaemia association 346
Proprotein convertase subtilisin kexin 9 
(PCSK9) 720–721
gain of function gene mutations 727, 866
922	
Index
Propylthiouracil 380, 391
Prostacyclin 705, 706f
Prostaglandin(s) 705, 706f
labour role 447
Prostaglandin D-synthase, cerebrospinal 
fluid 663f, 663t, 666
Prostaglandin E2 406, 706f
Prostaglandin endoperoxide synthase 705
Prostaglandin G2 705, 706f
Prostaglandin H2 705, 706f
Prostate cancer 840–841
androgen effects 820
management 841
screening and diagnosis 840–841
Prostate cancer gene 3 protein (PCA3)  
823t
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) 822t
analytical and reporting requirements 
826t, 841
in prostate cancer management 25, 841
in prostate cancer screening/diagnosis 
824t, 840–841
Protease activated receptors (PARs) 408
Proteases 223
Protein(s)
absorption 222–224
clinical aspects 223
investigation 224
bone matrix 605–607
brain-specific 663f, 665–666
cerebrospinal fluid. See Cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF)
conservation by kidneys 152–155
deficiency 183
dietary 183, 222
dietary restriction in chronic kidney 
disease 148–149, 323
digestion 223
drug binding 769
enteral feeding 210
laboratory-based assessment 196
loss, as cause of immune deficiency 
579–580, 579t
markers of tubular damage 162t
high molecular weight 161–162
low molecular weight 162, 163t
metabolism. See Protein metabolism
parenteral nutrition 211
reabsorption, tubular 154
secretion, tubular 154–155
synthesis 235
stress response 405
urinary excretion 131, 155, 155t
determinants 155–156
normal 131, 155–156, 155t
selectivity 158–159. See also Proteinuria
urine, measurement 165–166, 166f. See also 
Plasma proteins. specific proteins
Protein C 408–409
activated 411
Protein concentration
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
critical difference 15t
effect of posture 9
sodium deficiency 35
Protein disulphide isomerase (PDI) 720
Protein–energy malnutrition (PEM) 200
in children 201, 223
hypoglycaemia 347. See also Malnutrition
Protein kinase C (PKC), activation, in 
diabetic tissue damage 297
Protein metabolism
in chronic kidney disease 144
effects of alcohol 258
hepatic 235
stress response 405
14-3-3 Proteins 665, 670–671
Proteinuria 131, 152–167
Bence Jones. See Bence Jones proteinuria
clinical correlates 157t
clinical investigation 165–167
stepwise 166–167, 166f
exercise-induced 155–156
postural 155
in pregnancy 156, 446
of prerenal origin 162–164
in renal disease 156–164
glomerular. See Glomerular proteinuria
staging and prognosis of chronic kidney 
disease 156
tubular. See Tubular proteinuria
urine protein selectivity 158–159
Proteoglycans
bone 606–607
heparan sulphate 713
Proteomics 871
Prothrombin 507, 508f
Prothrombin time (PT) 508, 509t
liver function tests 242, 248t
Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs), 
hypomagnesaemia and 118
Proto-oncogenes 867
Protoporphyria
erythropoietic. See Erythropoietic 
protoporphyria (EPP)
X-linked dominant. See X-linked dominant 
protoporphyria (XLDPP)
Protoporphyric liver disease 547
Protoporphyrin, in extravascular haemolysis 
525
Protoporphyrin-induced photosensitivity 
546
treatment 547
Protoporphyrinogen oxidase (PPOX) 
533–534, 535f
Provocation tests, hypoglycaemia 336–338
Proximal convoluted tubule 125, 125f
amino acid reabsorption 168
function 128
tests 136
glucose absorption 168
phosphate reabsorption 169
protein reabsorption 154
Pseudo-Cushing syndrome 293, 800
Pseudodementia 677
Pseudogout 642
Pseudohermaphroditism 416, 417t.  
See also Disorder of sex development 
(DSD)
Pseudohyperkalaemia 58, 60
Pseudohyperphosphataemia 113b, 114
Pseudohypoaldosteronism 56, 59t, 60, 60t
laboratory investigations 60–61
type I 35, 56, 60–61, 60t
type II 60–61, 60t, 760t, 761t
Pseudohypoglycaemia 336
clinical 320
Pseudohyponatraemia 46
Pseudohypoparathyroidism 106–107,  
107t
classification 107t, 122
diagnosis 122
in neonates 491
Pseudo-Pelger neutrophils 506, 507f
Pseudopseudohypoparathyroidism (PPHP) 
107, 107t
Psychiatric disorders 673–682
aetiology 675
classification 674–675, 675t
compulsive water drinking 41, 681
endocrine and metabolic manifestations 
680–681
future developments 682
investigations 674
biochemical 675–676
organic disease manifestations 675t, 676–680
prevalence 674
Psychiatry 673–674
investigations 674
subspecialities 675
Psychogenic polydipsia 41, 681
Psychological factors, cardiovascular disease 
risk 754
Psychosis 674
Korsakoff 187, 686
Psychotropic drugs
metabolic complications 675–676, 
681–682. See also Antipsychotic drugs
Pteroylpolyglutamate hydrolase 521
Pteroylpolyglutamic acid 521, 522f. See also 
Folate
Puberty
disorders of 412, 428
endocrine investigations 428t. See also 
Delayed puberty; Precocious puberty
inherited metabolic disease presentation 
464–465
normal 414–416
endocrinology 414
physical signs 414–416, 415f
tempo of 414–415
Pubic hair, growth of 415–416, 415f
Pulmonary aspiration, enteral feeding-
associated risk 210
Pulmonary function 87–88
Pulmonary hypertension, sickle cell patients 
556
Pulse oximeters 91
Pure red cell aplasia 816
Purine metabolism 639–640, 640f
Pyelonephritis, urinary sediment 131
Pyrazinamide, therapeutic drug monitoring 
782
Pyridinoline 611–612, 612f
Pyridoxal 188, 188f
Pyridoxal phosphate 477
Pyridoxamine 188, 188f
Pyridoxamine 5-phosphate oxidase deficiency 
477
Pyridoxine 188, 188f
challenge, in homocystinuria 479
hyperoxaluria and 176
pharmacological doses 188. See also 
Vitamin B6
Pyrimidine 5'-nucleotidase 517, 518f
deficiency 528
tests 531
Pyrosequencing 860
Pyruvate 70, 277f, 278
blood measurements in inherited 
metabolic diseases 473–474
Pyruvate carboxylase deficiency 78
Pyruvate dehydrogenase 277f, 278
deficiency 78, 670
Pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency 528, 531
Q
Quality, definition 21
Quality assurance 24, 26
external. See External quality assurance (EQA)
therapeutic drug monitoring 776
Quality control, internal. See Internal quality 
control (IQC)
Quality indicators 24–25, 24t
Quality management systems 22
	
  Index	
923
Quality standards 21–23
Quetiapine 681
Quinagolide 361, 440
Quinidine-like activity, drugs 803, 804f
Quinine, hypoglycaemia association 346
R
Rabson–Mendenhall syndrome 281
Race, cardiovascular disease risk and 752
Radioiodine therapy
as cause of hypothyroidism 396
Graves disease 391–392
thyroid cancer 400
toxic adenoma 392
toxic multinodular goitre 392
Radiology
chronic kidney disease–mineral and bone 
disorder investigation 627
hypercalcaemia investigation 104
Paget disease investigation 630
thyroid gland 387
Radionuclide techniques, assessment of renal 
function 130
Radiotherapy, effects
reproductive 819–820
on somatic growth 818–819
Raloxifene 618
RANK (receptor activator of nuclear factor-
κB) 608, 629
RANKL (receptor activator of nuclear 
factor-κB ligand) 608, 609f, 613
Rapoport–Luebering shunt 517, 518f
Rasburicase 642, 816
RAST (radioallergosorbent test) 581
RB (retinoblastoma gene) 867–868
rBAT 171
Reactive hypoglycaemia 347
Reactive oxygen species (ROS), in diabetic 
tissue damage 297
Real-time polymerase chain reaction 855
Reaven syndrome. See Metabolic syndrome
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) 
curves 19, 19f
Recessive, definition 872
Recombination 849, 849f
definition 872
Recombination fraction 849
Recommended daily amount (RDA), 
definition 181t
Recommended daily intake (RDI), definition 
181t
Rectum, villous adenoma of 53–54
Red blood cell(s) 515–517
carbon dioxide transport and buffering 67, 67f
in cerebrospinal fluid 661
counting 498
enzyme defects 526–528, 527b
tests 531
formation. See Erythropoiesis
function 517, 518f
glycolytic intermediates, measurement 531
indices 498
in iron deficiency anaemia 520
lysis. See Haemolysis
membrane defects
acquired 527b, 529
inherited 525–526, 527b
metabolites
measurement 531. See also specific 
metabolites
morphology. See Red blood cell 
morphology
removal by reticuloendothelial system 517
structure 516–517. See also Red blood cell 
morphology
survival, measurement 530
transfusion 513
in severe sepsis 410
urinary casts 131, 166
Red blood cell morphology
abnormalities 501, 502f, 516–517
in anaemia 501–503
haemolytic 529
normal 501, 501f, 516–517
Redistribution hyperkalaemia. See 
Hyperkalaemia
Redistribution hypokalaemia. See 
Hypokalaemia
Reducing substances, urinary, in inherited 
metabolic diseases 470–471
5α-Reductase deficiency 426t, 427, 456
Refeeding syndrome 115, 207, 211–212
identification of people at increased risk of 
developing 211–212, 212b
Reference change value 14, 15
Reference intervals 14
disadvantages 14–15
Reference limits 14
comparison of observed results with 15
Reference nutrient intake (RNI), definition 
181t
Reference values 14–15
Reflux oesophagitis 214
Refsum disease 694–695
Regular insulin 310
Regulation, laboratories 22, 22b
Rejection, graft 599, 599b
Releasing hormone tests 356
Remnant hyperlipoproteinaemia (RH) 
725–726, 726f
Renal blood flow 127, 152
pregnancy-related changes 445
Renal bone disease. See Chronic kidney 
disease–mineral and bone disorder 
(CKD–MBD)
Renal calculi 174–179
infection-related stones 177
investigation of stone formers 178, 178b
pathogenesis 175–178
rarities 177–178
treatment 178–179
types 175t
uric acid stones 175t, 177
Renal disease 129–130
acidosis 78–80
autoimmune 585, 585t, 586f, 601t
diabetic. See Diabetic nephropathy
hyperphosphataemia 114
hypertension in 759
manifestations 129
proteinuria. See Proteinuria
slowing progression of 148–149
therapeutic diets 209t. See also specific diseases
Renal failure
acute. See Acute kidney injury
in acute porphyria 539
chronic. See Chronic kidney disease
encephalopathy and 686
established, in diabetes mellitus 323
hypoglycaemia associated with 344–345
peripheral neuropathy and 693
polyuria 39
Renal function 127–129
assessment 130–136
measurement of glomerular filtration rate. 
See Glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
in neonates, test interpretation 488
in poisoning 793
urinalysis 130–131
biochemical tests 130–136
development 486–487
glomerular function 127
impaired
lipid abnormalities 730–731
renin levels 147, 762. See also Renal 
disease
involving hormones 144, 144t
in neonates. See Neonates
in pregnancy 445
progressive loss of 142. See also Chronic 
kidney disease (CKD)
tubular function 128–129. See also 
Kidney(s)
Renal hypokalaemia, without specific acid–
base disorder 54b, 56
Renal hypokalaemic acidosis 54–55, 54b, 57
Renal hypokalaemic alkalosis 54b, 55–56, 57
Renal leak hypercalciuria 175–176
Renal osteodystrophy. See Chronic kidney 
disease–mineral and bone disorder 
(CKD–MBD)
Renal replacement therapy
acute kidney injury 141
chronic kidney disease 149–150. See also 
specific methods
Renal sodium loss
primary 34, 34b
secondary 35, 35b
Renal transplantation
bone disease following 628
chronic kidney disease 150
cystinuria 171
hyperlipidaemia following 731
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) 54, 78–80, 
172–173
diagnosis 179
type 1 (distal) 79–80, 173, 492
type 2 (proximal) 79–80, 173, 492
type 3 173
type 4 (hyperkalaemic) 79–80, 173
in diabetes 326
Renal tubular disorders 168–174
generalized tubular defects 174
isolated abnormalities of tubular function 
169–174
osteomalacia/rickets resulting from 622, 
622b. See also Renal tubules, damage
Renal tubules
damage
assessment methods 161–162
drug-induced 161
heavy metal-induced 161
high molecular weight protein markers 
161–162
low molecular weight protein markers 
162, 162t. See also Renal tubular 
disorders
development 486–487
distal. See Distal convoluted tubule (DCT)
function 128–129
assessment 161–162
intrinsic control
potassium 33
sodium 28
physiology 168–169, 169f, 169t
protein reabsorption 154
protein secretion 154–155
proximal. See Proximal convoluted tubule. 
See also entries beginning tubular; 
Kidney(s)
Renin 28–29, 29f
direct active renin concentration 762
effect of posture 9
menstrual cycle and 38
plasma activity 762
reference ranges 766
in renal impairment 147, 762
924	
Index
Renin (Continued)
in pre-eclampsia 38
secretion 126
ectopic 815t
in stress response 406
in syndromes of hypoaldosteronism 59–60, 
59t. See also Aldosterone:renin ratio
Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone system 
28–29, 29f
in idiopathic oedema 38
in pregnancy 37
Renovascular hypertension 759–760
Repaglinide 315
Reproductive function
effects of malignant disease therapy 
819–820
female. See Female(s)
hormones regulating 436–437. See also 
specific hormones
male. See Male(s)
Reproductive system
hyperthyroidism manifestations 389
hypothyroidism manifestations 395, 440
Request forms 6, 7
Resonium A 54
Respiratory acidosis. See Acidosis, 
respiratory
Respiratory alkalosis. See Alkalosis, 
respiratory
Respiratory chain. See Mitochondrial 
respiratory chain
Respiratory compensation
non-respiratory acidosis 73, 74–75
non-respiratory alkalosis 82
Respiratory control ratio (RCR) 656
Respiratory disorders
effects on oxygen uptake into blood 89
neonates 485–486
Respiratory distress syndrome (RDS) 
485–486, 485b
management 486
Respiratory failure 89
encephalopathy and 686–687
management 91–92
Respiratory quotient (RQ), calculation 195, 
195f
Respiratory support 92
in poisoning 791
respiratory distress in neonates 486
shocked patients 410
Respiratory system
hyperthyroidism manifestations 389
hypothyroidism manifestations 395
Response-to-injury hypothesis 741
Restriction endonuclease(s) 852–853, 853f
allele recognition 855, 856f
definition 872
Restriction fragment length polymorphism 
(RFLP) 852, 858, 859f
definition 872
Reticulin 233–234
Reticulocyte(s) 515–516
count 498t, 499
Reticuloendothelial system, red blood cell 
removal 517
Retinal 184, 184f
Retinoblastoma 867–868
Retinoblastoma gene (RB) 867–868
Retinoic acid 185
Retinoic acid receptors (RAR) 185
Retinoid X receptors (RXR) 185, 377, 720
Retinol 184, 184f
teratogenicity 185
Retinol-binding protein 184
as marker of tubular damage 162, 162t
tubular reabsorption 154
Retinopathy, diabetic. See Diabetic retinopathy
RET proto-oncogene mutations 812
Retrovirus
definition 872
gene therapy vectors 870
Reverse transcriptase 853–854
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 855
Reye-like illness 496
Reye syndrome 496
Reynolds risk score 751
RGD (arginyl-glycyl-aspartate)-containing 
glycoproteins 607, 607t
Rhabdomyolysis 162
in acute porphyria 538
aminotransferase activities 240
causes 162–163, 163b
creatine kinase activity 652
hyperphosphataemia and 114
hypocalcaemia and 107–108
Rheology, cardiovascular disease risk and 753
Rhesus (Rh) blood group 510
laboratory tests 511, 511t
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) 585–586, 637
anaemia in 643–644
management 637
Rheumatoid factor (RF) 585, 644
Rhinorrhoea, cerebrospinal fluid 666, 666f
Rhodopsin 184–185
Riboflavin (vitamin B2) 187
deficiency 187
laboratory-based assessment 197–198
Rickets 492, 492b, 620
hypophosphataemic. See 
Hypophosphataemic rickets
vitamin D-dependent. See Vitamin 
D-dependent rickets (VDDR)
Riedel thyroiditis 399
Rifampicin, therapeutic drug monitoring 782
Rimonabant 205
Ringer's solution 36t
Risedronate 618, 631f
Risk of malignancy index (RMI), ovarian 
cancer 839, 839t
RNA (ribonucleic acid) 845
RNA polymerase 846
Rose Bengal dye test 247
Rosen Waaler test 644
Rosiglitazone 315
Rotor syndrome 246, 548
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) 206, 206f, 
207t
Rubeosis iridis 325
Ruboxistaurin mesylate 297
S
S100 family of proteins 665
S100B as melanoma marker 837
Safe prescribing, in acute porphyria 541
St John's wort, drug interactions 208–209, 
771, 772t
Salbutamol, hyperkalaemia management 61
Salicylates
hypoglycaemia association 346. See also 
Aspirin
Saline
diabetic ketoacidosis management 328
non-respiratory alkalosis management 83
sodium deficiency management 36t
Saline infusion, hypertonic. See Hypertonic 
saline infusion
Saliva 215
amylase 221
therapeutic drug monitoring 773
Salt intake 30. See also Sodium, dietary 
intake
Salt-losing nephropathy 34, 34b
Salt poisoning 878, 878b
Salts, potassium 57, 57t
Salt wasting
cerebral 50
meticillin-induced acute interstitial 
nephritis and 34
Sampling, therapeutic drug monitoring 
772–774
Sandhoff disease 700
Sarcoidosis 367
Sarcomere 647f, 740
Saturated fat, dietary 224
Saturated fatty acids 704, 704f
Scavenger receptor(s) 742
class B type 1 (SRB1) 719
Schilling test 524
Schizophrenia 675, 679–680
Schmidt syndrome 584t
Schofield equation 196, 196f
Schumm test 530
Scintigraphy
chronic kidney disease–mineral and bone 
disorder investigation 627
meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) 764
thyroid. See Thyroid scintiscanning
Scleroderma 587, 587t, 639t
Sclerostin 607–609, 609f, 613, 619
Screening 4–5
acute porphyrias 541t
diabetes mellitus 301, 302f
diabetic retinopathy 325, 325b
DNA analysis 861. See also Genetic 
screening
fetal malformation. see under Fetus
individuals 4–5, 861
mutation detection 857–858, 857f
neonatal. See Neonatal screening
population 4, 861
thyroid disease 401
Scurvy 189
Secretin–pancreozymin test 217
Secretory piece 568
Sedative–hypnotic poisoning 790t
Sediment, urine 131
Seizures
in acute porphyria 538
neonatal, inherited metabolic disease 
presentation 463–464, 464t. See also 
Convulsions
Selective oestrogen receptor modulators 
(SERMs) 618
Selective screening 4
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs)
overdose 804
therapeutic drug monitoring 780
Selenium 191
deficiency 191
dietary sources 191
laboratory-based assessment 199
toxicity 191
Semen analysis 454, 454t
Seminiferous tubules 451, 452f
Seminoma 453, 832
diagnosis 832
long-term surveillance 829
prognosis 833t
teratoma vs. 832. See also Germ cell 
tumours
Sensitivity 16–17, 17t
Separation techniques, lipoproteins 733–734
Sepsis
as cause of delirium 676
definition 409b
hypoglycaemia association 347
	
  Index	
925
management 410
immunomodulation 411
organ support 410
Septic encephalopathy 687–688
Septo-optic dysplasia, congenital 39–40,  
367
Serotonin 204
appetite control 204
foods rich in 810b
metabolism 809, 809f
Serotonin agonist syndrome 790t
Sertoli cell(s) 451, 452f
in chronic kidney disease 145–146
tumours 453, 841–842
Sertraline
overdose 804
therapeutic drug monitoring 780
Serum enzymes, pancreatic function testing 
217–218
Serum free light chains (SFLC) 596
Severe combined immunodeficiencies 
(SCID) 578
X-linked, gene therapy 870
Severity assessment, disease 3
Sex. See Gender
Sex assignment 416
Sex development
disorders. See Disorder of sex development 
(DSD)
normal 412–414, 413f, 451
Sex hormone(s)
changes in cirrhosis 261–263
changes in hyperthyroidism 389
females. See Ovarian steroid hormones
loss of, effect on bone density 615, 615b
measurement, investigation of disorder of 
sex development 420, 421f
physiology and biochemistry 262
replacement therapy, monitoring 371
stress response 405. See also specific sex 
hormones
Sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) 262
androgen sensitivity assessment 428
in cirrhosis 262, 262t
in hypothyroidism 395
oestrogen transport 438–439
testosterone binding 439
in thyroid stimulating hormone-secreting 
adenomas 366–367
Sexual dysfunction
in chronic kidney disease 145–146
in chronic liver disease 261–262
Sexual orientation 416
SGLT1 (sodium-dependent glucose 
cotransporter 1) 170, 276, 276t
SGLT2 (sodium-dependent glucose 
cotransporter 2) 170, 276, 276t
Sheehan syndrome 367
Shock 409
anaphylactic 574–575
Shocked patients 409–411
definitions 409, 409b
management 410–411
immediate care 410
immunomodulation 411
organ support 410–411
Short bowel syndrome 213
Short stature, causes 368. See also Growth 
hormone (GH) deficiency
Short tetracosactide test 354, 355, 358, 372
Shoulder, capsulitis 643
Shunting 89
Sialoprotein, bone 607, 607t
Sibutramine 205
Sick cell syndrome 49
Sick euthyroid syndrome 380, 678, 680
Sickle cell disease 525, 550, 555–556
clinical manifestations 555–556
epidemiology 550, 551f, 555
laboratory diagnosis 557–559, 557t, 558f
neonatal screening 557–558
pathophysiology 555
prognosis 556
Sickle haemoglobin (HbS) 555, 557t
Sildenafil 459
Silent thyroiditis 398
Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
in gene tracking 858–859. See also Point 
mutations
Single-stranded conformational 
polymorphism (SSCP) 857, 857f
Sirolimus 150, 600t
therapeutic drug monitoring 784
Sitosterol 757
β-Sitosterolaemia 711
Sjögren syndrome 587, 587t, 638, 639t
Skeletal muscle
cardiac muscle vs. 740
functional anatomy and physiology 
646–649
glucose metabolism 274–275
effects of insulin 279–280, 280t
glycogen 274
insulin actions 280t. See also Muscle
Skeleton
hyperthyroidism manifestations 389
hypothyroidism manifestations 395
Skin
autoimmune disease 585, 601t
development 488
hyperthyroidism manifestations 389
Graves disease 390
hypothyroidism manifestations 395
innate immune system 561
porphyrias 534t, 542–547
bullous. See Bullous porphyrias
erythropoietic protoporphyria. See 
Erythropoietic protoporphyria (EPP)
X-linked dominant protoporphyria. See 
X-linked dominant protoporphyria 
(XLDPP)
Skinfold thickness 194
Skin prick testing 581, 581t
Small bowel
normal microflora 218. See also 
Duodenum; Ileum; Jejunum
Small bowel bacterial overgrowth 218–219
causes 219
definition 219
diagnosis 219
symptoms 219
Small cell lung cancer (SCLC) 836, 836t
Small fibre painful axonal neuropathy 691
Small for gestational age (SGA) neonates 
484–485
Smith–Lemli–Opitz syndrome 462
Smoking
as cardiovascular disease risk factor 752
effect on bone mineral density 615
Smoking cessation, diabetes mellitus 
management 307
Smooth muscle antibody (SMA) 255–256
Sodium
appetite 30
body fluid composition 28t
concentrations
plasma. See Sodium, plasma 
concentration
vitreous humour, post-mortem 879
deficiency. See Sodium deficiency
deficit calculation in hypovolaemic 
hyponatraemia 62
dietary intake 28
cardiovascular disease risk and 756
in diabetes 306
effect on aldosterone:renin excretion 
762
effect on calcium excretion 95
hypokalaemia and 38
excess. See Sodium excess
expected depression in hyperglycaemia-
induced hyponatraemia, estimation 62
extracellular fluid 28–30, 28t, 128
extrarenal fluid composition 34t
fractional excretion of 878, 878b
metabolism, disorders 33–39
sodium deficiency. See Sodium 
deficiency
sodium excess. See Sodium excess
plasma concentration. See Sodium, plasma 
concentration
renal control of output 28–30, 128
renal tubular handling 168, 169, 169t
retention
in ascites formation 259–260
in chronic kidney disease 147
in hepatorenal syndrome 261
in patients with diabetes and 
hypertension 289
urinary excretion 28
chronic kidney disease 34, 147, 147f
hyponatraemia 50
nocturnal polyuria 43–44, 44f
vitreous humour, post-mortem 
biochemistry 879t
water intoxication requirement, estimation 
62
Sodium, plasma concentration 28
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
critical difference 15t
in hyponatraemia 46
in poisoning 875t
in polyuria 41
Sodium bicarbonate, non-respiratory acidosis 
management 76
Sodium chloride poisoning 878, 878b
Sodium deficiency 33–36
causes 33–35
clinical presentation 33
laboratory investigation 35–36
management 36, 36t. See also 
Hyponatraemia
Sodium-dependent glucose cotransporter 1 
(SGLT1) 170, 276, 276t
Sodium-dependent glucose cotransporter 2 
(SGLT2) 170, 276, 276t
Sodium excess 36–39
causes 37–39, 37b
clinical presentation 36
laboratory investigation 39
management 39
with oedema 36, 37, 37b
without oedema 37b, 38–39. See also 
Hypernatraemia
Sodium–glucose cotransporter 1 (SGLT1) 
170, 276, 276t, 333
Sodium–glucose cotransporter 2 (SGLT2) 
170, 276, 276t, 333
Sodium–iodide symporter 375–376
Sodium lactate 36t
Sodium loading, acute 38
Sodium polystyrene sulphonate 54
Sodium valproate. See Valproate
Soil-eating 54
Solanine 189
Solitary plasmacytoma 595
926	
Index
Solvent abuse 792t, 803
Somatic cell, definition 872
Somatic growth
effects of malignant disease treatments 
818–819. See also Growth
Somatoform disorders 675t
Somatostatin 351
analogues, acromegaly management  
363
ectopic secretion 815t
inhibition of thyroid-stimulating hormone 
release 379, 379f
Somatostatinoma 227
Somatostatin syndrome 222
Somogyi effect 320–321
Sorbitol 296
diabetic neuropathy pathophysiology 
691–692
Sortilins 712–713, 721
Sorting protein-related receptor with type A 
repeats (SORLA) 721
Southern blotting 852–853
definition 872
SOX9 412–413
Soy protein 756
Space of Disse 233–234, 233f, 713
Specificity 11, 16–17, 17t
Specimen carry-over 826b
Spectrin 516–517
Sperm
count 454, 454t
motility 454
Spermatogenesis 262, 414, 451
defective
in chronic kidney disease 145–146
in cirrhosis 262
regulation 453, 453f
Spherocytes, osmotic fragility tests 530
Spherocytosis, hereditary. See Hereditary 
spherocytosis
Sphingolipidoses 270
Sphingolipids 705
function 703t
structure 707f
Sphingomyelin 705, 707f
cell membranes 703–704
fetal lung production 444–445
Sphingosine 705, 707f
Spinal cord disorders 688–689
causes 688b
Spinal osteosclerosis 628
Spinal paracentesis. See Lumbar puncture
Splenectomy, as cause of immune deficiency 
580
Splice site mutations 848, 848f
Splicing 846
Spontaneous abortion 443
Spurious hyperkalaemia 58
Spurious hypernatraemia 44
Spurious hypokalaemia 52
Spurious hyponatraemia 46
SQSTM1 mutations 629
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) antigen 
823t, 829
as cervical cancer marker
monitoring 829
prognosis 829
screening and diagnosis 829
as lung cancer marker 836t, 837
SRY (sex-determining region Y) gene 
412–413
Staff
laboratory 22
therapeutic drug monitoring service 775
Standard deviation 10, 15
Stanols 704
Starch 181–182, 182f, 220–221
absorption 221–222, 221f
Starling forces 28
Starvation, metabolic changes 817t
Statin therapy 734, 735t
adverse effects 735t, 736
as cause of elevated creatine kinase activity 
653, 736
cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis 696
in chronic kidney disease 149
drug interactions 653, 736
management of diabetes-related 
cardiovascular risk 308
mode of action 735t
nephrotic hyperlipidaemia 160
rate of cholesterol absorption as predictor 
of benefit 711
Steatohepatitis, non-alcoholic 258
Steatorrhoea 224–225
Steatosis 234–235
alcoholic 257–258
diabetes association 298
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease 258
ST elevation myocardial infarction (STEMI) 
738, 739f, 744
treatment 744
Stellate cells 233–234, 244
Stem cells 564, 564f
in gene therapy 870–871
sources 600t
Stem cell transplantation 600
immunological complications 599b. See also 
Bone marrow transplantation
'Steroid card' 371
Steroid hormones
measurement, investigation of disorder of 
sex development 420, 421f
metabolism 438f
ovarian. See Ovarian steroid hormones
pregnancy-related changes 445
synthesis. See Steroidogenesis; Sex 
hormone(s). specific hormones
Steroidogenesis 352, 353f
ovarian 437–438, 438f
Steroid response elements (SREs) 721
Steroid therapy 600t
adrenal suppression, assessment 358–359. 
See also Prednisolone therapy
Sterol regulatory element binding proteins 
(SREBPs) 721
Sterols 703–704
plant 757
Stick tests, blood ketones 299–300
Stigmasterol 757
St John's wort, drug interactions 208–209, 
771, 772t
Stomach 215–217
cancer. See Gastric cancer
emptying 204
gastrin 215, 216
Helicobacter pylori infection. See Helicobacter 
pylori infection
intrinsic factor. See Intrinsic factor
microflora 218
protein digestion 223
stretching 204. See also entries beginning 
gastric
Stones, renal. See Renal calculi
Stool water, composition 34t, 53–54
Strachan syndrome 694
Stress
amenorrhoea and 369
definition 403
effect on diabetes mellitus 322
effect on test results 8t, 9
inflammation and 406–409
Stress hyperglycaemia 273–274
Stressors, categories 403
Stress-related disorders 675t
Stress response 403–405
acute phase proteins 408
adrenal medulla 405
catecholamines 407–408
central 403
coagulation factors 408–409
cytokines 406
hypothalamo–pituitary–adrenal axis 404–405
inflammation and 406–409
initiation 403, 404f
kidneys 406
shock 409. See also Shocked patients
systemic 403
Stroke 737–738
sickle cell patients 556
Strong ion difference (SID) 85–86
Strong ion gap (SIG) 86
Strontium ranelate 618–619, 620
Struma ovarii 393
Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) 
670–671
Subarachnoid haemorrhage 661–662, 670
Subclinical thyroid disease 385
hyperthyroidism. See Hyperthyroidism
hypothyroidism. See Hypothyroidism
Substance abuse 800–803
psychiatric disorders 675–676, 675t
Substrate depletion, inherited metabolic 
disease management 483
Substrate deprivation therapy, inherited 
metabolic diseases 483
Succinate dehydrogenase 655, 656
Succinylcholine, redistribution 
hyperkalaemia and 58
Sucrase–isomaltase 221
Sucrose 220–221
cardiovascular disease risk and 756
Sudden adult death syndrome (SADS) 882
Sudden unexpected death in infancy (SUDI) 
882, 882t
Sugars, dietary 181, 220–221
cardiovascular disease risk and 756
dental caries and 208
digestion and absorption 221–222, 221f
Suicidal poisoning 788
Sulfonylureas 314–315
adverse effects 314–315
hypoglycaemia 340–341, 346
indications and clinical usage 315
mechanism of action 314
Sulfuric acid, daily production and 
elimination 68t
Sunlight avoidance, porphyria management
congenital erythropoietic porphyria 545
erythropoietic protoporphyria 547
Superovulation regimens 441
Supplements, dietary 208–209
Surfactant 485
fetal synthesis 444–445, 485
immature in pre-term infants 485
neonatal administration 486
Surgery
bariatric. See Bariatric surgery
perioperative management of diabetic 
patients 331
pituitary gland. See Pituitary surgery
thyroid gland. See Thyroid surgery
Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC) 410
SvO2 (mixed venous oxygen saturation) 90
measurement 91
Sweat
fluid composition 34t
phosphate content 110
	
  Index	
927
Sweating
calcium loss 95
excessive, potassium depletion 53
magnesium loss 118
Sweat test, cystic fibrosis 863
Swyer syndrome 425
Symmetrical polyneuropathies 691
Sympathetico-adrenomedullary system, 
activation in acute hypoglycaemia 320
failure 320
Sympathomimetic syndrome 790t
Synacthen test 354, 355, 358, 372
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic 
hormone secretion (SIADH) 48–49, 
49b
Syndrome X. See Metabolic syndrome
Synovial fluid 636–637
examination 644
potassium measurement, post-mortem 
879–880
Synovial joint 636–637, 637f
Synthetic analogues, inherited metabolic 
disease management 478
Syrup of ipecacuanha 794
Systematic reviews 25
Systemic inflammatory response syndrome 
(SIRS) 165, 409, 409b
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 587, 
639t
investigation 587, 587t, 644
T
Tachypnoea, transient of the newborn 486
Tacrolimus 600t
therapeutic drug monitoring 784
Tadalafil 459
Tamm–Horsfall glycoprotein 131, 154–155
Tamoxifen
as cause of hypercalcaemia 103t
hyperlipidaemia association 732
Tandem mass spectrometry (TMS)
acylcarnitine profiling 473
amino acid analysis 472
Tangier disease 696, 722t, 728–729
Tanner staging 415, 415f, 416
Taq polymerase 854–855, 854f
Tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase 613
'TATA' box 846
Tau protein 665, 678
Tau-transferrin 666
Tay–Sachs disease 700
T cell receptor (TCR) 561, 566, 566t, 569
immunoglobulin receptor vs. 566t, 569
Tea 757
Technical factors, affecting test results 7
Teicoplanin, therapeutic drug monitoring 
781
Telopeptides, collagen 612–613, 612f, 630, 
632
Tendon xanthomata, in familial 
hypercholesterolaemia 726, 726f, 727f
Teratogens, retinol 185
Teratoma
seminoma vs. 832
testicular 453. See also Germ cell tumours
Teriparatide 618
Testes 451–453
autonomously hyperfunctioning 429
development 412–413, 413f
failure to descend (cryptorchidism) 455
function. See Testicular function
germ cell tumours. See Seminoma
Leydig cells. See Leydig cell(s)
Sertoli cells. See Sertoli cell(s)
size, pubertal changes 415f, 416
Testicular cancer 453
germ cell tumours. See Seminoma
tumour markers 841–842
Testicular function 451
in chronic kidney disease 146
defective hormone synthesis and hormone 
receptor defects 456
effects of endocrine disrupting chemicals 453
evaluation 454–455
hypothalamo–pituitary control 452–453, 
453f. See also Spermatogenesis; 
Testosterone
Testosterone 262
biological actions 451–452, 452t
concentrations, plasma
age-related changes 457
borderline, interpretation 368
in cirrhosis 262, 262t
elevated in females, hirsuitism and 441
pituitary function assessment 352–353
deficiency
age-related 457
effect on calcium/bone metabolism 99
in females 439
hirsutism and 441
fetal 412–413, 451–452, 452t
secretion 452
in puberty 414
synthesis 452
fetal testes 412–413
human chorionic gonadotrophin 
stimulation test 422, 423f
in XY disorders of sex development. See 
XY disorders of sex development
Testosterone replacement therapy 371, 
456–457
Tests
comparison of results. See Comparison of 
results
factors affecting results 7–13
analytical 10–12
postanalytical 12–13
preanalytical 7–10
interpretation 13–16
normal vs. abnormal results 13
predictive value. See Predictive value of 
tests
requests 6, 7t
specific uses of 2–5. See also specific disorders. 
specific tests
Tetracosactide test 354, 355, 358, 372
Tetrahydrobiopterin deficiency 698
Tetrahydrocannabinol 802
Tetrahydrofolate (THF) 521, 522f
Thalassaemia(s) 550, 551, 552–554
α thalassaemia 552–553, 552t, 558
β thalassaemia 552, 553–554, 554b, 554t, 
557–558
epidemiology 550, 551f, 552
laboratory diagnosis 557–559, 557t, 558f
Thallium, antidote 794t
Thanatochemistry 875b. See also  
Post-mortem biochemistry
Thelarche 415
premature 429
Theophylline
poisoning 792t, 803
management 803
therapeutic drug monitoring 783
Therapeutic biomarkers 776
Therapeutic diets 208–209, 209t. See also 
Dietary management
Therapeutic drug monitoring (TDM) 4, 
767–786
aims 767
analytical methods 774, 774t
clinical interpretation 774–775
clinically useful, criteria 770b
continuing education 776
drug interactions 771, 772t
drugs measured 769–771, 770b
effective, criteria 771, 771b
accurate analysis 774, 774t
accurate patient information 772, 772t
appropriate clinical question 771–772
appropriate sample 772–774
effective action taken 774–775, 775f
relevant clinical interpretation 774–775
individual drugs 777–785
analgesic/anti-inflammatory drugs 777
antiarrhythmics and cardiac glycosides 
777–778
anticonvulsants 778–780
antidepressants 780
antifungal drugs 781–782
antimicrobials 781–782
antineoplastic drugs 782–783
antipsychotic drugs 780
antiretroviral drugs 782
antitubercular drugs 782
bronchodilator drugs 783
immunosuppressants 783–785
opiate and opioid drugs 785
integrating information 777
patient information requirements 772, 
772t
pharmacodynamic monitoring 776–777
pharmacogenetic studies 776
point-of-care testing 775
quality assurance 776
reporting 775
saliva 773
sampling 772–774
service provision 775–776
staff 775
therapeutic biomarkers 776
toxicity 771
turnaround time 775
units 775–776
use of 771–775
Therapeutic index 770
Thevetia 798, 806
Thiamin (vitamin B1) 187, 694
laboratory-based assessment 197
Thiamin (vitamin B1) deficiency 187, 197, 
212, 677
manifestations 187
encephalopathy 187, 686
peripheral neuropathy 187, 694
Thiazide diuretics
abuse 35
as cause of hypercalcaemia 103t
congenital nephrogenic diabetes insipidus 
management 43
effect on biochemical variables 8t
hypertension management in diabetes 
mellitus 309
low osmotic load hyponatraemia and 50
Thiazide-like diuretics, hypercalciuria 
treatment 176
Thiazolidinediones 315–316
adverse effects 316
hypoglycaemia risk 341
mechanism of action 315–316
Thin layer chromatography (TLC), inherited 
metabolic disease investigation 
470–471, 472
Thioctic acid 692
Thiopurine S-methyltransferase (TPMT) 862
Thirst
in acute hypernatraemia 38
in chronic kidney disease 147
928	
Index
Thirst (Continued)
compulsive water drinking 41, 681
in diabetes insipidus 39–40, 40f
excessive. See Polydipsia
non-osmotic control 32
osmoregulation 31–32, 31f
pathological 41
water deficiency with 44
water deficiency without 44–46, 45f
Thrombin 507, 508f
Thrombin time (TT) 508, 509t
Thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) 529
Thrombogenesis, cardiovascular disease risk 
and 753
Thrombomodulin 408–409
Thrombosis
risk in nephrotic syndrome 159. See also 
Venous thromboembolic disease
Thrombospondins 607, 607t
Thromboxane(s) 705
stress response 406
Thromboxane A2 705, 706f
Thymus 562
Thyrocytes 374, 374f
biochemical processes 375–376, 375f
Thyroglobulin (Tg) 375, 375f
antibodies to 386–387, 842
measurement 386
analytical and reporting requirements 
826t, 842
post-mortem biochemistry 879t
as tumour marker 823t
thyroid cancer monitoring 400, 824t, 
842
Thyroidal antigens, autoantibodies to 
386–387, 583, 601t
Thyroid cancer 399–400, 399b, 842
diagnosis 391f, 399–400, 400b, 842
medullary. See Medullary thyroid 
carcinoma
monitoring 842
screening 842
treatment 400
tumour markers 400, 812, 842
analytical and reporting requirements 
842
Thyroid crisis 388
Thyroid disease 373–374
autoimmune 386, 583, 601t
hypertension and 759
hyperthyroidism. See Hyperthyroidism
hypothyroidism. See Hypothyroidism
inflammation. See Thyroiditis
investigations. See Thyroid function tests
neoplasia. See Thyroid cancer
postpartum 399
screening 401
secondary 385
subclinical 385. See also specific diseases
Thyroidectomy
Graves disease treatment 392
thyroid cancer treatment 400
medullary thyroid cancer 813
Thyroid function 374
abnormalities
in chronic kidney disease 146–147, 146b. 
See also Thyroid disease
assessment 382–388
clinical evaluation of thyroid status 
382–383, 382t
following pituitary surgery 359
imaging techniques 387–388
in vitro tests. See Thyroid function tests
depression and 678, 680
extrathyroidal factors affecting 379–382
age 379
drugs 381–382, 381t
non-thyroidal illness 380–381, 381f
pregnancy 379, 385, 445
Thyroid function tests 383
free hormone measurements 383
assay nomenclature 384
methods 383
theoretical considerations 383
validity of commercial methods 383–384
interpretation 382t, 385
miscellaneous tests 386
in psychiatric disorders 680
anxiety disorders 677
depression 678, 680
post-traumatic stress disorder 679
reference ranges 385–386
selective use 384
significant changes 385–386
total hormone measurements 384
TSH measurement. See Thyroid 
stimulating hormone (TSH), 
measurement
Thyroid gland
disease. See Thyroid disease
embryology 374
follicular cells. See Thyrocytes
function. See Thyroid function
imaging 387–388
in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 
813. See also Thyroid scintiscanning
nodules 399–400
palpation 382–383
physiology 374
surgery. See Thyroid surgery
Thyroid hormone(s) 373–374
in anorexia nervosa 207
biological actions 374–375, 375b
catabolism 377
in chronic kidney disease 146b
classic feedback regulation 378, 378f
deiodination 377
effect on calcium/bone metabolism 99, 374
effects on metabolic indices 375, 375b
entry into tissues 377
free, measurement. see under Thyroid 
function tests
free hormone hypothesis 376–377
maternal–fetal transfer 380
nuclear action 377
receptors 377
reference ranges 385–386
resistance 377, 385, 400–401
thyroid stimulating hormone-secreting 
adenomas vs. 400–401, 401t
secretion 375–376, 375f
control 378–379
effect of radiotherapy 819
significant changes 385–386
storage 375–376, 375f
stress response 405
structure 374f
synthesis 374, 375–376, 375f
control 378–379, 378f, 379f
iodine and 376
total, measurement 384
transporters 376, 377
transport in blood 376. See also Thyroxine 
(T4); Tri-iodothyronine (T3)
Thyroid hormone replacement therapy 371, 
397–398
drugs affecting 381–382, 398
in pregnancy 380
Thyroiditis 398–399
De Quervain 399
Hashimoto. See Hashimoto disease
hyperthyroidism-producing 398–399
postpartum 399
Riedel 399
Thyroid peroxidase (TPO) 375, 375f, 376
antibodies 386
measurement 583
transplacental passage 380
inhibition by drugs 376
Thyroid scintiscanning 387–388, 391f
Graves disease 390, 391f
thyroid cancer 391f, 399–400
medullary 813
toxic adenoma 391f, 392
toxic multinodular goitre 391f, 392
Thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) 376, 378
age-related changes 379
deficiency 352, 360, 369
in hyperthyroidism 382t, 389
subclinical 394
measurement 383
interpretation of results 382t, 385
misleading results 385
reference ranges 385
significant changes 385–386
thyroid cancer monitoring 842
pregnancy-related changes 380, 385
receptor antibodies 387, 583
release, regulatory mechanisms 351, 379, 
379f
classic feedback regulation 378, 378f
stress response 405
suppression, thyroid cancer management 
400, 400b
Thyroid stimulating hormone-secreting 
adenomas (TSHomas) 366–367, 385, 
390t, 392–393
diagnosis 392–393
thyroid hormone resistance vs. 400–401, 
401t
treatment 393
Thyroid surgery
Graves disease treatment 391, 392
hypothyroidism following 396
Thyroid tissue, ectopic 390t, 393
Thyrotoxicosis
diabetes association 294, 295–296
eye signs 390t
hypokalaemic periodic paralysis with 53
Thyrotoxicosis factitia 390t, 393
Thyrotrophin releasing hormone (TRH) 
351, 378, 378f
stimulation of prolactin secretion 440
tests 356, 386
transplacental passage 380
Thyroxine (T4) 351
age-related changes 379
extrathyroidal deiodination 377
free, measurement 383
methods 383
reference ranges 385
significant changes 385–386
theoretical considerations 383
interpretation of thyroid function tests 382t
pregnancy-related changes 380
reference ranges 385
replacement therapy. See Thyroid 
hormone replacement therapy
secretion 375f, 376
stress response 405
structure 374f
synthesis 374, 375, 375f
total, measurement 384
reference ranges 385
significant changes 385–386
transporters 377
transport in blood 376. See also Thyroid 
hormone(s)
	
  Index	
929
Thyroxine-binding globulin (TBG) 376
abnormal concentrations, causes 384, 384b
Thyroxine-binding prealbumin (TBPA) 376
Tibolone 450
Tics 699
Time-dependent changes, effect on test 
results 8–9
Tissue factor (TF) 507
Tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1 
(TIMP-1), serum tests for hepatic 
fibrosis 244
Tissue oxygenation 65, 87–92
effects of acidosis 76
factors affecting 90t
haemoglobin role in oxygen transport 
88–89, 88f
impaired. See Hypoxia, tissue
oxygen delivery 89, 91, 91f
measurement 90–91
oxygen uptake
into blood. See Oxygen uptake
into tissues 90
pulmonary function 87–88
Tissue polypeptide antigen (TPA) 823t
Tissue protective receptors (TPR) 407
Tissue sampling techniques, fetal 444, 444f, 
444t
T lymphocytes 563t, 566
antigen receptor. See T cell receptor 
(TCR)
clonality 561
deficiency
associated infections 576, 577t
primary immunodeficiencies 578
TmP/GFR (tubular maximum for 
phosphate/glomerular filtration rate) 
111
estimation 111, 114, 123, 123f
factors regulating 111–112, 112t
in hyperphosphataemia 113–114
in hypophosphataemia 116
Tobramycin, therapeutic drug monitoring 
781
α-Tocopherol 185, 185f. See also Vitamin E
Toluene abuse 803
Tolvaptan 51
Tonicity 27
Total allowable error 12
Total carbon dioxide (TCO2), measurement 
73
Total iron binding capacity (TIBC) 520
Toxic adenoma 392
diagnosis 391f, 392
treatment 392
Toxic metabolites, in inherited metabolic 
diseases
blockage of site of action 482
reduction strategies 481–482
removal strategies 482–483
Toxic multinodular goitre 392
clinical features 392
diagnosis 391f, 392
pathogenesis 390t
treatment 392
Toxicodynamics 787
Toxicology screen 792t
Toxins
interaction with biological systems. See 
Poisoning
uraemic 143, 143b, 145–146
TP53 868
Trabecular bone 604
Trace elements 184, 190–192
laboratory-based assessment 198–199
parenteral nutrition 211. See also specific 
trace elements
Trait, definition 872
Transaminases. See Aminotransferases
Transcellular fluid 27
Transcobalamins 521
Transcription 846, 847f
definition 872
Transcription errors 12
Transcription factors, in erythropoiesis 516
Transcriptomics 871
Transfection, definition 872
Transferrin 242, 519
carbohydrate-deficient 242–243, 258
cerebrospinal fluid 662–663, 663f, 663t
in haemochromatosis/iron overload 242, 
265–266
liver function tests 242–243
plasma concentration, in malnutrition 
194–195
saturation 520
serum concentration, measurement 520
serum receptor, measurement 520
Transformation, definition 873
Transfusion, blood. See Blood transfusion
Transfusion reaction, investigation 512
Transgenic animal, definition 873
Transglutaminase 220
Transient hypogammaglobulinaemia of 
infancy 579
Transient paraproteinaemia 596
Transient tachypnoea of the newborn (TTN) 
486
Transitions 846–847, 848f
Translation 846, 847f
definition 873
Transplantation
immunological issues 599–600, 599b. See 
also specific types
Transthyretin (prealbumin) 376
in assessment of nutritional status 195
cerebrospinal fluid 663f, 663t, 666
gene mutation in familial amyloid 
polyneuropathy 696
in pregnancy 446
Transtubular potassium gradient (TTKG)
calculation 56–57, 62–63
hyperkalaemia 60–61
hypokalaemia 56–57
Transurethral prostatectomy syndrome 
(TURS) 46
Transversion 846–847, 848f
Trazodone overdose 804
Tremor 698
Triacylglycerols. See Triglyceride(s)
Tricarboxylic acid cycle 647–649
glucose metabolism and 278
Triceps skinfold (TSF) measurement 194
Tricyclic antidepressants
poisoning 803–804
clinical features 803
management 803–804
mechanisms 803, 804f
therapeutic drug monitoring 780
Trientine hydrochloride, Wilson disease 
treatment 267
Triglyceride(s) 704
absorption 224, 711
cardiovascular disease risk and  
752–753
dietary 182
digestion 224, 711
function 703t
measurement, investigation of lipid 
disorders 732
metabolism 234–235, 704
complete 69
incomplete 69
lipolysis in adipose tissue 713. See also 
Lipid metabolism
plasma concentration. See Triglycerides, 
plasma concentration
structure 704f
Triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (TGRLs) 715
Triglycerides, plasma concentration
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t, 732
critical difference 15t
effect of food intake 9
in nephrotic syndrome 160, 160t
in obese patients 8
Tri-iodothyronine (T3) 351
age-related changes 379
extrathyroidal production 377
free, measurement 383
methods 383
reference ranges 385
significant changes 385–386
theoretical considerations 383
pregnancy-related changes 380
reference ranges 385
secretion 375f, 376
stress response 405
structure 374f
synthesis 374, 375, 375f, 377
total, measurement 384
reference ranges 385
significant changes 385–386
transporters 377
transport in blood 376. See also Thyroid 
hormone(s)
Trimipramine, therapeutic drug monitoring 
780
13/14C-Triolein breath test 225
Triple acid–base disorders 87
Triple phosphate stones 177
Triple test 443, 444
Trisomies 848–849, 852
Trisomy 21. See Down syndrome
Troglitazone 315
Trophoblastic tumours. See Gestational 
trophoblastic neoplasia (GTN)
Tropical diabetes 293–295
Tropomyosin 740, 740f
Troponin(s) 740, 740f
as biomarkers of acute myocardial damage 
745–746, 745f
high-sensitivity troponins 746
elevated, causes other than acute coronary 
syndrome/heart failure 746–747, 747b
post-mortem biochemistry 879t, 880
Troponin C 740, 740f
Troponin I 740, 740f
as biomarker of acute myocardial damage 
745–746, 745f
Troponin T 740, 740f
as biomarker of acute myocardial damage 
745–746, 745f
True hermaphroditism 416, 417t, 423–425. 
See also Disorder of sex development 
(DSD)
True negatives 16, 16t, 17t
True positives 16, 16t, 17t
Trypsin 223
pancreatic function testing 217–218
Trypsinogen 217–218
Tryptase 582
post-mortem biochemistry 879t, 880
Tryptophan 809f
in carcinoid syndrome 808–809
catabolism, nicotinamide formation 188
Tuberculosis, therapeutic drug monitoring  
782
930	
Index
Tuberous xanthomas, in remnant 
hyperlipoproteinaemia 726, 726f
Tubular necrosis, acute. See Acute tubular 
necrosis (ATN)
Tubular proteinuria 160–162
glomerular proteinuria vs. 160, 160t, 161
renal disorders associated with 160–161
Tubuloglomerular feedback 128–129
Tubulointerstitial nephritis, causes 160–161, 
161b
Tumoral calcinosis 113–114
Tumour(s)
endocrine sequelae 818–820, 819t
loss of heterozygosity 868, 868f
markers. See Tumour markers; Cancer; 
Malignancy. specific types
Tumour-associated glycoprotein antigen 
(TA90-IC) 837
Tumourigenesis, multiple endocrine 
neoplasia type 1 811
Tumour lysis syndrome 114, 115, 816
Tumour markers 821–843
analytical requirements 826
characteristics 822t, 823t
choice of test 825
definition 821
evaluation of clinical utility of 821–825
International Reference Preparations 
(IRP) 826t
International Reference Reagents (IRR) 
826t
International Standards (IS) 826t
key points for use 843b
management of specific cancers 827–842
bladder cancer 827
breast cancer 827–829
cancers of unknown primary origin 842
cervical cancer 829
colorectal cancer 829–831
gastric cancer 831
gastrointestinal stromal tumours 831–832
germ cell tumours 832–834
gestational trophoblastic neoplasia 
834–835
hepatocellular carcinoma 264, 835–836
lung cancer 836–837, 836t
melanoma 837
neonatal and paediatric tumours 
837–838
ovarian cancer 838–840
pancreatic cancer 840
prostate cancer 840–841
testicular cancer 841–842
thyroid cancer. See Thyroid cancer
misleading results, causes 826, 826b
pre-analytical requirements 825
reasons for requesting 824t, 825
reporting of results 827, 833f
Tumour necrosis factor superfamily 573t
Tumour necrosis factor α (TNFα) 406
Tumour suppressor genes 867–869
definition 873
Tunica adventitia 741, 741f
Tunica intima 741, 741f
Tunica media 741, 741f
Turner syndrome 431
management 431
Two-cell theory 438
Tyrosinaemia 269, 269f
Tyrosinaemia type I 269, 462–463, 481–482, 
495–496
management 481–482, 482f, 495
neonatal 495
Tyrosinaemia type II 269
Tyrosinaemia type III 481–482, 482f
Tyrosine, metabolism 269f
U
Ubiquinol 656
Ubiquinone, in measurement of respiratory 
chain complex activity 656
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 862
bilirubin metabolism 493
in Crigler–Najjar syndrome 246, 494
in Gilbert syndrome 246
Ulcerative colitis
faecal calprotectin concentrations 
225–226. See also Inflammatory bowel 
disease (IBD)
Ultracentrifugation, lipoprotein separation 
733–734
Ultrafiltration methods, free thyroid 
hormone measurement 383
Ultrasonography
evaluation of internal anatomy in disorder 
of sex development 418
polycystic ovary syndrome 435f
screening for fetal malformation 443
thyroid gland 387
in multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2 
813
Undernutrition 200
therapeutic diets 209t. See also 
Malnutrition
Universal donors 510
Universal recipients 510
Unstable angina 738, 739f
Upstream, definition 873
Uraemia, sodium deficiency 35
Uraemic acidosis 78–79
Uraemic encephalopathy 686
Uraemic hypoglycaemia 344–345
Uraemic syndrome 129, 142–144
clinical features 142b, 143
definition 141
Uraemic toxins 143, 143b, 145–146
Urate
age-related changes 8
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
critical difference 15t
in hereditary renal hypouricaemia 173–174
in hyponatraemia 50
renal tubular handling 169t
Urate oxidase (uricase) 642
recombinant 642, 816
Urea
disposal 235, 235f
plasma concentration. See Urea, plasma 
concentration
renal tubular handling 169t
role of 129
synthesis 69–70
hydrogen ion production 68t
vitreous humour, post-mortem 
biochemistry 879t
Urea, plasma concentration
analytical goals 11t
analytical variation 11t
biological variation 11t
in chronic kidney disease 143
critical difference 15t
effect of food intake 9
hyponatraemia 50
in pregnancy 445
renal function assessment 135
Urea cycle 235, 463f
Urea cycle defects 463f
investigation
plasma ammonia measurement 469, 470
urinary orotic acid analysis 473
management
drugs 482–483, 483f
liver transplantation 480
metabolic load reduction 481
presentation at puberty 464–465
presentation in adulthood 465
presentation in neonates 462, 470
Urea kinetic modelling (UKM) 149
Ureterosigmoidostomy 54, 55
Ureterostomy, cutaneous 54
Uric acid 639–640
stones 175t, 177
synthesis 640f
Urinalysis
renal function assessment 130–131. See also 
Urine
Urinary acidification test 179
Urinary frequency 129
Urinary reducing substances, in inherited 
metabolic diseases 470–471
Urinary steroid profiling, in disorder of sex 
development 420
Urinary tract obstruction 34
Urine
abnormal colouration 130, 130b
acidification 70–71, 72f
albumin. See Albumin
amino acids, analysis 472, 472b
appearance 130–131
casts 131
dip-sticks 165
diversion from bladder 54
excessive output. See Polyuria
formation 31
glucose
measurement 299. See also Glycosuria
glycosaminoglycans, analysis 474
ketone testing. See Ketone testing
normal colouration 130
organic acid analysis 472–473, 473b
orotic acid analysis 473
pH 70–71, 131
protein
measurement 165–166, 166f. See also 
Protein, urinary excretion
sediment 131
specific gravity 131
turbidity 130–131
Urine collection
investigation of stone formers 178
nocturnal polyuria 43–44
proteinuria 165
Urine osmolality 31, 129, 131
chronic kidney disease 147
hyponatraemia 35, 50
neonates 487
sodium deficiency 35
Urobilinogen
enterohepatic circulation 237–238, 238f
in pre-hepatic jaundice 245
urinary 245
Urolithiasis 174. See also Renal calculi
Uromodulin (Tamm–Horsfall glycoprotein) 
131, 154–155
Uromodulin storage disease 154–155
Uroporphyrinogen decarboxylase (UROD) 
533–534, 535f
activity in hepatoerythropoietic porphyria 545
deficiency 544. See also Porphyria cutanea 
tarda (PCT)
Uroporphyrinogen III 533–534, 535f
Uroporphyrinogen synthase (UROS), 
deficiency. See Congenital 
erythropoietic porphyria (CEP)
Ursodeoxycholate 236
User satisfaction surveys, laboratory services 
23, 23b
Uterine changes, menstrual cycle 436
	
  Index	
931
Uterus, effects of radiotherapy 820
UV therapy, erythropoietic protoporphyria 547
V
Vacuolar protein sorting 10 protein 
(VPS10P) 721
Valine, metabolism 480f
Valproate
hepatotoxicity 682
therapeutic drug monitoring 779
Vancomycin, therapeutic drug monitoring 781
Vaptans 51, 814
Vardenafil 459
Variable number of tandem repeats (VNTRs) 
859, 859f
definition 873
Variegate porphyria (VP) 534t, 537–538, 537t
homozygous 542
molecular genetics 534–537, 537t
pathophysiology 538
screening 541t. See also Porphyria(s), acute
Vasa recta 128
Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) 
antagonists, macular oedema 
treatment 325–326
Vaso-occlusion, in sickle cell anaemia 555
Vasopressin. See Arginine vasopressin (AVP)
Vasopressinase 41
Vasopressinase-related diabetes insipidus 41
Vasopressin test 63
Vectors
definition 873
gene therapy 870
Vegetable consumption, cardiovascular 
disease risk and 757
Vegetarians, cardiovascular disease risk 757
Venesection
haemochromatosis treatment 266, 643
porphyria cutanea tarda treatment 544
Venlafaxine overdose 804
Venous thromboembolic disease
combined oral contraceptive-associated 
risk 448
D-dimer measurement 508
hormone replacement therapy-associated 
risk 449
Ventilation, alveolar 87
Ventilation–perfusion imbalance 87–88, 89
Ventilatory support. See Respiratory support
Ventricles, cerebrospinal fluid 661
Versican 606–607
Vertical sleeve gastrectomy (VSG) 206, 206f
Very long chain fatty acids (VLCFAs) 704
in inherited metabolic disease 462, 465
analysis 474
Very long chain hydroxyl-acyl-CoA 
dehydrogenase deficiency (VLCADD) 
465–466, 473
Very low density lipoprotein (VLDL) 704, 
706–707, 708
characteristics 708t
metabolism 711–712, 713–714
in nephrotic syndrome 160, 160t
in type 2 diabetes 290
Vesicant poisoning 790t
Villous adenoma of rectum 53–54
VIPoma 227
Viral hepatitis, acute. See Hepatitis, acute
Virilism 441–442
Virilization, external genitalia
differential 418f
females 413–414, 419, 423–425
Vision, role of vitamin A 184–185
Visual field assessment, patients with 
pituitary disease 360
Vitamin(s) 184–192
definition 96
fat-soluble 184–187, 192, 224
laboratory-based assessment 196–198
water-soluble 187–190, 192. See also specific 
vitamins
Vitamin A 184–185, 717
deficiency 185, 197
function 184–185, 703t
laboratory-based assessment 197
structure 184f
toxicity 103t, 185
Vitamin B1. See Thiamin (vitamin B1)
Vitamin B2. See Riboflavin (vitamin B2)
Vitamin B3. See Niacin
Vitamin B5. See Pantothenic acid
Vitamin B6 188, 188f
deficiency 188, 198, 694
hyperoxaluria and 176
laboratory-based assessment 198
toxicity 694
Vitamin B12 521
absorption 521
metabolism 476f, 521
disorders 476–477
requirements 519t, 521
serum concentration, measurement 
523–524
sources 519t, 521
status, laboratory determination 523–524
structure 521, 523f
Vitamin B12 deficiency 217, 219, 501, 521
causes 523
features 686
encephalopathy 686
peripheral neuropathy 693
spinal cord degeneration 688–689
laboratory investigation 523–524
in malignant disease 816t
serum folate concentration 521
treatment 693. See also Pernicious anaemia
Vitamin C 189
deficiency 189, 198
dietary sources 189
excess intake 189
function 189
laboratory-based assessment 198
Vitamin D 96–98
actions 97–98
circulating metabolites 97, 97t
function 703t
laboratory-based assessment 197, 621
measurement of metabolites 97t, 98
receptor 97–98
synthesis and metabolism 96–97, 97f
synthetic analogues 98
hyperparathyroidism treatment 627
toxicity 103, 197, 627
Vitamin D2 96
Vitamin D3 96
Vitamin D deficiency 197, 615, 617
haemolysis in neonates 529
in nephrotic syndrome 159–160
osteomalacia 620–621
in primary hyperparathyroidism 628–629
treatment 109
responses 622. See also Vitamin D 
supplementation
Vitamin D-dependent rickets (VDDR) 621
treatment 622
Vitamin D supplementation 98
in hyperparathyroidism 628–629
in nephrotic syndrome 159–160
in osteopenia of prematurity 492
in osteoporosis 617
in phosphopenic osteomalacia 623
Vitamin E 185–186
atherogenesis and 743
deficiency 185, 197, 689, 694
ataxia with 185, 699–700
function 703t
laboratory-based assessment 197
structure 185f
supplementation 185
Vitamin K 186–187
antagonists 186f
deficiency 186–187, 197
dietary 186
function 186, 703t
laboratory-based assessment 197
neonatal administration 186–187
structure 186f
toxicity 187
Vitreous humour, post-mortem biochemistry 
879–880, 879t
Vitronectin 607, 607t
Volatile substance abuse 792t, 803
von Gierke disease 277
von Hippel–Lindau syndrome 813
W
Waardenburg syndrome 851
Waist circumference 194
Waldenström macroglobulinaemia 591t, 595, 
595t, 693
'Washout' phenomenon 91
Wasting syndrome, cancer patients 818
Water 27
balance
in chronic kidney disease 147
in hyperthyroidism 389
in hypothyroidism 395
body content 27, 28t
pre-term vs. term infants 487, 487f
compulsive drinking 41, 681
deficiency
with thirst 44
without thirst 44–46, 45f
deficit calculation in hypernatraemia 62
fractional excretion of 878, 878b
intake control 31–32
intoxication, estimation of sodium required 
62
intracellular fluid and 30–32
metabolism, disorders 39–51
hypernatraemia. See Hypernatraemia
hyponatraemia. See Hyponatraemia
polyuria. See Polyuria
renal output, control 30–31
restriction, hyponatraemia management 
51
retention
ascites 259–260
in nephrotic syndrome 159
Water channels (aquaporins) 27, 30, 129
Water deprivation test 42, 63, 357, 372
interpretation 42, 63, 372
protocol 42, 63, 63t, 372
Water drinking
compulsive 41, 681. See also Thirst
Water load test 64, 64t
interpretation 64
Water-soluble vitamins 187–190, 192. See also 
specific vitamins
Watery diarrhoea–hypokalaemia achlorhydria 
(WDHA) syndrome 53–54
Weaning, inherited metabolic disease 
presentation 464
Wegener granulomatosis 639t
Weight, assessment of nutritional status 
193–194, 193t
932	
Index
Weight gain
growth hormone deficiency 203. See also 
Obesity
Weight loss 193, 205
amenorrhoea and 369, 440
in anorexia nervosa 207
in cancer patients. See Cancer cachexia
dietary approaches 205
in hyperthyroidism 388
pharmacological approaches 205
physical exercise 205
surgical approaches. See Bariatric surgery
Wermer syndrome. See Multiple endocrine 
neoplasia (MEN), type 1
Wernicke–Korsakoff syndrome 187, 686
Western blot, definition 873
Whipple's triad 227, 334
White blood cells (WBCs) 515, 562–566, 564f
in cerebrospinal fluid 661, 662
count 498, 498t, 562, 563t, 602
differential 498–499, 499f, 563t
low 504
raised 503–504
function 503
morphology 503–504, 504f, 564f
abnormal 502f, 504, 505f
in redistribution hyperkalaemia 58
in redistribution hypokalaemia 52
stress and 407
urinary casts 131. See also specific types
Wild type, definition 873
Williams syndrome 491
Wilson disease 191, 266–268, 496, 698–699
diagnosis 243, 254t, 255, 266–267, 267t
long-term management 267
Wolff–Chaikoff effect 376
Wolffian ducts 413, 451
Wolfram syndrome 39–40
Wolman disease 717
World Health Organization (WHO), 
diagnostic criteria for diabetes 
mellitus 282, 283b, 283t, 284b
X
Xanthine oxidase 639–640, 640f
deficiency 177–178
Xanthine stones 177–178
Xanthinuria 177–178
Xanthochromia 661, 667
Xanthomata 723t
in acquired hyperlipidaemia 729
eruptive, in chylomicronaemia syndrome 
725, 725f
in remnant hyperlipoproteinaemia 726, 726f
tendon, in familial hypercholesterolaemia 
726, 726f, 727f
X chromosome, gene mapping 845, 845f
Xeroderma pigmentosum 868–869
X-linked agammaglobulinaemia 578
X-linked dominant protoporphyria (XLDPP) 
533, 534t, 546–547
biochemical findings 536f, 537t
chronic complications and their 
managment 547
molecular genetics 537t
symptoms and signs 546–547
treatment 547
X-linked hyper-IgM syndrome 578
X-linked hypophosphataemic rickets 112, 
622, 623
X-linked inheritance 467, 468f, 850, 850f
X-linked nephrolithiasis 172
XX disorders of sex development 423, 424t
androgen excess 423–425, 424t
46XX ovotesticular DSD 423–425
46XX testicular DSD 423–425. See also 
Disorder of sex development (DSD)
XX males 412–413
XY disorders of sex development 419–420, 
424t, 426t, 456
evaluation of internal anatomy 418
investigations in adolescents 419–420
with low testosterone and high steroid 
precursor concentrations 425–427, 
426t
with low testosterone and low precursor 
concentrations 425, 426t
with normal testosterone, normal 
precursor and low DHT 
concentrations 427
with normal testosterone, normal 
precursor and normal DHT 
concentrations 427–428
physical examination 417. See also Disorder 
of sex development (DSD)
XY females 412–413
Xylose absorption test 222
Y
Y chromosome 412–413, 451
Yolk sac tumours 838
Z
Zellweger syndrome 462, 495
Zieve syndrome 529
Zinc 190
deficiency 190, 198
dietary sources 190
functions 190
laboratory-based assessment 198
toxicity 190
Wilson disease treatment 267
Zoledronate 617, 618, 631f, 632
Zollinger–Ellison syndrome 55, 216, 811
