Crash Course: Respiratory
Medicine
FIFTH EDITION
Hannah Lawrence, BSc, MBBS,
MRCP
Higher Specialist Trainee GIM and Respiratory Medicine,
Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust, Nottingham,
UK
Thomas Moore, BMedSci, BMBS,
MRCP
Core Medical Trainee, Nottingham University Hospitals
NHS Trust, Nottingham, UK
Series Editor
Philip Xiu, MA, MB BChir, MRCP
GP Registrar, Yorkshire Deanery, Leeds, UK
Shreelata Datta, MD, MRCOG,
LLM, BSc (Hons), MBBS
Honorary Senior Lecturer, Imperial College London,
Consultant Obstetrician and Gynaecologist, King's College
Hospital, London, UK
Faculty Advisor
Omar S. Usmani, MBBS, PhD,
FHEA, FRCP
Reader in Respiratory Medicine & Consultant Physician,
National Heart and Lung Institute (NHLI), Imperial College
London & Royal Brompton Hospital, Airways Disease
Section, London UK
Table of Contents
Cover image
Title page
Copyright
Series Editors’ foreword
Prefaces
Authors
Faculty Advisor
Acknowledgements
Series Editors’ acknowledgements
Section 1: Basic Science and Physiology
1: Overview of the respiratory system
Introduction to respiratory medicine
Overall structure and function
Basic concepts in respiration
Control of respiration
Other functions of the respiratory system
2: Organization of the respiratory tract
The respiratory tract
3: Pulmonary circulation
Introduction
Blood supply to the lungs
Pulmonary blood flow
4: Physiology, ventilation and gas exchange
Introduction
Lung volumes
Mechanics of breathing
Ventilation and dead space
Gaseous exchange in the lungs
5: Perfusion and gas transport
Overview
The ventilation–perfusion relationship
Gas transport in the blood
Gas transport and respiratory failure
Acid–base balance
6: Control of respiratory function
Control of ventilation
Coordinated responses of the respiratory system
Respiratory response to extreme environments
7: Basic pharmacology
Overview
Bronchodilators
Glucocorticosteroids
Mucolytics
Drug delivery devices
Drugs used in smoking cessation
Palliative medications used in respiratory medicine
References and further reading:
Section 2: Clinical Assessment
8: Taking a respiratory history
Introduction
General steps
History of presenting complaint
Breathlessness
Cough
Haemoptysis
Wheeze
Chest pain
Other associated symptoms
Systems review
Past medical history
Summary
9: Examination of the respiratory system
Introduction
Peripheral examination
10: The respiratory patient: clinical investigations
Introduction
Routine investigations
Invasive procedures
Investigations of pulmonary function
11: The respiratory patient: Imaging investigations
Introduction
Plain radiography
Ultrasound
Magnetic resonance imaging
Section 3: Respiratory Conditions
12: Acute respiratory failure
Introduction
Initial assessment of the acutely breathless patient
How to read an arterial blood gas result
Respiratory failure
Oxygen delivery and ventilation
13: The upper respiratory tract
Introduction
Emergency presentations of the upper respiratory tract
Disorders of the nose
Disorders of the larynx
Tracheostomy and laryngectomy
14: Asthma
Definition and background
Classification
Precipitating factors
Occupational asthma
Pathogenesis
Clinical features
Investigations and diagnosis
Treatment of stable asthma
Acute asthma
15: Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Introduction
Epidemiology
Aetiology
Genetic risk factors
Pathophysiology
Mucus hypersecretion
Clinical features
Complications
Investigation
Management
Management of acute exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease
16: Disorders of the interstitium
Interstitial lung disease
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Occupational lung diseases
17: Lung cancer
Bronchial carcinoma
Metastatic malignancy to the lung
Lung nodules
Mesothelioma
18: Respiratory infections
Pneumonia
Tuberculosis
Influenza
Fungal respiratory infections
19: Bronchiectasis and cystic fibrosis
Bronchiectasis
Cystic fibrosis
20: Pleural disease
Pleural effusion
Haemothorax
Chylothorax
Chest drain insertion
Pneumothorax
Tension pneumothorax
Neoplasms of the pleura: malignant mesothelioma
21: Thromboembolic disease and pulmonary hypertension
Pulmonary embolism
Pulmonary hypertension
22: Sleep disorders
Sleep apnoea
Obstructive sleep apnoea
Central sleep apnoea
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome
Useful links
23: Respiratory manifestations of systemic disease
Introduction
Sarcoidosis
Vasculitis
Systemic rheumatological diseases
HIV-related lung disease
Single best answer (SBA) questions
Chapter 1  Overview of the respiratory system
Chapter 2  Organization of the respiratory tract
Chapter 3  Pulmonary circulation
Chapter 4  Physiology, ventilation and gas exchange
Chapter 5  Perfusion and gas transport
Chapter 6  Control of respiratory function
Chapter 7  Basic pharmacology
Chapter 8  Taking a respiratory history
Chapter 9  Examination of the respiratory system
Chapter 10  The respiratory patient: clinical
investigations
Chapter 11  The respiratory patient: imaging
investigations
Chapter 12  Acute respiratory failure
Chapter 13  The upper respiratory tract
Chapter 14  Asthma
Chapter 15  Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Chapter 16  Disorders of the interstitium
Chapter 17  Lung cancer
Chapter 18  Respiratory infections
Chapter 19  Bronchiectasis and cystic fibrosis
Chapter 20  Pleural disease
Chapter 21  Thromboembolic disease and pulmonary
hypertension
Chapter 22  Sleep disorders
Chapter 23  Respiratory manifestations of systemic
disease
Extended-matching questions (EMQs)
Chapter 1  Overview of the respiratory system
Chapter 2  Organization of the respiratory tract
Chapter 4  Physiology, ventilation and gas exchange
Chapter 5  Perfusion and gas transport
Chapter 6  Control of respiratory function
Chapter 8  Taking a respiratory history
Chapter 9  Examination of the respiratory system
Chapter 10  The respiratory patient: clinical
investigations
Chapter 11  The respiratory patient: imaging
investigations
Chapter 12  Acute respiratory failure
Chapter 13  The upper respiratory tract
Chapter 14  Asthma
Chapter 15  Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Chapter 16  Disorders of the interstitium
Chapter 17  Lung cancer
Chapter 18  Respiratory infections
Chapter 19  Bronchiectasis and cystic fibrosis
Chapter 22  Sleep disorders
Chapter 23  Respiratory manifestations of systemic
disease
SBA answers
Chapter 1  Overview of the respiratory system
Chapter 2  Organization of the respiratory tract
Chapter 3  Pulmonary circulation
Chapter 4  Physiology, ventilation and gas exchange
Chapter 5  Perfusion and gas transport
Chapter 6  Control of respiratory function
Chapter 7  Basic pharmacology
Chapter 8  Taking a respiratory history
Chapter 9  Examination of the respiratory system
Chapter 10  The respiratory patient: clinical
investigations
Chapter 11  The respiratory patient: imaging
investigations
Chapter 12  Acute respiratory failure
Chapter 13  The upper respiratory tract
Chapter 14  Asthma
Chapter 15  Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Chapter 16  Disorders of the interstitium
Chapter 17  Lung cancer
Chapter 18  Respiratory infections
Chapter 19  Bronchiectasis and cystic fibrosis
Chapter 20  Pleural disease
Chapter 21  Thromboembolic disease and pulmonary
hypertension
Chapter 22  Sleep disorders
Chapter 23  Respiratory manifestations of systemic
disease
EMQ answers
Chapter 1  Overview of the respiratory system
Chapter 2  Organization of the respiratory tract
Chapter 4  Physiology, ventilation and gas exchange
Chapter 5  Perfusion and gas transport
Chapter 6  Control of respiratory function
Chapter 8  Taking a respiratory history
Chapter 9  Examination of the respiratory system
Chapter 10  The respiratory patient: clinical
investigations
Chapter 11  The respiratory patient: imaging
investigations
Chapter 12  Acute respiratory failure
Chapter 13  The upper respiratory tract
Chapter 14  Asthma
Chapter 15  Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
Chapter 16  Disorders of the interstitium
Chapter 17  Lung cancer
Chapter 18  Respiratory infections
Chapter 19  Bronchiectasis and cystic fibrosis
Chapter 22  Sleep disorders
Chapter 23  Respiratory manifestations of systemic
disease
Glossary
Index
Copyright
Content Strategist: Jeremy Bowes
Content Development Specialist: Alexandra Mortimer
Project Manager: Andrew Riley
Design: Christian Bilbow
Illustration Manager: Karen Giacomucci
Illustrator: MPS North America LLC
Marketing Manager: Deborah Watkins
© 2019, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved.
First edition 1999
Second edition 2003
Third edition 2008
Fourth edition 2013
Updated Fourth edition 2015
Fifth edition 2019
The right of Hannah Lawrence and Tom Moore to be
identified as author of this work has been asserted by them
in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act
1988.
No part of this publication may be reproduced or
transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic or
mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or any
information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to
seek permission, further information about the Publisher’s
permissions policies and our arrangements with
organizations such as the Copyright Clearance Center and
the Copyright Licensing Agency, can be found at our
website: www.elsevier.com/permissions.
This book and the individual contributions contained in it
are protected under copyright by the Publisher (other than
as may be noted herein).
Notices
Practitioners and researchers must always rely on their
own experience and knowledge in evaluating and using
any information, methods, compounds or experiments
described herein. Because of rapid advances in the
medical sciences, in particular, independent verification
of diagnoses and drug dosages should be made. To the
fullest extent of the law, no responsibility is assumed by
Elsevier, authors, editors or contributors for any injury
and/or damage to persons or property as a matter of
products liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any
use or operation of any methods, products, instructions,
or ideas contained in the material herein.
ISBN: 978-0-7020-7366-3
eISBN: 978-0-7020-7367-0
Printed in Poland
Last digit is the print number: 9  8  7  6  5  4  3  2  1
Series Editors’ foreword
Philip Xiu; Shreelata Datta
The Crash Course series was conceived by Dr Dan Horton-
Szar who as series editor presided over it for more than 15
years – from publication of the first edition in 1997, until
publication of the fourth edition in 2011. His inspiration,
knowledge and wisdom lives on in the pages of this book.
As the new series editors, we are delighted to be able to
continue developing each book for the twenty-first century
undergraduate curriculum.
The flame of medicine never stands still, and keeping this
all-new fifth series relevant for today's students is an
ongoing process. Each title within this new fifth edition has
been re-written to integrate basic medical science and
clinical practice, after extensive deliberation and debate.
We aim to build on the success of the previous titles by
keeping the series up-to-date with current guidelines for
best practice, and recent developments in medical research
and pharmacology.
We always listen to feedback from our readers, through
focus groups and student reviews of the Crash Course
titles. For the fifth editions we have reviewed and re-
written our self-assessment material to reflect today's
‘single-best answer’ and ‘extended matching question’
formats. The artwork and layout of the titles has also been
largely re-worked and are now in colour, to make it easier
on the eye during long sessions of revision. The new on-line
materials supplement the learning process.
Despite fully revising the books with each edition, we
hold fast to the principles on which we first developed the
series. Crash Course will always bring you all the
information you need to revise in compact, manageable
volumes that still maintain the balance between clarity and
conciseness, and provide sufficient depth for those aiming
at distinction. The authors are junior doctors who have
recent experience of the exams you are now facing, and the
accuracy of the material is checked by a team of faculty
editors from across the UK.
We wish you all the best for your future careers!
Prefaces
Hannah Lawrence; Thomas Moore
Omar S. Usmani
Authors
Thank you for taking the time to look through the latest
version of this textbook. It has been a great honour to be
involved in writing this update and the research and time
that has gone into this has helped to shape us as clinicians.
In this version we aim to make the text as relevant and
applicable to clinical practice as possible. We have tried to
use a combination of our clinical experience, exam
exposure and research interest to give a rounded view of
respiratory medicine from its physiological foundations
through final examinations and to the wards. We have used
the latest clinical guidelines and tried to give real practical
tips for how to think through respiratory problems,
whether in an exam or real life. We hope that with this
textbook as a foundation you can become a better doctor
and spark a lifelong interest in respiratory medicine.
Faculty Advisor
I was delighted to be asked again to work on this Fifth
Edition of the unique series that is Crash Course.
It is presently a particularly exciting and evolving time in
Respiratory Medicine, with new therapeutic treatments,
diagnostic methods and investigative approaches across
the spectrum of patients with respiratory diseases.
Hannah and Tom have undertaken a stellar job in
building upon and reworking the previous edition. Amongst
the many updates, they have focused their efforts and
attention into further integrating basic science and its
relevance with clinical practice and cross referencing from
bench to bedside and back to bench again throughout the
book. Their energy, oft waning after stretches of on calls,
was the backbone in progressing the book forward. It has
been a pleasure to work with them both.
I do hope you enjoy this edition and we all would
welcome your feedback should we embark in the future on
another edition!
Acknowledgements
Hannah Lawrence
Tom Moore
Omar S. Usmani
I would like to say thank you to Barabara Simmons for her
advice and understanding during the more difficult times of
writing. Thanks also to my friends, family and Del for their
support and patience.
I would like to personally thank my supportive parents
who have been invaluable with proof reading, wisdom,
inspiration and clarity. Without them I would never have
finished this work and I am eternally grateful for their help.
I would also like to thank Amy for your patience with me as
well as being relentlessly wonderful, and to my furry
brothers for their erudite contributions and helpfulness.
I would like to add a thank you to Barbara, our
development editor, who looked after us through all the
writing stages of the book and helped us with all our
editorial queries.
Series Editors’
acknowledgements
Phillip Xiu; Shreelata Datta
We would like to thank the support of our colleagues who
have helped in the preparation of this edition, namely the
junior doctor contributors who helped write the manuscript
as well as the faculty editors who check the veracity of the
information.
We are extremely grateful for the support of our
publisher, Elsevier, whose staffs’ insight and persistence
has maintained the quality that Dr Horton-Szar has set-out
since the first edition. Jeremy Bowes, our commissioning
editor, has been a constant support. Alex Mortimer and
Barbara Simmons our development editors have managed
the day-to-day work on this edition with extreme patience
and unflappable determination to meet the ever looming
deadlines, and we are ever grateful for Kim Benson’s
contribution to the online editions and additional online
supplementary materials.
SECTION 1
Basic Science and Physiology
1
Overview of the respiratory
system
Introduction to respiratory medicine
Understanding the respiratory system and the pathological
processes that can affect it is a fundamental part of modern
medicine. In the United Kingdom, approximately one in five
people are diagnosed with asthma, chronic obstructive
pulmonary 
disease 
(COPD) 
or 
another 
long-term
respiratory condition during their lifetime. Unfortunately, a
person dies from a respiratory disease every 5 minutes in
the United Kingdom. Worldwide in 2015, four of the top ten
causes of death were primary respiratory disorders (lower
respiratory 
infections, 
COPD, 
lung 
cancers 
and
tuberculosis), according to World Health Organization
statistics.
There is significant morbidity associated with respiratory
conditions, affecting millions of people across the world. In
health, we hardly notice our breathing; however, when our
breathing is compromised, we notice nothing else. In
addition 
to 
morbidity, 
there 
are 
health 
economic
consequences to respiratory disorders, with 8% of hospital
admissions in the United Kingdom in 2011 due to
respiratory 
disease. 
The 
implications 
of 
respiratory
problems influence all medical and surgical specialities. An
assessment of lung health is required before any surgery
requiring general anaesthesia and informs the decision-
making process prior to intensive care admission.
As a physician, understanding the respiratory system is
vital in day-to-day practice. Having a firm grasp on normal
physiology, control and response to insult is essential to
recognizing, predicting and effectively managing illness.
This book aims to outline the physiology, demonstrate how
assessments are carried out and discuss the common
conditions currently seen in respiratory medicine.
Overall structure and function
Respiration
Respiration refers to the processes involved in oxygen
transport from the atmosphere to the body tissues and the
release and transportation of carbon dioxide produced in
the tissues to the atmosphere.
Microorganisms rely on diffusion for the supply of oxygen
to and removal of carbon dioxide from their environment.
Humans, however, are unable to rely on diffusion because:
• Their surface area:volume ratio is too small.
• The diffusion distance from the surface of the body
to the cells is too large and the process would be far
too slow to be compatible with life.
Remember that diffusion time increases with the square
of the distance, and, as a result, the human body has had to
develop a specialized respiratory system to overcome this
problem. This system has two components:
1. A gas-exchange system that provides a large surface
area for the uptake of oxygen from, and the release
of carbon dioxide to, the environment. This function
is performed by the lungs.
2. A transport system that delivers oxygen to the
tissues from the lungs and carbon dioxide to the
lungs from the tissues. This function is carried out by
the cardiovascular system.
Structure
The respiratory system can be neatly divided into upper
respiratory tract (nasal and oral cavities, pharynx, larynx
and trachea) and lower respiratory tract (main bronchi and
lungs) (Fig. 1.1).
FIG. 1.1  Schematic diagram of the respiratory tract.
Upper respiratory tract
The upper respiratory tract has a large surface area and a
rich 
blood 
supply, 
and 
its 
epithelium 
(respiratory
epithelium) is covered by a mucus secretion. Within the
nose, hairs are present, which act as a filter. The function
of the upper respiratory tract is to warm, moisten and filter
the air so that it is in a suitable condition for gaseous
exchange in the distal part of the lower respiratory tract.
Lower respiratory tract
The lower respiratory tract consists of the lower part of the
trachea, the two primary bronchi and the lungs. These
structures are contained within the thoracic cavity.
Lungs
The lungs are the organs of gas exchange and act as both a
conduit for air flow (the airway) and a surface for
movement of oxygen into the blood and carbon dioxide out
of the blood (the alveolar capillary membrane).
The lungs consist of airways, blood vessels, nerves and
lymphatics, supported by parenchymal tissue. Inside the
lungs, the two main bronchi divide into smaller and smaller
airways until the end respiratory unit (acinus) is reached
(Fig. 1.2).
FIG. 1.2  The acinus, or respiratory unit. This part of the
airway is involved in gas exchange.
Acinus
The acinus is the part of the airway involved in gaseous
exchange (i.e., the passage of oxygen from the lungs to the
blood and carbon dioxide from the blood to the lungs). It
begins with the respiratory bronchioles and includes
subsequent divisions of the airway and alveoli.
Conducting airways
Conducting airways allow the transport of gases to and
from the acinus but are themselves unable to partake in
gas exchange. They include all divisions of the bronchi
proximal to, but excluding, respiratory bronchioles.
Pleurae
The lung, chest wall and mediastinum are covered by two
continuous layers of epithelium known as the pleurae. The
visceral pleura is the inner pleura covering the lung and
the parietal pleura is the outer pleura covering the chest
wall and mediastinum. These two pleurae are closely
opposed and are separated by only a thin layer of liquid.
The liquid acts as a lubricant and allows the two surfaces to
slip over each other during breathing.
Basic concepts in respiration
The supply of oxygen to body tissues is essential for life;
after only a brief period without oxygen, cells undergo
irreversible change and eventually die. The respiratory
system plays an essential role in preventing tissue hypoxia
by optimizing the oxygen content of arterial blood through
efficient gas exchange. The three key steps involved in gas
exchange are:
1. Ventilation.
2. Perfusion.
3. Diffusion.
Together these processes ensure that oxygen is available
for transport to the body tissues and that carbon dioxide is
eliminated (Fig. 1.3). If any of the three steps are
compromised, e.g., through lung disease, then the oxygen
content of the blood will fall below normal (hypoxaemia)
and levels of carbon dioxide may rise (hypercapnia) (Table
1.1). In clinical practice, we do not directly test for tissue
hypoxia but look for:
• Symptoms and signs of impaired gas exchange (e.g.,
breathlessness or central cyanosis).
• Abnormal results from arterial blood gas tests.
FIG. 1.3  Key steps in respiration. RA, Right atrium; LA, left
atrium; RV, right ventricle; LV, left ventricle.
Table 1.1
Common respiratory terms
Term
Definition
Hypocapnia
Decreased carbon dioxide tension in
arterial blood (PaCO2 < 4.8 kPa or
35 mmHg)
Hypercapnia
Increased carbon dioxide tension in
arterial blood (PaCO2 > 6 kPa or
45 mmHg)
Hypoxaemia
Deficient oxygenation of the arterial
blood
Hypoxia
Deficient oxygenation of the tissues
Hyperventilation
Ventilation that is in excess of
metabolic requirements (results in
hypocapnia)
Hypoventilation
Ventilation that is too low for metabolic
requirements (results in
hypercapnia)
Ventilation
Ventilation is the movement of air in and out of the
respiratory system. It is determined by both:
• The respiratory rate (i.e., number of breaths per
minute, normally 12–20).
• The volume of each breath, also known as the tidal
volume.
A change in ventilation in response to the metabolic
needs of the body, can therefore be brought about by
either:
• Altering the number of breaths per minute, or
• Adjusting the amount of air that enters the lungs
with each breath.
In practice, the most common response to hypoxaemia is
rapid, shallow breathing, which increases the elimination of
carbon dioxide and often leads to hypocapnia. However, it
should be noted that a raised respiratory rate, or
tachypnoea, is not the same as hyperventilation. The term
hyperventilation refers to a situation where ventilation is
too great for the body's metabolic needs.
The mechanisms of ventilation
The movement of air into and out of the lungs takes place
because of pressure differences caused by changes in lung
volumes. Air flows from a high-pressure area to a low-
pressure area. We cannot change the local atmospheric
pressure around us to a level higher than that inside our
lungs; the only obvious alternative is to lower the pressure
within the lungs. We achieve this pressure reduction by
expanding the size of the chest.
The main muscle of inspiration is the diaphragm, upon
which the two lungs sit. The diaphragm is dome shaped;
contraction flattens the dome, increasing intrathoracic
volume. This is aided by the external intercostal muscles,
which raise the ribcage; this results in a lowered pressure
within the thoracic cavity and hence the lungs, supplying
the driving force for air flow into the lungs. Inspiration is
responsible for most of the work of breathing; diseases of
the lungs or chest wall may increase the workload so that
accessory muscles are also required to maintain adequate
ventilation.
Expiration is largely passive, being a result of elastic
recoil of the lung tissue. However, in forced expiration
(e.g., during coughing), the abdominal muscles increase
intraabdominal pressure, forcing the contents of the
abdomen against the diaphragm. In addition, the internal
intercostal muscles lower the ribcage. These actions
greatly increase intrathoracic pressure and enhance
expiration.
Impaired ventilation
There are two main types of disorder that impair
ventilation. These are:
1. Obstructive disorders:
• Airways are narrowed and resistance to air
flow is increased.
• Mechanisms of airway narrowing include
inflamed and thickened bronchial walls (e.g.,
asthma), airways filled with mucus (e.g.,
chronic bronchitis, asthma) and airway
collapse (e.g., emphysema).
2. Restrictive disorders:
• Lungs are less able to expand and so the
volume of gas exchanged is reduced.
• Mechanisms include stiffening of lung tissue
(e.g., pulmonary fibrosis) or inadequacy of
respiratory muscles (e.g., Duchenne
muscular dystrophy).
Obstructive and restrictive disorders have characteristic
patterns of lung function, measured by pulmonary function
tests.
Ventilatory failure occurs if the work of breathing
becomes excessive and muscles fail. In this situation, or to
prevent it from occurring, mechanical ventilation is
required.
Perfusion
The walls of the alveoli contain a dense network of
capillaries bringing mixed-venous blood from the right
heart. The barrier separating blood in the capillaries and
air in the alveoli is extremely thin. Perfusion of blood
through these pulmonary capillaries allows diffusion, and
therefore gas exchange, to take place.
Ventilation:perfusion inequality
To achieve efficient gaseous exchange, it is essential that
the flow of gas (ventilation: V) and the flow of blood
(perfusion: Q) are closely matched. The V/Q ratio in a
normal, healthy lung is approximately one. Two extreme
scenarios 
illustrate 
mismatching 
of 
ventilation 
and
perfusion (Fig. 1.4). These are:
• Normal alveolar ventilation but no perfusion (e.g.,
owing to a blood clot obstructing flow).
• Normal perfusion but no air reaching the lung unit
(e.g., owing to a mucus plug occluding an airway).
FIG. 1.4  Ventilation:perfusion (V/Q) mismatching.
V/Q inequality is the most common cause of hypoxaemia
and underlies many respiratory diseases.
Diffusion
At the gas-exchange surface, diffusion occurs across the
alveolar capillary membrane. Molecules of carbon dioxide
and oxygen diffuse along their partial pressure gradients.
Partial pressures
Air in the atmosphere, before it is inhaled and moistened,
contains 21% oxygen. This means that:
• 21% of the total molecules in air are oxygen
molecules.
• Oxygen is responsible for 21% of the total air
pressure; this is its partial pressure, measured in
mmHg or kPa and abbreviated as PO2 (Table 1.2).
Table 1.2
Abbreviations used in denoting partial pressuresa
Abbreviation
Definition
PO2
Oxygen tension in blood (either arterial or venous)
PaO2
Arterial oxygen tension
PvO2
Oxygen tension in mixed-venous blood
PAO2
Alveolar oxygen tension
a Carbon dioxide tensions follow the same format. (PCO2, etc.)
Partial pressure also determines the gas content of
liquids, but it is not the only factor. Gas enters the liquid as
a solution, and the amount that enters depends on its
solubility. The more soluble a gas, the more molecules will
enter solution for a given partial pressure. The partial
pressure of a gas in a liquid is sometimes referred to as its
tension (i.e., arterial oxygen tension is the same as PaO2).
As blood perfusing the pulmonary capillaries is mixed-
venous blood:
• Oxygen will diffuse from the higher PO2 environment
of the alveoli into the capillaries.
• Carbon dioxide will diffuse from the blood towards
the alveoli, where PCO2 is lower.
Blood and gas equilibrate as the partial pressures
become the same in each and gas exchange then stops.
Oxygen transport
Once oxygen has diffused into the capillaries, it must be
transported to the body tissues. The solubility of oxygen in
the blood is low and only a small percentage of the body's
requirement can be carried in dissolved form. Therefore,
most of the oxygen is combined with haemoglobin in red
blood cells. Haemoglobin has four binding sites and the
amount of oxygen carried by haemoglobin in the blood
depends on how many of these sites are occupied. If they
are all occupied by oxygen, the molecule is said to be
saturated. The oxygen saturation (SaO2) tells us the relative
percentage of the maximum possible sites that can be
bound. Note that anaemia will not reduce SaO2; lower
haemoglobin means there are fewer available sites but the
relative percentage of possible sites that are saturated
stays the same.
The relationship between the partial pressure of oxygen
and percentage saturation of haemoglobin is represented
by the oxygen dissociation curve.
Diffusion defects
If the blood–gas barrier becomes thickened through
disease, then the diffusion of oxygen and carbon dioxide
will be impaired. Any impairment is particularly noticeable
during exercise, when pulmonary flow increases and blood
spends an even shorter time in the capillaries, exposed to
alveolar oxygen. Impaired diffusion is, however, a much
less common cause of hypoxaemia than V:Q mismatching.
Control of respiration
Respiration must respond to the metabolic demands of the
body. This is achieved by a control system within the
brainstem that receives information from various sources in
the body where sensors monitor:
• Partial pressures of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the
blood.
• pH of the extracellular fluid within the brain.
• Mechanical changes in the chest wall.
Based on the information they receive, the respiratory
centres modify ventilation to ensure that oxygen supply and
carbon dioxide removal from the tissues match their
metabolic requirements. The actual mechanical change to
ventilation is carried out by the respiratory muscles: these
are known as the effectors of the control system.
Common pitfalls 
It is easy to get confused about PaO2, SaO2 and oxygen
content. PaO2 tells us the pressure of the oxygen
molecules dissolved in plasma, not those bound to
haemoglobin. It is not a measure of how much oxygen is
in the arterial blood. SaO2 tells us how many of the
possible haemoglobin binding sites are occupied by
oxygen. To calculate the amount of oxygen you would
also need to know haemoglobin levels and how much
oxygen is dissolved. Oxygen content (CaO2) is the only
value that actually tells us how much oxygen is in the
blood and, unlike PaO2 or SaO2, it is given in units that
denote quantity (mL O2/dL).
Respiration can also be modified by higher centres (e.g.,
during speech, anxiety, emotion).
Other functions of the respiratory
system
Respiration is also concerned with a number of other
functions, 
including 
metabolism, 
excretion, 
hormonal
activity and, most importantly:
• The pH of body fluids.
• Regulation of body temperature.
Acid–base regulation
Carbon dioxide forms carbonic acid in the blood, which
dissociates to form hydrogen ions, lowering pH. By
controlling the partial pressure of carbon dioxide, the
respiratory system plays an important role in regulating the
body's acid–base status; lung disease can therefore lead to
acid–base disturbance. In acute disease, it is important to
test for blood pH and bicarbonate levels, and these are
included in the standard arterial blood gas tests.
Body temperature regulation
Body temperature is achieved mainly by insensible heat
loss. Thus, by altering ventilation, body temperature may
be regulated.
Metabolism
The lungs have a huge vascular supply and thus a large
number 
of 
endothelial 
cells. 
Hormones 
such 
as
noradrenaline (norepinephrine), prostaglandins and 5-
hydroxytryptamine are taken up by these cells and
destroyed. Some exogenous compounds are also taken up
by the lungs and destroyed (e.g., amphetamine and
imipramine).
Excretion
Carbon 
dioxide 
and 
some 
drugs 
(notably 
those
administered through the lungs, e.g., general anaesthetics)
are excreted by the lungs.
Hormonal activity
Hormones (e.g., steroids) act on the lungs. Insulin
enhances 
glucose 
utilization 
and 
protein 
synthesis.
Angiotensin II is formed in the lungs from angiotensin I (by
angiotensin-converting enzyme). Damage to the lung tissue
causes the release of prostacyclin PGI2, which prevents
platelet aggregation.
Chapter Summary
• Respiratory illness is a major cause of morbidity and
mortality in the United Kingdom and worldwide.
Knowledge of the respiratory system is important for
doctors in all specialities.
• The main functions of the respiratory system are gas
exchange and the transport of gases involved in
respiration, the process in tissues responsible for
production of energy.
• The three key steps involved in gas exchange are
ventilation, perfusion and diffusion. Defects in these
steps cause hypoxaemia.
• Ventilation is the movement of air into and out of the
lungs. This movement takes place owing to pressure
differences caused by changes in lung volumes. Air
flows from a high-pressure area to a low-pressure
area. Ventilation is determined by respiratory rate
and the volume of each breath.
• Perfusion of blood through a dense network of
capillaries brings mixed-venous blood from the right
heart into contact with the extremely thin barrier
separating the blood from the air in the alveoli.
• Diffusion occurs across the alveolar capillary
membrane. Molecules of CO2 and O2 diffuse along
their partial pressure gradients.
2
Organization of the
respiratory tract
The respiratory tract
The respiratory tract is the collective term for the anatomy
relating to the process of respiration, from the nose down
to the alveoli. It can be considered in two parts: that lying
outside the thorax (upper tract) and that within the thorax
(lower tract) (see Fig. 1.1). These will be considered in
turn, detailing both macroscopic and microscopic structure.
Macroscopic structure
Upper respiratory tract
Nose and nasopharynx
The nose is the part of the respiratory tract superior to the
hard palate. It consists of the external nose and the nasal
cavities, which are separated into right and left by the
nasal septum. The main functions of these structures are
olfaction (which is not detailed in this book) and breathing.
The lateral wall of the nasal cavity consists of bony ridges
called conchae or turbinates (Figs 2.1 and 2.2), which
provide a large surface area covered in highly vascularized
mucous membrane to warm and humidify inspired air.
Under each turbinate, there is a groove or meatus. The
paranasal air sinuses (frontal, sphenoid, ethmoid and
maxillary) drain into these meatuses via small ostia, or
openings.
FIG. 2.1  Lateral view of the nasal cavity showing the rich
blood supply.
FIG. 2.2  Frontal view of the nasal cavity drainage sites of
the paranasal sinuses.
Nasal neurovascular supply and lymphatic drainage
The terminal branches of the internal and external carotid
arteries provide the rich blood supply for the internal nose.
The sphenopalatine artery (from the maxillary artery) and
the anterior ethmoidal artery (from the ophthalmic) are the
two most important branches. Sensation to the area is
provided mainly by the maxillary branch of the trigeminal
nerve. Lymphatic vessels drain into the submandibular
node, then into deep cervical nodes.
Pharynx
The pharynx extends from the base of the skull to the
inferior border of the cricoid cartilage, where it is
continuous anteriorly with the trachea and posteriorly with
the oesophagus. It is described as being divided into three
parts: the nasopharynx, oropharynx and laryngopharynx,
which open anteriorly into the nose, mouth and larynx,
respectively (Fig. 2.3). The pharynx is part of both the
respiratory and gastrointestinal systems.
FIG. 2.3  Schematic diagram showing midline structures of
the head and neck.
The nasopharynx is situated above the soft palate and
opens anteriorly into the nasal cavities at the choanae
(posterior nares). During swallowing, the nasopharynx is
cut off from the oropharynx by the soft palate. The
nasopharynx contains the opening of the eustachian canal
(pharyngotympanic or auditory tube) and the adenoids,
which lie beneath the epithelium of its posterior wall.
Musculature, neurovascular supply and lymphatic
drainage
The tube of the pharynx is enveloped by the superior,
middle and inferior constrictor muscles, respectively. These
receive arterial blood supply from the external carotid
through the superior thyroid, ascending pharyngeal, facial
and lingual arteries. Venous drainage is by a plexus of
veins on the outer surface of the pharynx to the internal
jugular vein. Both sensory and motor nerve supplies are
from the pharyngeal plexus (cranial nerves IX and X); the
maxillary nerve (cranial nerve V) supplies the nasopharynx
with sensory fibres. Lymphatic vessels drain directly into
the deep cervical lymph nodes.
Larynx
The larynx is continuous with the trachea at its inferior
end. At its superior end, it is attached to the U-shaped
hyoid bone and lies below the epiglottis of the tongue. The
larynx consists of a cartilaginous skeleton linked by a
number 
of 
membranes. 
This 
cartilaginous 
skeleton
comprises the epiglottis, thyroid, arytenoid and cricoid
cartilages (Fig. 2.4). The larynx has three main functions:
1. As an open valve, to allow air to pass when
breathing.
2. Protection of the trachea and bronchi during
swallowing. The vocal folds close, the epiglottis is
pushed back covering the opening to the larynx, and
the larynx is pulled upwards and forwards beneath
the tongue.
3. Speech production (phonation).
FIG. 2.4  The larynx. (A) External view—anterior aspect. (B)
Median section through the larynx, hyoid bone and trachea.
Musculature
There are external and internal muscles of the larynx. One
external muscle, the cricothyroid, and numerous internal
muscles attach to the thyroid membrane and cartilage. The
internal muscles may change the shape of the larynx: they
protect the lungs by a sphincter action and adjust the vocal
folds in phonation.
Blood and nerve supply and lymphatic drainage
The blood supply of the larynx is from the superior and
inferior laryngeal arteries, which are accompanied by the
superior and recurrent laryngeal branches of the vagus
nerve (cranial nerve X). The internal branch of the superior
laryngeal nerve supplies the mucosa of the larynx above
the vocal cords, and the external branch supplies the
cricothyroid muscle. The recurrent laryngeal nerve supplies
the mucosa below the vocal cords and all the intrinsic
muscles apart from the cricothyroid. Lymph vessels above
the vocal cords drain into the upper deep cervical lymph
nodes; below the vocal cords, lymphatic vessels drain into
the lower cervical lymph nodes.
Trachea
The trachea is a cartilaginous and membranous tube of
about 10  cm in length. It extends from the larynx to its
bifurcation at the carina (at the level of the fourth or fifth
thoracic vertebra). The trachea is approximately 2.5 cm in
diameter and is supported by C-shaped rings of hyaline
cartilage. The rings are completed posteriorly by the
trachealis muscle. Important relations of the trachea within
the neck are:
1. The thyroid gland, which straddles the trachea, with
its two lobes positioned laterally, and its isthmus
anterior to the trachea with the inferior thyroid
veins.
2. The common carotid arteries, which lie lateral to the
trachea.
3. The oesophagus, which lies directly behind the
trachea, and the recurrent laryngeal nerve, which
lies between these two structures.
Lower respiratory tract
The lower respiratory tract is that contained within the
thorax, a cone-shaped cavity defined superiorly by the first
rib and inferiorly by the diaphragm. The thorax has a
narrow top (thoracic inlet) and a wide base (thoracic
outlet). The thoracic wall is supported and protected by the
bony thoracic cage, consisting of:
• Thoracic vertebrae
• Manubrium
• Sternum
• Twelve pairs of ribs with associated costal cartilages
(Fig. 2.5).
FIG. 2.5  The thoracic cage.
Each rib makes an acute angle with the spine and
articulates with the body and transverse process of its
equivalent thoracic vertebra, and with the body of the
vertebra above. The upper seven ribs (true ribs) also
articulate anteriorly through their costal cartilages with the
sternum. The 8th, 9th and 10th ribs (false ribs) articulate
with the costal cartilages of the next rib above. The 11th
and 12th ribs (floating ribs) are smaller and their tips are
covered with a cap of cartilage.
The space between the ribs is known as the intercostal
space. Lying obliquely between adjacent ribs are the
internal and external intercostal muscles. The intercostal
muscles support the thoracic cage and their functions
include:
• External intercostal muscles—raise the ribcage and
increase intrathoracic volume.
• Internal intercostal muscles—lower the ribcage and
reduce intrathoracic volume.
Clinical notes 
The neurovascular bundle
Deep to the intercostal muscles and under cover of the
costal groove lies a neurovascular bundle of vein, artery
and nerve (Fig. 2.6). Knowledge of this anatomy is
important during pleural procedures such as inserting a
chest drain to remove fluid or air from the pleural space.
Where possible the drain should be inserted above the rib
to minimize damage to the neurovascular bundle during
the procedure. More detail on pleural procedures can be
found in Chapter 20.
FIG. 2.6  Details of the subcostal neurovascular bundle.
Mediastinum
The mediastinum is situated in the midline and lies
between the two lungs. It contains the:
• Heart and great vessels
• Trachea and oesophagus
• Phrenic and vagus nerves
• Lymph nodes.
Pleurae and pleural cavities
The pleurae consist of a continuous serous membrane,
which covers the external surface of the lung (parietal
pleura) and is then reflected to cover the inner surface of
the thoracic cavity (visceral pleura) (Fig. 2.7), creating a
potential space known as the pleural cavity. The visceral
and parietal pleurae are so closely apposed that only a thin
film of fluid is contained within the pleural cavity. This
allows the pleurae to slip over each other during breathing,
thus reducing friction. Normally, no cavity is actually
present, although in pathological states this potential space
may expand, e.g., pneumothorax.
FIG. 2.7  The two pleurae form a potential space called the
pleural cavity.
Where the pleura is reflected off the diaphragm and onto
the thoracic wall, a small space is created which is not
filled by the lung tissue; this space is known as the
costodiaphragmatic recess. At the root of the lung (the
hilum) in the mediastinum, the pleurae become continuous
and form a double layer known as the pulmonary ligament.
The parietal pleura has a blood supply from intercostal
arteries and branches of the internal thoracic artery.
Venous and lymph drainage follow a return course similar
to that of the arterial supply. Nerve supply is from the
intercostal nerves and phrenic nerve; thus, inflammation of
the pleurae may cause ipsilateral shoulder-tip pain.
Conversely, the visceral pleura receives its blood supply
from the bronchial arteries. Venous drainage is through the
bronchial veins to the azygous and veins. Lymph vessels
drain through the superficial plexus over the surface of the
lung to bronchopulmonary nodes at the hilum. The visceral
pleura has an autonomic nerve supply. It is not sensitive to
pain but does have sensory fibres that detect stretch.
Lungs
The two lungs are situated within the thoracic cavity either
side of the mediastinum and contain:
• Airways: bronchi, bronchioles, respiratory
bronchioles, alveolar ducts, alveolar sacs and alveoli.
• Vessels: pulmonary artery and vein and bronchial
artery and vein.
• Lymphatics and lymph nodes.
• Nerves.
• Supportive connective tissue (lung parenchyma),
which has elastic qualities.
Hilum of the lung
The hilum or root of the lung (Fig. 2.8) consists of:
• Bronchi
• Vessels: pulmonary artery and vein
• Nerves
• Lymph nodes and lymphatic vessels
• Pulmonary ligament.
FIG. 2.8  Contents of the hilum.
Bronchopulmonary segments
The trachea divides to form the left and right primary
bronchi, which in turn divide to form lobar bronchi,
supplying air to the lobes of each lung. The lobar bronchi
divide again to give segmental bronchi, which supply air to
regions of lung known as bronchopulmonary segments. The
bronchopulmonary segment is both anatomically and
functionally distinct. This is important because it means
that a segment of diseased lung can be removed surgically
(e.g., in tuberculosis).
Surface anatomy
The surface anatomy of the lungs is shown in Figs 2.9–2.11.
FIG. 2.9  Lateral aspect of the lungs. The outer surfaces
show impression of the ribs. (A) Right lung; (B) left lung.
FIG. 2.10  Relations of the lung. (A) Right lung; (B) left
lung.
A 
Midclavicular 
line 
Apex of lung 
Horizontal -
-t-----l'c--t'l-'>l<">/ 
B 
fissure 
2 
4 
Oblique fissure 
Cardiac notch 
Paravertebral 
line 
Oblique --+---+--',)!----cf¥~ 
fissure 
10 
12 
Costodiaphragmatic 
recess of pleura 
c 
_J 
Midaxillary 
line 
2 
4 
Oblique---t----+..~nq/]4,J,.+---6 
fissure 
Costod iaph ragmatic----+-ft-.L:0>6-~4/J'!!;-i­
recess of pleura 
10 
12 
FIG. 2.11  Surface anatomy of the lungs and pleura
(shaded area). (A) Anterior aspect; (B) posterior aspect; (C)
lateral aspect. Numbering relates to relative rib position.
The respiratory tree and blood–air
interface
Respiratory tree
Inside the thorax, the trachea divides into the left and right
primary bronchi at the carina. The right main bronchus is
shorter and more vertical than the left (for this reason,
inhaled foreign bodies are more likely to pass into the right
lung). The primary bronchi within each lung divide into
secondary or lobar bronchi. The lobar bronchi divide again
into tertiary or segmental bronchi. The airways continue to
divide, always splitting into two daughter airways of
progressively smaller calibre until eventually forming
bronchioles.
Table 2.1 outlines the structure of the respiratory tree.
Each branch of the tracheobronchial tree can be classified
by its number of divisions (called the generation number);
the trachea is generation number zero. The trachea and
bronchi contain cartilage in their walls for support and to
prevent collapse of the airway. At about generation 10 or
11, the airways contain no cartilage in their walls and are
known as bronchioles. Airways distal to the bronchi that
contain no cartilage rely on lung parenchymal tissue for
their support and are kept open by subatmospheric
intrapleural pressure (radial traction).
Table 2.1
Gas, gaseous exchange; Con, conducting zone.
Bronchioles continue dividing for up to 20 or more
generations before reaching the terminal bronchiole.
Terminal bronchioles are those which supply the end
respiratory unit (the acinus).
The tracheobronchial tree can be classified into two
zones:
1. The conducting zone (airways proximal to the
respiratory bronchioles), involved in air movement
by bulk flow to the end respiratory units.
2. The respiratory zone (airways distal to the terminal
bronchiole), involved in gaseous exchange.
As the conducting zone does not take part in gaseous
exchange, it can be seen as an area of ‘wasted’ ventilation
and is described as anatomical dead space.
Acinus
The acinus is the part of the airway involved in gaseous
exchange (i.e., the passage of oxygen from the lungs to the
blood and carbon dioxide from the blood to the lungs). The
acinus consists of:
• Respiratory bronchioles, leading to the alveolar
ducts.
• Alveolar ducts, opening into two or three alveolar
sacs, which in turn open into several alveoli. Note:
alveoli can also open directly into alveolar ducts and
a few open directly into the respiratory bronchiole.
Multiple acini are grouped together and surrounded by
parenchymal tissue, forming a lung lobule (Fig. 2.12).
Lobules are separated by interlobular septa.
Cartilage rings 
Cartilage plates 
Tertiary 
bronchus 
Smaller----~u 
bronchus 
- --Visceral pleura 
1e+------Terminal 
bronchiole 
Respiratory -------,.~--­
bronchiole 
--------Alveoli in 
pulmonary 
lobule 
FIG. 2.12  Visual representation of the bronchial tree.
The blood–air interface
The blood–air interface is a term that describes the site at
which gaseous exchange takes place within the lung.
The alveoli are microscopic blind-ending air pouches
forming the distal termination of the respiratory tract;
there are 150–400 million in each normal lung. The alveoli
open into alveolar sacs and then into alveolar ducts. The
walls of the alveoli are extremely thin and are lined by a
single layer of pneumocytes (types I and II) lying on a
basement membrane. The alveolar surface is covered with
alveolar lining fluid. The walls of the alveoli also contain
capillaries (Fig. 2.13). It should be noted that:
• Average surface area of the alveolar–capillary
membrane = 50–100 m2.
• Average thickness of alveolar–capillary membrane =
0.4 mm.
FIG. 2.13  The alveolus.
This allows an enormous area for gaseous exchange and
a very short diffusion distance.
Microscopic structure
Upper respiratory tract
Nose and nasopharynx
The upper one-third of the nasal cavity is the olfactory area
and is covered in yellowish olfactory epithelium. The nasal
sinuses and the nasopharynx (lower two-thirds of the nasal
cavity) comprise the respiratory area, which is adapted to
its main functions of filtering, warming and humidifying
inspired air. These areas are lined with pseudostratified
ciliated columnar epithelium (Fig. 2.14), also known as
respiratory epithelium. With the exception of a few areas,
this pattern of epithelium lines the whole of the respiratory
tract down to the terminal bronchioles. Throughout these
cells are numerous mucus-secreting goblet cells with
microvilli on their luminal surface. Coordinated beating of
the cilia propels mucus and entrapped particles to the
pharynx, where it is swallowed, an important defence
against infection.
FIG. 2.14  Respiratory epithelium.
Adenoids
The nasopharyngeal tonsil is a collection of mucosa-
associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) that lies behind the
epithelium of the roof and the posterior surface of the
nasopharynx.
Oropharynx and laryngopharynx
The oropharynx and laryngopharynx have dual functions as
parts of both the respiratory and alimentary tracts. They
are lined with nonkeratinized stratified squamous (NKSS)
epithelium several layers thick and are kept moist by
numerous salivary glands.
Larynx and trachea
The epithelium of the larynx is made up of two types: NKSS
epithelium and respiratory epithelium. NKSS epithelium
covers the vocal folds, vestibular fold and larynx above this
level. Below the level of the vestibular fold (with the
exception of the vocal folds, which are lined with
keratinized stratified squamous epithelium), the larynx and
trachea are covered with respiratory epithelium.
Lower respiratory tract
The basic structural components of the walls of the airways
are shown in Fig. 2.15, although the proportions of these
components 
vary 
in 
different 
regions 
of 
the
tracheobronchial tree.
FIG. 2.15  Structure of the airways: (A) bronchial structure;
(B) bronchiolar structure. Note there are no submucosal
glands or cartilage in the bronchiole.
Trachea
The respiratory epithelium of the trachea is tall and sits on
a thick basement membrane separating it from the lamina
propria, which is loose and highly vascular, with a
fibromuscular band of elastic tissue. Under the lamina
propria lies a loose submucosa containing numerous glands
that secrete mucinous and serous fluid. The C-shaped
cartilage found within the trachea is hyaline in type and
merges with the submucosa.
Bronchi
The respiratory epithelium of the bronchi is shorter than
the epithelium of the trachea and contains fewer goblet
cells. The lamina propria is denser, with more elastic fibres,
and it is separated from the submucosa by a discontinuous
layer of smooth muscle. It also contains mast cells. The
cartilage of the bronchi forms discontinuous flat plates and
there are no C-shaped rings.
Tertiary bronchi
The epithelium in the tertiary bronchi is similar to that in
the bronchi. The lamina propria of the tertiary bronchi is
thin and elastic, being completely encompassed by smooth
muscle. Submucosal glands are sparse and the submucosa
merges with surrounding adventitia. MALT is present.
Bronchioles
The epithelium here is ciliated and cuboidal but contains
some Clara cells, which are nonciliated and secrete
proteinaceous fluid. Bronchioles contain no cartilage,
meaning these airways must be kept open by radial
traction, and there are no glands in the submucosa. The
smooth-muscle layer is prominent. Adjusting the tone of the
smooth-muscle layer alters airway diameter, enabling
resistance to air flow to be effectively controlled.
Respiratory bronchioles
The respiratory bronchioles are lined by ciliated cuboidal
epithelium, which is surrounded by smooth muscle. Clara
cells are present within the walls of the respiratory
bronchioles. Goblet cells are absent but there are a few
alveoli in the walls; thus, the respiratory bronchiole is a site
for gaseous exchange.
Alveolar ducts
Alveolar ducts consist of rings of smooth muscle, collagen
and elastic fibres. They open into two or three alveolar
sacs, which in turn open into several alveoli.
Alveoli
An alveolus is a blind-ending terminal sac of respiratory
tract (Fig. 2.16). Most gaseous exchange occurs in the
alveoli. Because alveoli are so numerous, they provide the
majority of lung volume and surface area. The majority of
alveoli open into the alveolar sacs. Communication between
adjacent alveoli is possible through perforations in the
alveolar wall, called pores of Kohn. The alveoli are lined
with type I and type II pneumocytes, which sit on a
basement membrane. Type I pneumocytes are structural,
whereas type II pneumocytes produce surfactant.
FIG. 2.16  The relationship of the alveoli to the respiratory
acinus.
Type I pneumocytes
To aid gaseous diffusion, type I pneumocytes are very thin;
they contain flattened nuclei and few mitochondria. Type I
pneumocytes make up 40% of the alveolar cell population
and 90% of the surface lining of the alveolar wall. Cells are
joined by tight junctions.
Type II pneumocytes
Type 
II 
pneumocytes 
are 
surfactant-producing 
cells
containing rounded nuclei; their cytoplasm is rich in
mitochondria and endoplasmic reticulum, and microvilli
exist on their exposed surface. These cells make up 60% of
the alveolar cell population, and 5%–10% of the surface
lining of the alveolar wall.
Alveolar macrophages
Alveolar macrophages are derived from circulating blood
monocytes. They lie on an alveolar surface lining or on
alveolar 
septal 
tissue. 
The 
alveolar 
macrophages
phagocytose foreign material and bacteria; they are
transported up the respiratory tract by mucociliary
clearance. They are discussed later in this chapter.
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
MALT is noncapsulated lymphoid tissue located in the walls
of 
the 
respiratory 
tract. 
It 
is 
also 
found 
in 
the
gastrointestinal and urogenital tract. MALT is a specialized
local system of concentrated lymphoid cells in the mucosa,
and has a major role in the defence of the respiratory tract
against pathogens (see below).
Pulmonary defence mechanisms
The lungs possess the largest surface area of the body in
contact with the environment. They are therefore extremely
susceptible to damage by foreign material and provide an
excellent gateway for infection. The lungs are exposed to
many foreign materials, e.g., bacteria and viruses, as well
as dust, pollen and pollutants. Defence mechanisms to
prevent infection and reduce the risk of damage by
inhalation of foreign material are thus paramount (Fig.
2.17). There are three main mechanisms of defence:
1. Physical
2. Humoral
3. Cellular.
FIG. 2.17  Summary of defences of the respiratory system.
Physical defences are particularly important in the upper
respiratory tract, whilst at the level of the alveoli, other
defences, such as alveolar macrophages, predominate.
Physical defences
Entry of particulates to the lower respiratory tract is
restricted by the following three mechanisms:
1. Filtering at the nasopharynx—hairs within the nose
act as a coarse filter for inhaled particles; sticky
mucus lying on the surface of the respiratory
epithelium traps particles, which are then
transported by the wafting of cilia to the
nasopharynx; the particles are then swallowed into
the gastrointestinal tract.
2. Swallowing—during swallowing, the epiglottis folds
back, the laryngeal muscles constrict the opening to
the larynx and the larynx itself is lifted; this prevents
aspiration of food particles.
3. Irritant C-fibre nerve endings—stimulation of irritant
receptors within the bronchi by inhalation of
chemicals, particles or infective material produces a
vagal reflex contraction of bronchial smooth muscle;
this reduces the diameter of airways and increases
mucus secretion, thus limiting the penetration of the
offending material.
Airway clearance
Cough reflex
Inhaled 
material 
and 
material 
brought 
up 
the
bronchopulmonary tree to the trachea and larynx by
mucociliary clearance can trigger a cough reflex. This is
achieved by a reflex deep inspiration that increases
intrathoracic pressure whilst the larynx is closed. The
larynx is suddenly opened, producing a high-velocity jet of
air, which ejects unwanted material at high speed through
the mouth.
Mucociliary clearance
Mucociliary clearance deals with a lot of the large particles
trapped in the bronchi and bronchioles and debris brought
up by alveolar macrophages. Respiratory epithelium is
covered by a layer of mucus secreted by goblet cells and
submucosal glands. Approximately 10–100 mL of mucus is
secreted by the lung daily. The mucus film is divided into
two layers:
1. Periciliary fluid layer about 6 μm deep, immediately
adjacent to the surface of the epithelium. The mucus
here is hydrated by epithelial cells. This reduces its
viscosity and allows movement of the cilia.
2. Superficial gel layer about 5–10 μm deep. This is a
relatively viscous layer forming a sticky blanket,
which traps particles.
The cilia beat synchronously at 1000–1500 strokes per
minute. Coordinated movement causes the superficial gel
layer, together with trapped particles, to be continually
transported towards the mouth at 1–3 cm/min. The mucus
and particles reach the trachea and larynx where they are
swallowed 
or 
expectorated. 
Importantly, 
mucociliary
clearance is inhibited by:
• Tobacco smoke
• Cold air
• Drugs (e.g., general anaesthetics and atropine)
• Sulphur oxides
• Nitrogen oxides.
The significance of mucociliary clearance is illustrated by
cystic fibrosis (see Ch. 19), in which a defect in chloride
channels throughout the body leads to hyperviscous
secretions. In the lung, inadequate hydration causes
excessive stickiness of the mucus lining the airways,
preventing the action of the cilia in effecting mucociliary
clearance. Failure to remove bacteria leads to repeated
severe respiratory infections, which progressively worsen
pulmonary function, ultimately leading to respiratory
failure.
Humoral defences
Lung secretions contain a wide range of proteins which
defend the lungs by various mechanisms. Humoral and
cellular aspects of the immune system are considered only
briefly here; for more information see Vanbergen et al.
(2019).
Antimicrobial peptides
A number of proteins in lung fluid have antibacterial
properties. 
These 
are 
generally 
low-molecular-weight
proteins such as defensins, lysozyme and lactoferrin.
Surfactant
The alveoli are bathed in surfactant, which reduces surface
tension and prevents the lungs from collapsing. Surfactant
also contains proteins that play an important role in
defence. Surfactant protein A (Sp-A) is the most abundant
of these proteins and is hydrophilic. Sp-A has been shown
to enhance the phagocytosis of microorganisms by alveolar
macrophages. Sp-D, which is also hydrophilic, has a similar
role to Sp-A in immune defence.
Sp-B and Sp-C, which are hydrophobic in nature, have a
more structural role in that they are involved in
maintaining the surfactant monolayer and further reducing
the surface tension. Surfactant deficiency in preterm
babies is a major contributor to infant respiratory distress
syndrome.
Immunoglobulins
Effector B lymphocytes (plasma cells) in the submucosa
produce immunoglobulins. All classes of antibody are
produced, 
but 
IgA 
production 
predominates. 
The
immunoglobulins 
are 
contained 
within 
the 
mucus
secretions in the respiratory tract and are directed against
specific antigens.
Complement
Complement proteins are found in lung secretions, in
particularly high concentrations during inflammation, and
they 
play 
an 
important 
role 
in 
propagating 
the
inflammatory response. Complement components can be
secreted by alveolar macrophages (see further in the
chapter) and act as chemoattractants for the migration of
cells such as neutrophils to the site of injury.
Antiproteases
Lung 
secretions 
contain 
a 
number 
of 
enzymes
(antiproteases) that break down the destructive proteases
released from dead bacteria, macrophages and neutrophils.
One of the most important of these antiproteases is α1-
antitrypsin, produced in the liver. Its role is to oppose
neutrophil elastase, which breaks down alveolar wall
connective tissue in the lungs.
Clinical notes 
α1-Antitrypsin deficiency
Genetic deficiency of α1-antitrypsin leads to early-onset
emphysema as a result of uninhibited protease activity in
the lung. Patients may also develop chronic hepatitis as
the abnormal protein accumulates within the liver. α1-
Antitrypsin deficiency has an autosomal codominant
mode of inheritance. Screening should be considered in
patients presenting with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease under the age of 40 years, with minimal smoking
history or a family history of disease.
Cellular defences
Alveolar macrophages
Alveolar macrophages are differentiated monocytes, and
are both phagocytic and mobile. They normally reside in
the lining of the alveoli where they ingest bacteria and
debris, before transporting them to the bronchioles to be
removed from the lungs by mucociliary clearance. Alveolar
macrophages can also initiate and amplify the inflammatory
response by secreting proteins that recruit other cells.
These proteins include:
• Complement components
• Cytokines (e.g., interleukin (IL)-1, IL-6) and
chemokines
• Growth factors.
Neutrophils
Neutrophils are the predominant cells recruited in the
acute inflammatory response. Neutrophils emigrate from
the intravascular space to the alveolar lumen, where
intracellular killing of bacteria takes place by two
mechanisms:
1. Oxidative—via reactive oxygen species
2. Nonoxidative—via proteases.
Chapter Summary
• The respiratory tract is the collective term for the
anatomy relating to the process of respiration, from
the nose down to the alveoli. It is divided into the
upper respiratory tract (outside the thorax) and the
lower respiratory tract (within the thorax).
• The two lungs are situated within the thoracic cavity
either side of the mediastinum. The mediastinum
contains the midline structures, including the heart,
great vessels, trachea, oesophagus and phrenic and
vagus nerves.
• The trachea is a cartilaginous and membranous tube
of about 10 cm in length. It extends from the larynx to
its bifurcation at the carina, where it divides into the
left and right main bronchi. The right main bronchus
is shorter and more vertical than the left.
• Bronchioles continue dividing for up to 20 or more
generations before reaching the terminal bronchiole.
Terminal bronchioles are those bronchioles which
supply the end respiratory unit (the acinus).
• Different types of specialist epithelium line the
respiratory tract at different stages, from respiratory
epithelium lining the trachea through to pneumocytes
lining the alveoli.
• Gas exchange takes place at the blood–air interface
within the acinus.
• The three main defence mechanisms to prevent
infection within the lungs are physical (e.g., airway
clearance and mucociliary clearance), humoral (e.g.,
surfactant) and cellular (e.g., alveolar macrophages).
Reference
Vanbergen O., Redhouse White G. Crash
Course: Haematology and Immunology. 2019.
Elsevier..
3
Pulmonary circulation
Introduction
This chapter will provide an overview of the pulmonary
circulation, exploring the important concepts and factors
that influence perfusion of the lungs. The pulmonary
circulation is a highly specialized system that is adapted to
accommodate the entire cardiac output both at rest and
during exercise. The pulmonary circulation can do this
because it is:
• A low-pressure, low-resistance system.
• Able to recruit more vessels with only a small
increase in arterial pulmonary pressure.
Sufficient perfusion of the lungs is only one factor in
ensuring that blood is adequately oxygenated. The most
important determinant is the way in which ventilation and
perfusion 
are 
matched 
to 
each 
individual 
alveolus.
Mismatching of ventilation:perfusion is a central fault in
many common lung diseases.
Blood supply to the lungs
The lungs have a dual blood supply from the pulmonary and
bronchial circulations. The bronchial circulation is part of
the systemic circulation.
Pulmonary circulation
Function
The primary function of the pulmonary circulation is to
allow the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide between
the blood in the pulmonary capillaries and air in the alveoli.
Oxygen is taken up into the blood whilst carbon dioxide is
released from the blood into the alveoli.
Anatomy
Mixed-venous blood is pumped from the right ventricle
through the pulmonary arteries and then through the
pulmonary capillary network. The pulmonary capillary
network is in contact with the respiratory surface (Fig. 3.1)
and provides a huge gas-exchange area, approximately 50–
100 m2. Gaseous exchange occurs (carbon dioxide given up
by the blood, oxygen taken up by the blood) and the
oxygenated blood returns through the pulmonary venules
and veins to the left atrium.
FIG. 3.1  The pulmonary circulation. LA, left atrium; LV, left
ventricle; RA, right atrium; RV, right ventricle.
Bronchial circulation
The bronchial circulation is derived from the systemic
circulation. The bronchial arteries (usually two left and one
right bronchial artery) derive from the thoracic aorta. They
form a broad network with pre- and postcapillary
anastomoses to the pulmonary circulation.
Function
The function of the bronchial circulation is to supply
oxygen, water and nutrients to:
• Lung parenchyma
• Airways—smooth muscle, mucosa and glands
• Pulmonary arteries and veins
• Pleurae.
An additional function of the bronchial circulation is in
the conditioning (warming) of inspired air.
Venous drainage
Both the pulmonary and bronchial circulation in the lungs
are drained by the pulmonary veins. These large veins
carry oxygenated blood from the lungs into the left atrium
of the heart.
Pulmonary blood flow
Mechanics of the circulation
Flow through the pulmonary artery is considered to be
equal to cardiac output. However, in real terms the flow of
blood through the pulmonary vasculature is actually
slightly less than cardiac output. This is because a
proportion of the coronary circulation from the aorta drains
directly into the left ventricle and the bronchial circulation
from the aorta drains into pulmonary veins, thus bypassing
the lungs.
Pressures within the pulmonary circulation are much
lower than in equivalent regions within the systemic
circulation (Table 3.1). The volume of blood flowing
through both circulations is approximately the same;
therefore the pulmonary circulation must offer lower
resistance than the systemic circulation.
Table 3.1
Pulmonary capillaries and arterioles cause the main
resistance to flow in the pulmonary circulation. Low
resistance in the pulmonary circulation is achieved in two
ways:
1. The large number of resistance vessels which exist
are usually dilated; thus, the total area for flow is
very large.
2. Small muscular arteries contain much less smooth
muscle than equivalent arteries in the systemic
circulation, meaning they are more easily distended.
Many other factors affect pulmonary blood flow and
pulmonary vascular resistance. These are discussed later.
Clinical notes 
Pulmonary haemorrhage and infarction
following pulmonary embolism
A pulmonary embolism (PE) causes a blockage of the
pulmonary circulation to an area of lung. The bronchial
circulation continues to supply the capillaries in the
affected area via capillary anastomoses. The bronchial
circulation is at higher pressure than the pulmonary
circulation. After a PE there is locally increased vascular
permeability owing to tissue injury at the site. Red blood
cells therefore move out of the vessels into the alveoli,
causing haemorrhage. As blood flow is restored, the red
cells will be reabsorbed. If, however, the pressure in the
bronchial 
circulation 
is 
also 
decreased 
(e.g., 
in
hypotension caused by shock) the area of lung may
infarct. In both cases this may be represented by a
wedge-shaped opacity at the periphery of the lung on a
chest X-ray or computed tomography scan. This is a
useful sign to look for in a patient with suspected PE.
Hydrostatic pressure
Hydrostatic pressure has three effects.
1. It distends blood vessels: as hydrostatic pressure
rises, distension of the vessel increases.
2. It is capable of opening previously closed capillaries
(recruitment).
3. It causes flow to occur; in other words, a pressure
difference (ΔP) between the arterial and venous
ends of a vessel provides the driving force for flow.
In situations where increased pulmonary flow is required
(e.g., during exercise), the cardiac output is increased,
which raises pulmonary vascular pressure. This causes
recruitment of previously closed capillaries and distension
of already open capillaries (Fig. 3.2), which reduces the
pulmonary vascular resistance to flow. It is for this reason
that resistance to flow through the pulmonary vasculature
decreases with increasing pulmonary vascular pressure.
FIG. 3.2  Effect of increased pressure on pulmonary
vasculature. To minimize pulmonary vascular resistance
when pulmonary arterial pressure increases, new vessels are
recruited and vessels that are already open are distended.
External pressure
Pressure outside a blood vessel will act to collapse the
vessel if the pressure is positive, or aid distension of the
vessel if the pressure is negative.
The tendency for a vessel to distend or collapse is also
dependent on the pressure inside the lumen. Thus, it is the
pressure difference across the wall (transmural pressure)
that determines whether a vessel compresses or distends
(Fig. 3.3).
FIG. 3.3  Transmural pressure in pulmonary capillary. PEXT,
External pressure; PHYD, hydrostatic pressure.
Pulmonary vessels can be considered in two groups (Fig.
3.4): alveolar and extraalveolar vessels.
FIG. 3.4  Alveolar and extraalveolar vessels. (A) Alveolar
vessels. (B) Extraalveolar vessels. (C) Alveolar vessels tend
to collapse on deep inspiration, whereas extraalveolar
vessels distend by radial traction.
Alveolar vessels
There is a dense network of capillaries in the alveolar wall;
these are the alveolar vessels. The external pressure
affecting these capillaries is alveolar pressure (normally
atmospheric pressure). As the lungs expand, the capillaries
are compressed. The diameter of the capillaries is
dependent on the transmural pressure (i.e., the difference
between hydrostatic pressure within the capillary lumen
and pressure within the alveolus). If the alveolar pressure
is greater than capillary hydrostatic pressure, the capillary
will tend to collapse.
Vessels in the apex of the lung may collapse as the alveoli
expand. This is more likely during diastole when venous
(capillary) pressure falls below alveolar pressure.
Extraalveolar vessels
Extraalveolar vessels are arteries and veins contained
within the lung tissue. As the lungs expand, these vessels
are distended by radial traction. The external pressure is
similar to intrapleural pressure (subatmospheric, i.e.,
negative); therefore, transmural pressure tends to distend
these vessels.
During inspiration, intrapleural pressure and thus the
pressure outside the extraalveolar vessels becomes even
more negative, causing these vessels to distend even
further, reducing vascular resistance and increasing
pulmonary blood flow. At large lung volumes, the effect of
radial traction is greater and the extraalveolar vessels are
distended more.
Effects of lung volume on alveolar capillaries
Hydrostatic pressure within the capillaries is lowered
during deep inspiration. This is caused by negative
intrapleural pressure around the heart. This changes the
transmural pressure and the capillaries tend to be
compressed, increasing pulmonary vascular resistance
(Fig. 3.5). At large lung volumes, the alveolar wall is
stretched and becomes thinner, compressing the capillaries
and 
increasing 
vascular 
resistance. 
This 
is 
a 
key
mechanism in the development of pulmonary hypertension
in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
FIG. 3.5  Alveolar pressure and capillary compression.
Smooth muscle within the vascular wall
Smooth muscle in the walls of extraalveolar vessels causes
vasoconstriction, thus opposing the forces caused by radial
traction and hydrostatic pressure within the lumen that are
trying 
to 
distend 
these 
vessels. 
Drugs 
that 
cause
contraction of smooth muscle therefore increase pulmonary
vascular resistance.
Measurement of pulmonary blood flow
Pulmonary blood flow can be measured by three methods:
1. Fick principle (Fig. 3.6).
FIG. 3.6  Fick principle for measuring pulmonary
blood flow. Fick theorized that the difference in
oxygen content between pulmonary venous blood
and pulmonary arterial blood must be due to uptake
of oxygen in the pulmonary capillaries, and
therefore the pulmonary blood flow can be
calculated.
2. Indicator dilution method: a known amount of dye is
injected into venous blood and its arterial
concentration is measured.
3. Uptake of inhaled soluble gas (e.g., N2O, nitrous
oxide): the gas is inhaled and arterial blood values
are measured.
Both the first and second methods give average blood
flow, whereas the third method measures instantaneous
flow. The third method relies upon N2O transfer across the
gas-exchange surface being perfusion-limited.
Fick theorized that, because of the laws of conservation
of mass, the difference in oxygen concentration between
mixed-venous blood returning to the pulmonary capillary
bed [O2]pv and arterial blood leaving the heart [O2]pa must
be caused by uptake of oxygen within the lungs. This
uptake must be equal to the body's consumption of oxygen
(see Fig. 3.6).
Hints and tips 
Factors affecting alveolar and extraalveolar
blood vessels
The factors affecting the alveolar capillary blood flow
are:
• Hydrostatic pressure
• Alveolar air pressure
• Lung volume.
The factors affecting extraalveolar vessels are:
• Hydrostatic pressure
• Intrapleural pressure.
• Lung volume
• Smooth muscle tone.
Distribution of blood within the lung
Blood flow within the normal (upright) lung is not uniform.
Blood flow at the base of the lung is greater than at the
apex, owing to the influence of gravity, and therefore the
pulmonary vessels at the lung base will have a greater
hydrostatic pressure than vessels at the apex.
The hydrostatic pressure exerted by a vertical column of
fluid is given by the relationship:
where ρ = density of the fluid, h = height of the column
and g = acceleration due to gravity. From the equation
above, it can be seen that:
• Vessels at the lung base are subjected to a higher
hydrostatic pressure.
• The increase in hydrostatic pressure will distend
these vessels, lowering the resistance to blood flow.
Thus, pulmonary blood flow in the bases will be
greater than in the apices.
In diastole, the hydrostatic pressure in the pulmonary
artery is 11 cmH2O. The apex of each lung is approximately
15  cm above the right ventricle, and the hydrostatic
pressure within these vessels is lowered or even zero.
Vessels at the apex of the lung are therefore narrower or
even collapse because of the lower hydrostatic pressure
within them.
Ventilation also increases from apex to base, but is less
affected than blood flow because the density of air is much
less than that of blood.
Pattern of blood flow
The distribution of blood flow within the lung can be
described in three zones (Fig. 3.7).
FIG. 3.7  Zones of pulmonary blood flow.
Zone 1 (at the apex of the lung)
In zone 1, arterial pressure is less than alveolar pressure:
capillaries collapse and no flow occurs. Note that, under
normal conditions, there is no zone 1 because there is
sufficient pressure to perfuse the apices.
Zone 2
In zone 2, arterial pressure is greater than alveolar
pressure, 
which 
is 
greater 
than 
venous 
pressure.
Postcapillary venules open and close depending on
hydrostatic pressure (i.e., hydrostatic pressure difference
in systole and diastole). Flow is determined by the arterial–
alveolar pressure difference (transmural pressure).
Zone 3 (at the base of the lung)
In zone 3, arterial pressure is greater than venous
pressure, which is greater than alveolar pressure. Blood
flow is determined by arteriovenous pressure difference as
in the systemic circulation.
Control of pulmonary blood flow
Pulmonary blood flow can be controlled by several local
mechanisms in order to improve the efficiency of gaseous
exchange, such as:
• Changes in hydrostatic pressure (as previously
discussed).
• Local mediators (thromboxane, histamine and
prostacyclin), as in systemic circulation.
• Contraction and relaxation of smooth muscle within
walls of arteries and arterioles.
• Hypoxic vasoconstriction (important mechanism in
disease).
Hypoxic vasoconstriction
The aim of breathing is to oxygenate the blood sufficiently.
This is achieved by efficient gaseous exchange between the
alveoli and the bloodstream. If an area of lung is poorly
ventilated and the alveolar partial pressure of oxygen
(alveolar oxygen tension) is low, perfusion of this area with
blood would lead to inefficient gaseous exchange. It would
be more beneficial to perfuse an area that is well
ventilated. This is the basis of hypoxic vasoconstriction.
Small pulmonary arteries and arterioles which are in
close proximity to the gas-exchange surface and alveolar
capillaries are surrounded by alveolar gas. Oxygen passes
through the alveolar walls into the smooth muscle of the
blood vessel by diffusion. The high oxygen tension to which
these smooth muscles are normally exposed acts to dilate
the pulmonary vessels. In contrast, if the alveolar oxygen
tension is low, pulmonary blood vessels are constricted,
which leads to reduced blood flow in the area of lung which
is poorly ventilated and diversion to other regions where
alveolar oxygen tension is high.
It should be noted that it is the partial pressure of oxygen
in the alveolus (PAO2) and not in the pulmonary artery
(PaO2) that causes this response. The actual mechanism
and 
the 
chemical 
mediators 
involved 
in 
hypoxic
vasoconstriction are not known.
Chapter Summary
The lungs have a dual blood supply from the pulmonary
and bronchial circulations. The bronchial circulation
derives from the systemic circulation.
• The primary function of the pulmonary circulation is
to allow the exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide
between the blood in the capillaries and the air in the
alveoli.
• Pressures with the pulmonary circulation are much
lower than within equivalent regions of the systemic
circulation.
• Pulmonary vascular resistance is low and falls with an
increase in cardiac output owing to capillary
recruitment and distension.
• Blood flow is not uniform throughout the lungs but is
greater at the lung bases than the apices. This is
owing to gravity and greater hydrostatic pressure in
the vessels at the lung bases.
• Hypoxic vasoconstriction reduces inefficient gas
exchange by decreasing blood flow to poorly
ventilated area of the lung.
Further reading
West J.B. Respiratory Physiology: The
Essentials, ninth ed. Lippincott. In: William &
Wilkins. 2012.
4
Physiology, ventilation and
gas exchange
Introduction
This chapter will provide an overview of the important
principles that govern ventilation and gas exchange in the
lungs. Ventilation is the flow of air in and out of the
respiratory system (breathing); it is defined physiologically
as the amount of air breathed in and out in a given time.
The function of ventilation is to maintain blood gases at
their optimum level, by delivering air to the alveoli where
gas exchange can take place. The movement of air in and
out of the lungs occurs because of pressure differences
brought about by changes in lung volume. The respiratory
muscles bring about these changes; however, the physical
properties of the lungs (i.e., lung elasticity and airway
resistance) also influence the effectiveness of ventilation. It
is important to understand the principles of ventilation, as
many lung diseases affect the physical properties of the
lung and therefore impair gas exchange by reducing the
delivery of oxygen to the lungs.
Lung volumes
The gas held by the lungs can be thought of in terms of
subdivisions, or specific lung volumes. Definitions of all the
lung volumes and capacities (which are a combination of
two or more volumes) are given in Table 4.1. Lung volumes
are important in clinical practice and are measured
through pulmonary function testing. A trace from a
spirometer, showing key lung volumes, is reproduced in
Fig. 4.1. Further details about performing spirometry and
other methods of measuring lung volumes, such as nitrogen
washout, helium dilution and plethysmography can be
found in Chapter 10.
Table 4.1
ERV, Expiratory reserve volume; IRV, inspiratory reserve volume; RV, residual
volume; TLC, total lung capacity; TV, tidal volume, VC, vital capacity.
FIG. 4.1  Lung volumes. ERV, Expiratory reserve volume;
FRC, functional residual capacity; IC, inspiratory capacity;
IRV, inspiratory reserve volume; RV, residual volume; TLC,
total lung capacity; TV, tidal volume; VC, vital capacity.
Residual volume and functional
residual capacity
After breathing out, the lungs are not completely emptied
of air. This is useful physiologically, as a completely
deflated lung requires significantly more energy to inflate it
than one in which the alveoli have not completely
collapsed. Even following a maximum respiratory effort
(forced expiration), some air remains within the lungs. This
occurs because as the expiratory muscles contract during
forced expiration, all the structures within the lungs
(including the airways) are compressed by the positive
intrapleural pressure. Consequently, the smaller airways
collapse before the alveoli empty completely, meaning
some air remains within the lungs; this is known as the
residual volume (RV).
During normal breathing (quiet breathing), the lung
volume oscillates between inhalation and exhalation. In
quiet breathing, after the tidal volume has been expired:
• Pressure outside the chest is equal to pressure inside
the alveoli (i.e., atmospheric pressure).
• Elastic forces tending to collapse the lung are
balanced by the elastic recoil trying to expand the
chest.
• This creates a subatmospheric (negative) pressure in
the intrapleural space.
The lung volume at this point is known as functional
residual capacity (FRC). Both RV and FRC can be
measured using nitrogen washout, helium dilution and
plethysmography (see Chapter 10).
Effects of disease on lung volumes
Understanding lung volumes is important because they are
affected by disease. Disease affects lung volumes in specific
patterns, 
depending 
on 
the 
pathological 
processes.
Diseases can be classified as obstructive, restrictive or
mixed, with each showing characteristic changes in lung
volumes (Fig. 4.2).
FIG. 4.2  Effect of disease on lung volumes. ERV, Expiratory
reserve volume; FRC, functional residual capacity; IRV,
inspiratory reserve volume; RV, residual volume; TLC, total
lung capacity; TV, tidal volume; VC, vital capacity.
FIG. 4.3  Anatomy of the diaphragm.
Obstructive disorders
This group of disorders is characterized by obstruction of
normal air flow caused by airway narrowing, which if not
reversed, leads to hyperinflation of the lungs as air is
trapped behind closed airways. The RV is increased as gas
that is trapped cannot leave the lung, and the RV:total lung
capacity (TLC) ratio increases. In patients with severe
obstruction, air trapping can be so extensive that vital
capacity is decreased. An example of an obstructive lung
disease where a patient develops gas trapping and
hyperinflation is chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD).
Restrictive disorders
Restrictive disorders result in stiffer lungs that cannot
expand to normal volumes. All the subdivisions of volume
are decreased and the RV:TLC ratio will be normal or
increased (where vital capacity has decreased more quickly
than RV). An example of a restrictive lung disorder is
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
Mechanics of breathing
In 
order 
to 
understand 
ventilation, 
we 
must 
also
understand the mechanism by which it takes place, i.e.
breathing. This section reviews the mechanics of breathing,
including:
• The pressure differences that generate air flow.
• The respiratory muscles that effect these pressure
differences.
Flow of air into the lungs
To achieve air flow into the lungs, we require a driving
pressure (remember that air flows from high pressure to
low pressure). Pressure at the entrance to the respiratory
tract (i.e., at the nose and mouth) is atmospheric (Patm).
Pressure inside the lungs is alveolar pressure (PA).
Therefore:
• If PA = Patm, no air flow occurs (e.g., at FRC).
• If PA < Patm, air flows into the lungs.
• If PA > Patm, air flows out of the lungs.
As atmospheric pressure is constant, alveolar pressure
must be altered to achieve air flow. If the volume inside the
lungs is changed, Boyle's law (see Box 4.1) predicts that
pressure inside the lungs will also change. In the lungs, this
is achieved by flattening of the diaphragm, which increases
the thoracic volume and thus lowers intrapleural pressure,
allowing air to flow into the lungs.
Hints and tips 
Boyle's law states that at a fixed temperature, the
pressure and volume of an ideal gas are inversely
proportional, i.e., as the volume of air within the lungs
increases, the pressure decreases.
In expiration, relaxation of the muscles of the chest wall
allows the elastic recoil of the lungs to cause contraction of
the lungs, reducing thoracic volume and increasing
intrapleural pressure and thus expulsion of gas.
Intrapleural pressure
Intrapleural pressure plays an important role in generating
air flow in and out of the lung during breathing. At FRC the
elastic recoil of the lungs is exactly balanced by the elastic
recoil of the chest wall (which acts to expand the chest).
These two opposing forces create a subatmospheric
(negative) pressure within the intrapleural space. Because
the alveoli communicate with the atmosphere, the pressure
inside the lungs is higher than that of the intrapleural
space. This creates a pressure gradient across the lungs,
known as transmural pressure. It is transmural pressure
(caused by the negative pressure in the pleural space) that
ensures that the lungs are held partially expanded in the
thorax. It effectively links the lungs (which are like
suspended balloons) with the chest wall.
Intrapleural pressure fluctuates during breathing but is
approximately 0.5  kPa at the end of quiet expiration. On
inspiration, intrathoracic volume is increased; this lowers
intrapleural pressure, making it more negative, causing the
lungs to expand and air to enter. On expiration, the
muscles of the chest wall relax and the lungs return to their
original size by elastic recoil, with the expulsion of air.
During quiet breathing, intrapleural pressure is always
negative; however, in forced expiration the intrapleural
pressure becomes positive, forcing a reduction in lung
volume with the expulsion of air.
Clinical notes 
Puncture wounds through the thorax can mean that the
intrapleural space is open to the atmosphere (a
pneumothorax). The pressures equilibrate and the lungs
are no longer held expanded, leading to collapse of the
lung. This requires prompt medical management—see
Chapter 20 for further information.
Muscles of respiration
We have seen that the chest must be expanded in order to
reduce intrapleural pressure and drive air into the lungs.
This section describes how the muscles of respiration bring
about this change in volume.
Thoracic wall
The thoracic wall is made up of (from superficial to deep):
• Skin and subcutaneous tissue.
• Ribs, thoracic vertebrae, sternum and manubrium.
• Intercostal muscles: external, internal and thoracis
transversus.
• Parietal pleura.
Situated at the thoracic outlet is the diaphragm, which
attaches to the costal margin, xyphoid process and lumbar
vertebrae.
Intercostal muscles
The action of the intercostal muscles is to pull the ribs
closer together. There are therefore two main actions:
1. External intercostal muscles pull the ribs upwards.
2. Internal intercostal muscles pull the ribs downwards.
External intercostal muscles
External intercostal muscles span the space between
adjacent ribs, originating from the inferior border of the
upper rib, and attaching to the superior border of the rib
below. The muscle attaches along the length of the rib,
from the tubercle to the costal–chondral junction, and its
fibres run forward and downward.
Internal intercostal muscles
Internal intercostal muscles span the space between
adjacent ribs, originating from the subcostal groove of the
rib above, and attaching to the superior border of the rib
below. The muscle attaches along the length of the rib from
the angle of the rib to the sternum, and its fibres run
downward and backward.
Diaphragm
The diaphragm is the main muscle of respiration (Fig. 4.3).
The central region of the diaphragm is tendinous; the outer
margin is muscular, originating from the borders of the
thoracic outlet.
The diaphragm has right and left domes. The right dome
is higher than the left, to accommodate the liver below.
There is a central tendon that sits below the two domes,
attaching to the xiphisternum anteriorly and the lumbar
vertebrae posteriorly.
Several 
important 
structures 
pass 
through 
the
diaphragm:
• The inferior vena cava passes through the right dome
at the level of the eighth thoracic vertebra (T8).
• The oesophagus passes through a sling of muscular
fibres from the right crus of the diaphragm at the
level of T10.
• The aorta pierces the diaphragm anterior to T12.
The diaphragm attaches to the costal margin anteriorly
and laterally. Posteriorly, it attaches to the lumbar
vertebrae by the crura (left crus at L1 and L2, right crus at
L1, L2 and L3). In addition, the position of the diaphragm
changes relative to posture: it is lower when standing than
sitting.
The motor and sensory nerve supply of the diaphragm is
from the phrenic nerve. Blood supply of the diaphragm is
from pericardiophrenic and musculophrenic branches of
the internal thoracic artery.
Hints and tips 
The phrenic nerve supplies the diaphragm (60% motor,
40% sensory). Remember, ‘nerve roots 3, 4 and 5 keep
the diaphragm alive’.
Function of the muscles of respiration
Breathing can be classified by direction of air movement
into inspiration and expiration and by activity level as quiet
or forced.
Quiet inspiration
In quiet inspiration, contraction of the diaphragm flattens
its domes. This action increases the volume of the thorax,
thus lowering intrapleural pressure and drawing air into
the lungs. At the same time, the abdominal wall relaxes,
allowing 
the 
abdominal 
contents 
to 
be 
displaced
downwards as the diaphragm flattens. During quiet
inspiration, the change in intrathoracic volume is mainly
caused by the movement of the diaphragm downwards.
Contraction of the diaphragm therefore comprises 75% of
the energy expenditure during quiet breathing.
The key muscle in quiet breathing is the diaphragm;
however, the intercostal muscles are involved. With the
first rib fixed, the intercostal muscles can expand the
ribcage by two movements:
1. Forward movement of the lower end of the sternum.
2. Upward and outward movement of the ribs.
During quiet inspiration, these actions are small and the
intercostal muscles mainly prevent deformation of the
tissue between the ribs, which would otherwise lower the
volume of the thoracic cage (Fig. 4.4).
FIG. 4.4  Action of the intercostal muscles in quiet
inspiration.
Quiet expiration
Quiet expiration is passive and there is no direct muscle
action. During inspiration, the lungs are expanded against
their elastic recoil. This recoil is sufficient to drive air out
of the lungs in expiration. Thus, quiet expiration involves
the controlled relaxation of the intercostal muscles and the
diaphragm.
Forced inspiration
In addition to the action of the diaphragm:
• Scalene muscles and sternocleidomastoids raise the
ribs anteroposteriorly, producing movement at the
manubriosternal joint.
• Intercostal muscles are more active and raise the
ribs to a far greater extent than in quiet inspiration.
• The 12th rib, which is attached to quadratus
lumborum, allows forcible downward movement of
the diaphragm.
• Arching the back using erector spinae also increases
thoracic volume.
During respiratory distress, the scapulae are fixed by
trapezius muscles. The rhomboid muscles and levator
scapulae, pectoralis minor and serratus anterior raise the
ribs. The arms can be fixed (e.g., by holding the back of a
chair), allowing the use of pectoralis major.
Forced expiration
Elastic recoil of the lungs is reinforced by contraction of
the muscles of the abdominal wall. This forces the
abdominal contents against the diaphragm, displacing the
diaphragm upwards (Fig. 4.5).
Abdominal 
contents 
- -- Abdominal 
muscles 
Abdominal contents pushing diaphragm upwards 
FIG. 4.5  Forced expiration.
Clinical box 
The 
features 
of 
forced 
inspiration/expiration 
are
important clinically. It is vitally important to detect
patients needing to use their accessory muscles to
breathe. These patients are in respiratory distress and, as
active respiration is energy intensive, they will eventually
tire. 
If 
you 
detect 
features 
of 
forced
inspiration/expiration in a patient on the wards or in the
emergency department, urgent action is required and
you should alert the medical team.
In addition, quadratus lumborum pulls the ribs down,
adding to the force at which the abdominal contents are
pushed against the diaphragm. Intercostal muscles prevent
outward deformation of the tissue between the ribs.
Ventilation and dead space
Minute ventilation
Minute ventilation (VE) is the volume of gas moved in and
out of the lungs in 1 minute. To calculate (VE) you need to
know:
• The number of breaths per minute.
• The volume of air moved in and out with each breath
(the tidal volume: VT).
The normal frequency of breathing varies between 12
and 18 breaths per minute. Normal tidal volume is
approximately 500 mL in quiet breathing. If a subject with
a tidal volume of 500  mL took 12 breaths a minute, the
minute ventilation would be 500 × 12 = 6000 mL/min.
Or, more generally:
where VE = minute ventilation, VT = tidal volume and f =
the respiratory rate (breaths/minute).
Alveolar ventilation
Not all inspired air reaches the alveoli; some stays within
the trachea and other conducting airways (also known as
dead space).
Therefore, two values of minute ventilation need to be
considered:
1. Minute ventilation (VE), as described above.
2. Minute alveolar ventilation (VE), which is the amount
of air that reaches the alveoli in 1 minute.
We can say that for one breath:
where VA = the volume reaching the alveolus in one breath,
and VD = the volume of dead space. Hence, in 1 minute:
Anatomical dead space
Not all air entering the respiratory system actually reaches
the alveoli and takes part in gas exchange. Anatomical dead
space describes those areas of the airway not involved in
gaseous exchange (i.e., the conducting zone). Included in
this space are:
• Nose and mouth
• Pharynx
• Larynx
• Trachea
• Bronchi and bronchioles (including the terminal
bronchioles).
The volume of the anatomical dead space (VD) is
approximately 150  mL (or 2  mL/kg of body weight).
Anatomical dead space varies with the size of the subject
and also increases with deep inspiration because greater
expansion of the lungs also lengthens and widens the
conducting airways.
Anatomical dead space can be measured using Fowler's
method, which is based on the single-breath nitrogen test
(Fig. 4.6). The patient makes a single inhalation of 100% O2
and exhales through a gas analyser that measures N2
concentration. On expiration, the nitrogen concentration is
initially low as the patient breathes out the dead-space
oxygen just inspired (100% O2). The concentration of N2
rises where the dead-space gas has mixed with alveolar gas
(a mixture of nitrogen and oxygen). As pure alveolar gas is
expired, nitrogen concentration reaches a plateau (the
alveolar plateau).
FIG. 4.6  Measurement of anatomical dead space.
If there were no mixing of alveolar and dead-space gas
during expiration there would be a stepwise increase in
nitrogen concentration when alveolar gas is exhaled (Fig.
4.6A). In reality, mixing does occur, which means that the
nitrogen concentration increases slowly, then rises sharply.
The dead-space volume is defined as the midpoint of this
curve (where the two shaded areas are equal in Fig. 4.6B).
Physiological dead space
Anatomical dead space is not the only cause of ‘wasted’
ventilation, even in the healthy lung. The total dead space
is known as physiological dead space and includes gas in
the alveoli that does not participate in gas exchange.
Alveolar dead space comes about because gas exchange
is suboptimal in some parts of the lung. If each acinus (or
end respiratory unit) were perfect, the amount of air
received by each alveolus would be matched by the flow of
blood through the pulmonary capillaries. In reality:
• Some areas receive less ventilation than others.
• Some areas receive less blood flow than others.
In a normal, healthy person, anatomical and physiological
dead space are almost equal, alveolar dead space being
very small (<  5  mL). However, when lung disease alters
ventilation:perfusion relationships the volume of alveolar
dead space increases.
Physiological dead space can be measured using the Bohr
equation. The method requires a sample of arterial blood
and involves the analysis of carbon dioxide in expired air.
Knowing 
that 
carbon 
dioxide 
is 
not 
exchanged 
in
respiratory units that are not perfused, and that carbon
dioxide in air is almost zero, it is possible to calculate the
volume of physiological dead space.
Lung compliance and the role of
surfactant
For ventilation to occur, the respiratory muscles must
overcome the mechanical properties of the lungs and
thorax, specifically the lung's tendency to elastic recoil.
The elastic properties of the lung are caused by:
• Elastic fibres and collagen in lung tissue.
• Surface tension forces in the lung created by the
alveolar–liquid interface.
Compliance describes the distensibility or ease of stretch
of lung tissue when an external force is applied to it.
Elasticity (E) is the resistance to that stretch. Therefore:
In respiratory physiology, we deal with:
• Compliance of the lung (CL).
• Compliance of the chest wall (CW).
• Total compliance (CTOT) of the chest wall and lung
together.
Lung compliance is the ease with which the lungs expand
under pressure. The pressure to inflate arises from the
transmural pressure (i.e., the difference between the
intrapleural pressure and the intrapulmonary pressure);
this is plotted against the change in volume on a pressure–
volume curve (Fig. 4.7). Compliance represents the slope of
the curve (ΔV:ΔP). You can see from the pressure–volume
curve that expanding the lung is like blowing up a balloon.
At first, high pressure is required for a small increase in
volume. Then the slope becomes steeper before flattening
out again.
FIG. 4.7  The pressure–volume curve.
Hints and tips 
Lung mechanics are often categorized as static or
dynamic. Static mechanics do not change with time; lung
statics help us to explore certain qualities of the lungs in
isolation. In real life, air in the respiratory tree flows (i.e.,
it changes with time). Therefore lung dynamics give us a
fuller 
picture 
of 
what 
actually 
happens 
during
respiration.
Lung compliance varies with lung volume; compliance is
greatest at the lower lung volumes and is smallest at higher
lung volumes. For these reasons, lung compliance is
sometimes quoted as specific lung compliance (sp.CL).
This change in lung compliance helps explain the
difference in ventilation of the lung between apex and base.
The lung volume in the base is less (because it is
compressed) relative to the apex. Thus, the base of the lung
has greater initial compliance than that of the apex.
Because both base and apex are subject to intrapleural
pressure 
changes 
of 
the 
same 
magnitude 
during
inspiration, the base of the lung will therefore expand to a
greater extent than the apex. This explains in part the
regional difference of ventilation.
Chest wall compliance
The chest wall has elastic properties; at FRC these are
equal and opposite to those in the lung (i.e., act to expand
the chest). During inspiration, elastic forces (acting to
expand 
the 
chest 
wall) 
aid 
inflation; 
however, 
at
approximately two-thirds of TLC, the chest wall has
reached its resting position and any expansion beyond this
point requires a positive pressure to stretch the chest wall.
Effect of disease on compliance
Emphysema and pulmonary fibrosis (Fig. 4.8) represent
two extremes of lung compliance in disease. In emphysema
the compliance of the lung is increased, i.e., the lung
becomes more easily distended. This is because of the
destruction of the normal lung architecture, including the
elastic fibres and collagen. Impaired elastic recoil means
that the lungs do not deflate adequately, contributing to air
trapping. In diseases that cause fibrosis, scar tissue
replaces normal interstitial tissue. As a result, the lungs
become stiffer and compliance decreases. Structural
changes in the thorax (e.g., kyphoscoliosis) can similarly
alter compliance of the chest wall and reduce the ability of
the chest wall to expand, thus producing a restrictive
ventilatory defect.
FIG. 4.8  Pressure–volume curves in disease.
Surface tension and surfactant
The elasticity, and therefore compliance of the lungs, is
dependent on two factors:
1. Elastic fibres in lung tissue.
2. The surface tension of the alveolar lining (this lining
is a thin film of liquid, the main component of which
is surfactant).
Surface tension is a physical property of liquids that
arises because fluid molecules have a stronger attraction to
each other than to air molecules. Molecules on the surface
of a liquid in contact with air are therefore pulled close
together and act like a skin. When molecules of a liquid lie
on a curved surface (e.g., in a bubble), surface tension acts
to pull that surface inwards. If the bubble is to be
prevented from collapsing, there must be an equal and
opposite force tending to expand it. This is provided by
positive pressure within the bubble.
The alveoli are lined with liquid and are in contact with
air. They can therefore be considered similar to tiny
bubbles. Laplace's law (see Box 4.1) tells us that the
smaller a bubble, the greater the internal pressure needed
to keep it inflated. If a bubble of about the same size as an
alveolus was lined with interstitial fluid and filled with air,
it would require an internal pressure in the order of 3 kPa
to prevent it from collapsing. The lungs would have a very
low compliance and the forces involved in breathing would
be extremely large. However, this is not the case because
the alveoli are not lined with interstitial fluid, they are lined
with surfactant.
Box 4.1
Law of Laplace
Laplace’s law states that ‘The pressure within a bubble is
equal to twice the surface tension divided by the radius’
where
P = pressure within bubble
T = surface tension
r = radius
• The smaller a bubble (i.e., the more curved the
surface), the larger the radial component.
• The larger the radial component, the greater the
tendency to collapse.
• Smaller bubbles must have a greater internal
pressure to keep them inflated.
Surfactant
Surfactant is manufactured by type II pneumocytes. It is
first stored intracellularly as lamellar bodies and then
released as tubular myelin (the storage form of active
surfactant). Once in the alveolar air space, the tubular
myelin unravels to form a thin layer of surfactant over type
I and type II pneumocytes.
Surfactant is 90% lipid (mostly a phospholipid called
dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine) and 10% protein. The
three mechanical functions of surfactant are:
1. Prevention of alveolar collapse (gives alveolar
stability).
2. Increase in lung compliance by reducing surface
tension of alveolar lining fluid.
3. Prevention of transudation of fluid into alveoli.
Surfactant also has immunological functions, which are
discussed in Chapter 2.
Prevention of alveolar collapse
There are two properties of surfactant that ensure alveolar
stability:
1. The surface tension of the alveolar lining fluid varies
with surface area. This is because surfactant reduces
surface tension in proportion to its surface
concentration. Surfactant is insoluble in water and
floats on the surface of the alveolar lining fluid. In
larger alveoli the surfactant is more dilute and thus
the surface tension is higher (Fig. 4.9)
FIG. 4.9  Surface tension in the alveoli. R, radius; P,
pressure.
2. There is interaction between adjacent groups of
alveoli. Therefore, collapsing alveoli pull on adjacent
alveoli, preventing further collapse. This is termed
alveolar interdependence.
Respiratory distress syndrome
Respiratory distress syndrome occurs in premature babies
of less than 32 weeks’ gestation; it is caused by a deficiency
of surfactant production by type II pneumocytes in an
immature lung. Difficulty in breathing occurs as alveoli
collapse leading to low lung compliance. There is diffuse
damage to alveoli with hyaline membrane formation. The
neonate’s breathing is rapid and laboured from the moment
of delivery, often with an expiratory grunt. Treatment is
with high-concentration oxygen therapy, and ventilator
support if required. A course of corticosteroids can be
given to a mother at risk of preterm delivery to decrease
the risk of respiratory distress syndrome.
Airway resistance
The previous section examined the elastic properties of the
lungs (i.e., those caused by surface tension and tissue
elasticity). However, in addition to overcoming the elastic
properties of the lung during breathing, dynamic resistance
to lung inflation must be overcome in order to provide
effective ventilation.
The total pressure difference (PTOT) required to inflate
the lungs is the sum of the pressure to overcome lung
compliance and the pressure to overcome dynamic
resistance:
where PCOM = pressure to overcome lung compliance and
PDYN = pressure to overcome the dynamic resistance.
Dynamic resistance itself comprises:
• Airway resistance.
• Resistance to tissues as they slide over each other—
viscous tissue resistance.
where PAR = pressure to overcome airways resistance and
PVTR = pressure to overcome viscous tissue resistance.
Viscous tissue resistance comprises approximately 20%
of the total dynamic resistance, i.e., the vast majority of the
total resistance is provided by the airways.
Airway resistance is an important concept because it is
increased in common diseases such as asthma and COPD.
It is defined as the resistance to flow of gas within the
airways of the lung.
Before we discuss airway resistance further, it is
important to outline pattern of flow.
Pattern of flow
The pattern of air flowing through a tube (e.g., an airway)
varies with the velocity and physical properties of the
airway (Fig. 4.10).
FIG. 4.10  (A) Laminar and (B) turbulent air flow.
Laminar flow
Laminar flow is described by Poiseuille's law (see Box 4.2).
In basic terms, Poiseuille's law means that the wider the
tube, the lower the resistance to air flow. Importantly, the
change in width is not directly proportional to the change
in resistance: for a given reduction in the radius there is a
16-fold increase in resistance. Narrower or longer pipes
have a higher resistance to flow and so flow rate is
reduced.
Box 4.2
Poiseuille’s law
Poiseuille’s law states that, for a fluid under laminar flow
conditions, the flow rate is directly related to the
pressure drop between the two ends of a tube and the
fourth power of the radius but inversely related to
viscosity and length of pipe:
where
F = flow rat
P = pressure drop
r = radius
η = viscosity
L = length of pipe
Remember, Poiseuille’s law applies to laminar, not
turbulent, flow.
Turbulent flow
Turbulent flow is much more likely to occur with:
• High velocities (e.g., within the airways during
exercise).
• Larger-diameter airways.
• Low-viscosity, high-density fluids.
Branching 
or 
irregular 
surfaces 
can 
also 
initiate
turbulence.
Sites of airway resistance
When breathing through the nose, approximately one-half
of the resistance to air flow occurs in the upper respiratory
tract. This is significantly reduced when mouth breathing.
Thus, approximately one-half of the resistance lies within
the lower respiratory tract. Assuming laminar air flow,
Poiseuille's law would predict that the major resistance to
air flow would occur in the airways with a smaller radius.
This is not the case because, although the individual
diameter of each airway is small, the total cross-sectional
area for flow increases (large number of small airways)
further down the tracheobronchial tree.
Hints and tips 
Remembering Poiseuille's law isn't drastically important,
but understanding it is! So, remember that, in laminar
flow, a small change in radius significantly affects either
flow rate or pressure drop required to achieve the same
flow. An example of this is bronchoconstriction in asthma.
• Flow varies directly with pressure drop.
• Flow varies inversely with viscosity.
In 
exercise, 
the 
airway 
resistance 
may 
increase
significantly, owing to high air flows inducing turbulence. It
is normal under these conditions to switch to mouth
breathing to reduce airway resistance.
It is important to note that resistance of the smaller
airways is difficult to measure. Thus, these small airways
may be damaged by disease and it may be some time
before this damage is detectable, thus representing a
‘silent’ zone.
Factors determining airway resistance
Factors affecting airway resistance are:
• Lung volume
• Bronchial smooth-muscle tone
• Altered airway calibre
• Change in density and viscosity of inspired gas.
Lung volume
Airways 
are 
supported 
by 
radial 
traction 
of 
lung
parenchyma and thus their diameter and resistance to flow
are affected by lung volume:
• Low lung volumes tend to collapse and compress the
airways, reducing their diameter and thus
increasing resistance to flow.
• High lung volumes tend to increase radial traction,
increasing the length and diameter of airways.
Bronchial smooth-muscle tone
Motor innervation of the smooth muscle of the airways is
via the vagus nerve. The muscle has resting tone
determined by the autonomic nervous system. This tone
can be affected by a number of factors (Fig. 4.11). Factors
acting to decrease the airway diameter include:
• Irritant and cough receptors, C-fibre reflex.
• Pulmonary stretch receptors.
• Mediator release—inflammatory mediators
(histamine, leukotrienes, etc.) cause
bronchoconstriction.
FIG. 4.11  Factors affecting bronchial smooth-muscle tone.
Factors acting to increase the airway diameter include:
• Carbon dioxide
• Catecholamine release
• Other nerves—nonadrenergic, noncholinergic nerves
cause bronchodilatation.
Increased smooth-muscle tone is very important in
asthma. Inflammatory mediators act to narrow the airways
and increase resistance to air flow.
Hints and tips 
Things to remember:
• The major site of airway resistance is medium-sized
bronchi.
• Eighty percent of the resistance of the upper
respiratory tract is presented by the trachea and
bronchi.
• Less than 20% of airway resistance is caused by
airways less than 2 mm in diameter.
Effect of transmural pressure on airway
resistance
Remember that the airways are not rigid tubes; they are
affected by the pressures around them. The pressure
difference between the gas in the airway and the pressure
outside the airway is known as the transmural pressure
difference. The pressure outside the airway reflects the
intrapleural pressure.
During inspiration
The pressure within the pleural cavity is always negative
and the alveolar pressure is greater than intrapleural
pressure. The transmural pressure difference is always
positive; thus the airway is distended (radial traction) (Fig.
4.12 A).
FIG. 4.12  Transmural pressure (Ptm) in (A) inspiration and
(B) forced expiration.
During expiration
The pressure within the alveolus is positive with respect to
the intrapleural pressure; hence, the alveolus stays open.
The transmural pressure difference, however, is dependent
upon expiratory flow rate and intrapleural pressure.
During 
forced 
expiration, 
the 
positive 
intrapleural
pressure is transmitted through the lungs to the external
wall of the airways. In addition, there is a dynamic pressure
drop from the alveolus to the airway caused by airway
resistance. This is greater at high expiratory flow rates.
Thus, the pressure in the lumen of the airway may be lower
than the external wall pressure (negative transmural
pressure), leading to collapse of the airways.
Thus, the harder the subject tries to exhale forcibly, the
more the airways are compressed, so the rate of expiration
does not rise as the increased pressure gradient (from
alveoli to atmospheric pressure) is offset by the reduced
calibre of the airways. This phenomenon is known as
dynamic compression of airways (Fig. 4.12B).
Dynamic compression of airways is greater at lower lung
volumes because the effect of radial traction holding the
airways open is less. Thus it can be seen that, for a specific
lung volume, there is a maximum expiratory flow rate
caused by dynamic compression of the airways (Fig. 4.13).
Any rate of expiration below this flow rate is dependent on
how much effort is made to expel the air from the lungs and
the flow is said to be effort dependent. At maximum
expiratory flow rate, any additional effort does not alter the
expiratory flow rate (because of dynamic compression of
airways) and the flow is said to be effort independent.
FIG. 4.13  Flow–volume curves made with spirometer. (A)
Maximum inspiration and forced expiration. (B) Slow
expiration initially, then forced. (C) Expiratory flow almost to
maximum effort. RV, Residual volume. TLC, total lung
capacity.
Dynamic compression in disease
In patients with COPD, dynamic compression limits
expiratory flow, even in tidal breathing. The main reasons
for this are:
• Loss of radial traction (owing to destruction of the
lung architecture) means the airways are more
readily compressed.
• Increased lung compliance, leading to lower alveolar
pressure and less force driving air out of the lungs.
The clinical consequences are airway collapse on
expiration and air trapping in the alveoli. Patients
sometimes demonstrate pursed-lip breathing as they
attempt to increase pressure on expiration and reduce the
amount of air trapped.
Measuring airway resistance
Airway resistance can be measured by plethysmography. In
practice, estimates of airway resistance are made every day
using simpler methods which rely on the relationship
between resistance and air flow. Peak expiratory flow rate
measures the maximum air flow achieved in a rapid, forced
expiration. Spirometry measures the volume exhaled in a
specified time (e.g., the forced expired volume in 1 second
or FEV1).
The work of breathing
The work of breathing is the work done by the respiratory
muscles to overcome the forces described above, i.e.,
resistance to air flow and the elastic recoil of the lungs.
The work done (W) to change a volume (ΔV) of gas at
constant pressure (P) is shown by the relationship below:
Work done is measured in joules: a volume change of
10 L at a pressure of 1 cmH2O = 1 J of energy.
Respiration normally represents just a small fraction of
the total cost of metabolism (approximately 2%). However,
the work required to inflate the lungs, along with this
percentage, will rise if:
• Lungs are inflated to a larger volume (e.g., COPD
and chronic severe asthma).
• Lung compliance decreases (e.g., fibrotic lungs).
• Airway resistance increases (e.g., COPD and
asthma).
• Turbulence is induced in the airways (e.g., in high
flow rates experienced during strenuous exercise).
In contrast, the work of breathing is reduced by
bronchodilators, which act to decrease airway resistance.
The increased work requirement can be dramatic in
patients with severe COPD; a great deal of energy is
required to just breathe. This can also be understood in
terms of the efficiency of ventilation (i.e., the amount of
work done divided by energy expenditure). Efficiency of
normal quiet breathing is low (about 10%), even in health.
In COPD, efficiency decreases and the work done
increases, so that all the oxygen supplied from increasing
ventilation is consumed by the respiratory muscles. The
work of breathing can be illustrated by volume–pressure
curves (Fig. 4.14).
Pressure 
B 
(1) 
E 
::::l g 
Pressure 
c 
(1) 
E 
::::l g 
Pressure 
FIG. 4.14  The work of breathing. (A) Graph of normal lung
volume against trans-lung pressure; (B) increased airway
resistance (e.g., in asthma); (C) decreased compliance (e.g.,
in fibrotic lung disease).
Hints and tips 
Try to relate these concepts to respiratory failure. A
patient with lung disease may be able to respond to
impaired gas exchange by raising the ventilatory rate,
leading to rapid, shallow breaths. This increases the work
of breathing. If lung disease is severe, the work of
breathing 
may 
become 
unsustainable. 
Respiratory
muscles tire, ventilatory failure ensues and the patient
must be mechanically ventilated to reduce the work of
breathing.
Gaseous exchange in the lungs
This section discusses how gas is transferred from the
alveoli to the bloodstream and from the bloodstream to the
alveoli.
Diffusion
Gas exchange between alveolar air and blood in the
pulmonary capillaries takes place by diffusion.
• Diffusion occurs from an area of high concentration
to an area of low concentration. Thus, the driving
force for diffusion is concentration difference (ΔC).
• Diffusion will occur until the concentration in the two
areas is equalized (i.e., net movement has ceased).
Random movement of particles continues to occur
and this is known as dynamic equilibrium.
Diffusion in the lungs occurs across a membrane and is
therefore governed by Fick's law. Fick's law tells us that
the rate of diffusion of a gas increases:
• As the surface area of the membrane increases.
• The thinner the membrane.
• The greater the partial pressure gradient across the
membrane.
• The more soluble the gas.
It is clear that the blood–gas interface, with its large
surface area of 50–100  m2 and average thickness of 0.4
μm, permits the high rate of diffusion required by the body.
The rate of diffusion across the alveoli is directly
dependent upon the difference in partial pressures.
Hints and tips 
The following will decrease the rate of oxygen diffusion
into the blood:
• Reduction in the overall alveolar surface area (e.g.,
emphysema).
• Increased distance for diffusion (e.g., emphysema).
• Increased thickness of the alveolar wall (e.g.,
fibrosing alveolitis).
• Reduction in the alveolar partial pressure of oxygen
(e.g., high altitude).
• Partial pressures are also expressed in kPa: 1 kPa is
7.5 mmHg.
Perfusion and diffusion limitation
At the gas exchange surface, gas transfer occurs through a
membrane into a flowing liquid. There are two processes
occurring (Fig. 4.15):
• Diffusion across the alveolar capillary membrane.
• Perfusion of blood through pulmonary capillaries.
FIG. 4.15  Gas transfer across the alveolar capillary
membrane. (1) Diffusion across membrane; (2) perfusion of
blood through pulmonary capillaries.
Uptake of a gas into the blood is dependent on its
solubility 
and 
the 
chemical 
combination 
(e.g., 
with
haemoglobin). If the chemical combination is strong, the
gas is taken up by the blood with little rise in arterial
partial pressure.
The solubility of nitrous oxide (N2O) in the blood is low,
and it does not undergo chemical combination with any
component of the blood. Thus, rate of transfer of gas into
the liquid phase is slow and partial pressure of the gas in
the blood rises rapidly (Fig. 4.16). This reduces the partial
pressure difference between alveolar gas and the blood and
hence the driving force for diffusion. Nitrous oxide is,
therefore, an example of a gas that is said to be perfusion
limited. Thus, the amount of nitrous oxide taken up by the
blood is dependent almost solely upon the rate of blood
flow through the pulmonary capillaries.
FIG. 4.16  Partial pressures of respiratory gases.
In the case of carbon monoxide (CO), the gas is taken up
rapidly and bound tightly by haemoglobin; the arterial
partial pressure rises slowly (Fig. 4.16). Thus, there is
always a driving force (partial pressure difference) for
diffusion (even at low perfusion rates) and the overall rate
of transfer will be dependent on the rate of diffusion. This
type of transfer is said to be diffusion limited. Thus, the
amount of carbon monoxide taken up by the blood is
dependent on the rate of diffusion of carbon monoxide from
the alveoli to the blood.
The transfer of oxygen is normally perfusion limited
because the arterial partial pressure of oxygen (PaO2)
reaches equilibrium with the alveolar gas (PAO2) by about
one-third of the way along the pulmonary capillary (Fig.
4.16); there is, therefore, no driving force for diffusion after
this point. However, if the diffusion is slow because of
emphysematous changes in the lung, then PaO2 may not
reach equilibrium with the alveolar gas before the blood
reaches the end of the capillary. Under these conditions,
the transfer of oxygen is diffusion limited.
Oxygen uptake in the capillary
network
The time taken for the partial pressure of oxygen to reach
its plateau is approximately 0.25 second. The pulmonary
capillary volume under resting conditions is about 75 mL,
which is approximately the same size as the stroke volume
of the right ventricle. Pulmonary capillary blood is
therefore replaced with every heartbeat, approximately
every 0.75 seconds. This far exceeds the time for transfer
of oxygen into the bloodstream.
During exercise, however, the cardiac output increases
and the flow rate through the pulmonary capillaries also
increases. Because the lungs have the ability to recruit new
capillaries and distend already open capillaries (see
Chapter 3), the effect of increased blood flow rate on the
time allowed for diffusion is not as great as one might
expect. In strenuous exercise, the pulmonary capillary
network volume may increase by up to 200 mL. This helps
maintain the time allowed for diffusion, although it cannot
keep it to the same value as at rest.
Carbon dioxide transfer
Diffusion rates of gas in blood are also of great importance
in respiratory medicine. Diffusion in liquids is directly
dependent upon the solubility of the gas, but inversely
proportional to the square root of its molecular weight.
Carbon monoxide diffuses 20 times more rapidly than
oxygen, but has a similar molecular weight. Thus, the
difference in rates of diffusion is caused by the much
higher solubility of carbon dioxide.
Under normal conditions, the transfer of carbon dioxide
is not diffusion limited.
Measuring diffusion
Carbon monoxide is the gas most commonly used to study
diffusing capacity. Because carbon monoxide is taken up
into the liquid phase very quickly, the rate of perfusion of
pulmonary capillaries does not significantly affect the
partial pressure difference between alveolar gas and the
bloodstream. 
In 
addition, 
carbon 
monoxide 
binds
irreversibly to haemoglobin and is not taken up by the
tissues.
In contrast, oxygen is not a good candidate for
calculating diffusing capacity because it binds reversibly to
haemoglobin; thus, mixed-venous partial pressure may not
be the same as that of blood entering the pulmonary
capillary bed. In addition, because oxygen is taken up less
quickly than carbon monoxide, perfusion has more of an
effect.
We therefore use the diffusing capacity of carbon
monoxide (DLCO) as a general measure of the diffusion
properties of the lung.
One of the methods used to measure diffusion across the
blood–gas interface is the single-breath method. A single
breath of a mixture of carbon monoxide and air is taken.
The breath is then held for approximately 10 seconds. The
difference 
between 
inspiratory 
and 
expiratory
concentrations of carbon monoxide is measured and
therefore the amount of carbon monoxide taken up by the
blood in 10 seconds is known. If the lung volume is also
measured by the helium dilution method, it is possible to
determine the transfer coefficient (KCO) or diffusion rate
per unit of lung volume. This is a more useful measure of
diffusion where lung volume has been lost: for example,
after surgery or in pleural effusion. Because there can be
many causes of a reduction in diffusing capacity, it is not a
specific test for lung disease. It is, however, a sensitive
test: it is able to demonstrate minor impediments to gas
diffusion.
Factors that decrease the rate of diffusion include:
• Thickening of the alveolar capillary membrane (e.g.,
in fibrosing alveolitis).
• Oedema of the alveolar capillary walls.
• Increased lining fluid within the alveoli.
• Increased distance for gaseous diffusion (e.g., in
emphysema).
• Reduced area of alveolar capillary membrane (e.g.,
in emphysema).
• Reduced flow of fresh air to the alveoli from terminal
bronchioles.
Chapter Summary
• The function of ventilation is to maintain blood gases
at their optimum level by delivering air to the alveoli
where gas exchange can take place.
• The gas held by the lungs is subdivided into specific
lung volumes. Lung volumes are important in clinical
practice and are measured through pulmonary
function testing. See Fig. 4.1 and Table 4.1.
• The muscles involved in respiration include the
diaphragm, internal and external intercostal muscles
and the abdominal wall muscles.
• Minute ventilation (VE) is the volume of gas moved in
and out of the lungs in 1 minute. Minute alveolar
ventilation (VE), which is the amount of air that
reaches the alveoli in 1 minute.
• Anatomical dead space describes those areas of the
airway not involved in gaseous exchange (i.e., the
conducting zone). Included in this space are the nose,
mouth, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi and
bronchioles (including the terminal bronchioles). The
volume of the anatomical dead space (VD) is
approximately 150 mL.
• Lung compliance is the ease with which the lungs
expand under pressure. The pressure to inflate arises
from the transmural pressure (the difference between
the intrapleural pressure and the intrapulmonary
pressure).
• Alveoli are lined with surfactant. Surfactant prevents
alveolar collapse, increases lung compliance by
reducing surface tension of alveolar lining fluid and
prevents transudation of fluid into alveoli.
• Gas exchange between alveolar air and blood in the
pulmonary capillaries takes place by diffusion from an
area of high concentration to an area of low
concentration. The driving force for diffusion is
concentration difference.
5
Perfusion and gas
transport
Overview
The pulmonary circulation is a highly specialized system
adapted to accommodate the entire cardiac output, both at
rest and during exercise, facilitated by its low pressure, low
resistance and ability to recruit more vessels with only a
slight increase in arterial pulmonary pressure.
However, good perfusion is not enough to ensure that the
blood is adequately oxygenated. The most important
determinant in arterial blood gas composition is the way in
which ventilation (V) and perfusion (Q) are matched to each
alveolus. Mismatching of V:Q is a central fault in many
common lung diseases.
The ability of the lungs to change minute ventilation, and
therefore alter the rate of excretion of carbon dioxide, gives
the respiratory system a key role in maintaining the body's
acid–base status. This chapter therefore also reviews the
fundamentals of acid–base balance and discusses the
common acid–base disturbances.
The ventilation–perfusion relationship
Basic concepts
To achieve efficient gaseous exchange, it is essential that
the flow of gas (V) and the flow of blood (Q) are closely
matched. The ideal situation would be where:
• All alveoli are ventilated equally with gas of identical
composition and pressure.
• All pulmonary capillaries in the alveolar wall are
perfused with equal amounts of mixed-venous blood.
Unfortunately, this is not the case, as neither ventilation
nor perfusion is uniform throughout the lung. This carries
certain clinical implications, as outlined further in the
chapter.
The partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli determines
the amount of oxygen transferred to the blood. Two factors
affect the partial pressure of oxygen in the alveoli:
1. The amount of ventilation (i.e., the addition of
oxygen to the alveolar compartment).
2. The perfusion of blood through pulmonary capillaries
(i.e., the removal of oxygen from the alveolar
compartment).
It is the ratio of ventilation to perfusion that determines
the concentration of oxygen in the alveolar compartment.
Ventilation:perfusion ratio
By looking at the V:Q ratio, we can see how well ventilation
and perfusion are matched. By definition:
where VA = alveolar minute ventilation (usually about 4.2
L/min) and Q = pulmonary blood flow (usually about 5.0
L/min). Thus, normal VA/Q = 0.84 (i.e., approximately 1).
This is an average value across the lung. Different V:Q
ratios are present throughout the lung from apex to base.
Extremes of ventilation:perfusion
ratio
Looking at the V:Q ratio, it can be seen that there are two
extremes to this relationship. These extremes were
introduced in Chapter 1. Either there is:
1. No ventilation (a shunt): VA/Q = 0.
2. No perfusion (dead space): VA/Q = ∞.
Right-to-left shunt
A right-to-left shunt is described when the pulmonary
circulation bypasses the ventilation process, meaning
deoxygenated blood from the right side of the heart travels
to the left side of the heart without gas exchange or
oxygenation. This process (Fig. 5.1) occurs by either:
1. Bypassing the lungs completely (e.g., transposition
of great vessels).
2. Perfusion of an area of lung that is not ventilated.
FIG. 5.1  Shunted blood. The shunted blood has a low
oxygen concentration (i.e., of venous blood) and is known as
the venous admixture. a, arterial; C, capillary; E, exchange;
Q, perfusion/blood flow; S, shunted; v, venous.
The shunted blood will not have been oxygenated or able
to give up its carbon dioxide; thus its levels of PO2 and
PCO2 are those of venous blood. When added to the
systemic 
circulation, 
this 
blood 
will 
proportionately
decrease arterial PO2; it is called the venous admixture.
In normal subjects, there is only a very small amount of
shunting (about 1%). However, right-to-left shunting makes
a significant contribution to abnormal gas exchange in
some disease states, notably:
• Cyanotic congenital heart disease
• Eisenmenger syndrome
• Pulmonary oedema
• Severe pneumonia.
Regional variation of ventilation and
perfusion
Both ventilation and perfusion increase towards the lung
base because of the effects of gravity.
Because the blood has a greater density than air, the
gravitational effects on perfusion are much greater than on
ventilation. This leads to a regional variation (Fig. 5.2) in
the V:Q ratio from lung apex (high V/Q) to lung base (low
V/Q).
FIG. 5.2  Ventilation (V) and perfusion (Q) at the lung apex,
middle and base. C, capillary; Q, Flow of blood.
These regional variations in the V:Q ratio are caused by
the lung being upright; thus, changes in posture will alter
the V:Q ratio throughout the lung. For example, when lying
down, the posterior area of the lung has a low V:Q ratio and
the anterior area has a high V:Q ratio.
The effect of high and low V:Q ratios on carbon dioxide
and oxygen in the alveolus and blood is highlighted in Fig.
5.3 and described below.
FIG. 5.3  The effect of altering the ventilation:perfusion
(V:Q) ratio on the PAO2 and PACO2 in a lung unit: (A) normal
lung; (B) lung unit is not ventilated—O2 falls and CO2 rises
within lung unit; (C) lung unit is not perfused—O2 is not
taken up and CO2 does not diffuse into the alveolus.
At low ventilation:perfusion ratios
(e.g., at the lung base)
Effect on carbon dioxide concentrations
Carbon dioxide diffuses from the blood to alveoli; however,
because ventilation is low, carbon dioxide is not taken away
as rapidly. Thus, carbon dioxide tends to accumulate in the
alveolus until a new, higher steady-state PACO2 is reached.
Assuming that the overall lung function is normal, this
regional variation in PaCO2 will not affect overall PvCO2.
Thus, reducing the V:Q ratio will not increase PaCO2 above
the mixed-venous value.
Effect on oxygen concentrations
Oxygen diffuses from the alveolus into the blood; however,
because ventilation is low, oxygen taken up by the blood
and metabolized is not replenished fully by new air
entering the lungs. Oxygen in the alveolus is depleted until
a new, lower steady-state PAO2 is reached. Because
diffusion continues until equilibrium is achieved, the PaO2
of this unit will also be low (Fig. 5.4A).
FIG. 5.4  Ventilation (V) and perfusion (Q) at lung base (A)
and apex (B). At the lung base perfusion is high and the V/Q
ratio is low. This reduces alveolar O2 and raises CO2. At the
apex the V/Q ratio is higher, leading to a high alveolar O2
and more CO2 blown off.
At high ventilation:perfusion ratios
(e.g., at the lung apex)
Effect on carbon dioxide concentrations
The carbon dioxide diffusing from the blood is nearly all
removed; carbon dioxide in the alveolus is depleted until a
new, lower steady-state PACO2 is reached. Diffusion
continues until equilibrium is achieved: PaCO2 will also be
low.
Effect on oxygen concentrations
Oxygen diffusing from the alveolar gas is not taken away by
the blood in such large amounts because the relative blood
flow is reduced; in addition, oxygen is replenished with
each breath. Thus, oxygen tends to accumulate in the
alveolus until a new steady-state concentration is reached
(Fig. 5.4B). Diffusion occurs until a new higher equilibrium
is achieved; thus, PaO2 is also higher.
Measurement of ventilation and
perfusion
Ventilation:perfusion scans
In clinical practice, V:Q ratios are assessed primarily by
means of radioisotope scans. Ventilation is detected by
inhalation of a gas or aerosol labelled with the radioisotope
133Xe. The distribution of pulmonary blood flow is tested
with 
an 
intravenous 
injection 
of 
99mTc-labelled
macroaggregated 
albumin 
(MAA). 
These 
radioactive
particles are larger than the diameter of the pulmonary
capillaries and they remain lodged for several hours. A
gamma camera is then used to detect the position of the
MAA.
The two scans are then assessed together for ‘filling
defects’ or areas where ventilation and perfusion are not
matched. The technique has previously been used to detect
pulmonary emboli; however, spiral computed tomography
scans have largely superseded this technique in most
clinical areas. Fig. 5.5 shows a lung scan following
pulmonary embolism.
FIG. 5.5  Ventilation:perfusion scan following pulmonary
embolus. (Courtesy of Jones I and the Nuclear Medicine staff,
Derriford Hospital, Plymouth.)
Gas transport in the blood
Oxygen transport
Oxygen is carried in the blood in two forms:
1. Dissolved in plasma.
2. Bound to haemoglobin.
Dissolved oxygen
To meet the metabolic demands of the body, large amounts
of oxygen must be carried in the blood. We have seen that
the amount of gas dissolved in solution is proportional to
the partial pressure of the gas (Henry's law). Thus, with a
normal arterial PaO2 (100 mmHg; 13.3 kPa), for each 100
mL of blood there is only 0.003 mL of dissolved oxygen or
15 mL of oxygen per minute, based on a 5-L cardiac output.
At rest, the body requires approximately 250 mL of oxygen
per minute. Thus, if all the oxygen in the blood were
carried in the dissolved form, cardiac output would meet
only 6% of the demand.
Therefore, most of the oxygen must be carried in
chemical combination, not in simple solution. Oxygen is
thus combined with haemoglobin.
Haemoglobin
Haemoglobin is found in red blood cells and is a conjugate
protein molecule, containing iron within its structure. The
molecule consists of four polypeptide subunits, two α and
two β. Associated with each polypeptide chain is a haem
group that acts as a binding site for oxygen. The haem
group consists of a porphyrin ring containing iron and is
responsible for binding of oxygen:
• Haemoglobin contains iron in a ferrous (Fe2 +) or
ferric (fe2 +) state.
• Only haemoglobin in the ferrous form can bind
oxygen.
• Methaemoglobin (containing iron in a ferric state)
cannot bind oxygen.
The quaternary structure of haemoglobin determines its
ability 
to 
bind 
oxygen. 
In 
its 
deoxygenated 
state,
haemoglobin (known as reduced haemoglobin) has a low
affinity for oxygen. The binding of one oxygen molecule to
haemoglobin causes a conformational change in its protein
structure; this positive cooperativity allows easier access to
the 
other 
oxygen-binding 
sites, 
thus 
increasing
haemoglobin's affinity for further binding of oxygen.
Haemoglobin is capable of binding up to four molecules of
oxygen.
It should be noted that, during this reaction, the iron
atom of the haem group remains in the ferrous (Fe2 +)
form. It is not oxidized to the ferric (Fe3 +) form. The
interaction of oxygen with haemoglobin is oxygenation, not
oxidation.
The main function of haemoglobin is to take up oxygen at
the alveolar capillary membrane and to transport the
oxygen within the blood and release it into the tissues.
However, haemoglobin also has other functions:
• Buffering of H+ ions.
• Transport of carbon dioxide as carbamino
compounds.
Haemoglobin binding
Haemoglobin has four binding sites; the amount of oxygen
carried by haemoglobin in the blood depends on how many
of these binding sites are occupied. Therefore, the
haemoglobin molecule can be said to be saturated or
partially saturated:
• Saturated—all four binding sites are occupied by
oxygen.
• Partially saturated—some oxygen has bound to
haemoglobin, but not all four sites are occupied.
If completely saturated, the maximum binding of oxygen
to haemoglobin we could expect is:
In addition, there is approximately 10 mL of oxygen in
solution. The total (210 mL) is called the oxygen capacity;
the haemoglobin is said to be 100% saturated (SO2 =
100%). 
The 
actual 
amount 
of 
oxygen 
bonded 
to
haemoglobin and dissolved in the blood at any one time is
called the oxygen content.
The oxygen saturation (SO2) of the blood is defined as the
amount of oxygen carried in the blood, expressed as a
percentage of oxygen capacity:
Cyanosis
Haemoglobin 
absorbs 
light 
of 
different 
wavelengths
depending on whether it is in the reduced or oxygenated
form. 
Oxyhaemoglobin 
appears 
bright 
red, 
whereas
reduced haemoglobin appears purplish, giving a bluish
pallor to skin. This is called cyanosis, which can be
described as either central or peripheral. Cyanosis depends
on the absolute amount of deoxygenated haemoglobin in
the vessels, not the proportion of deoxygenated:oxygenated
haemoglobin. In central cyanosis, there is more than 5 g/dL
deoxygenated haemoglobin in the blood and this can be
seen 
in 
the 
peripheral 
tissues 
(e.g., 
lips, 
tongue).
Peripheral cyanosis has a local cause (e.g., vascular
obstruction of a limb).
Oxygen dissociation curve
How much oxygen binds to haemoglobin is dependent upon
the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood. This
relationship is represented by the oxygen dissociation
curve (Fig. 5.6A); this is an equilibrium curve at specific
conditions:
• 150 g of haemoglobin per litre of blood
• pH 7.4
• Temperature 37°C.
FIG. 5.6  (A) Oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve. (B) The
effect of temperature (T), PCO2, pH and 2,3-
diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) on the oxyhaemoglobin
dissociation curve.
Factors affecting the oxygen dissociation curve
The shape of the curve, and therefore oxygen delivery to
the tissues, is affected by a number of factors, including:
• pH
• Carbon dioxide
• Temperature
• Other forms of haemoglobin.
These factors shift the oxygen dissociation curve to the
right or to the left:
• A shift to the right allows easier dissociation of
oxygen (i.e., lower oxygen saturation at any
particular PO2) and increases the oxygen release
from oxyhaemoglobin.
• A shift to the left makes oxygen binding easier (i.e.,
higher oxygen saturation at any particular PO2) and
increases the oxygen uptake by haemoglobin.
The following factors shift the curve to the right (Fig.
5.6B):
• Increased PCO2 and decreased pH (increased
hydrogen ion concentration), known as the Bohr
shift.
• Increased temperature.
• Increase in 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG), which
binds to the β chains.
2,3-DPG is a product of anaerobic metabolism. Red blood
cells possess no mitochondria and therefore carry out
anaerobic metabolism to produce energy. 2,3-DPG binds
more 
strongly 
to 
reduced 
haemoglobin 
than 
to
oxyhaemoglobin. Concentrations of 2,3-DPG increase in
chronic hypoxia, e.g., in patients with chronic lung disease,
or at high altitude.
Other forms of haemoglobin
Fetal haemoglobin
Fetal haemoglobin differs from adult haemoglobin by
having two γ chains instead of two β chains (Fig. 5.7).
FIG. 5.7  Comparison of oxygen dissociation curves for
myoglobin, fetal haemoglobin (HbF) and adult haemoglobin
(HbA).
Fetal haemoglobin has a higher affinity for oxygen
because its γ chains bind 2,3-DPG less avidly than the β
chains of adult haemoglobin and are therefore able to bind
oxygen at lower partial pressures (maternal venous PvO2 is
low: < 40 mmHg).
Release of carbon dioxide from fetal haemoglobin causes
a shift to the left of the fetal oxyhaemoglobin dissociation
curve, thus increasing its affinity for oxygen. This released
carbon dioxide binds to maternal haemoglobin, causing a
shift to the right of maternal haemoglobin, thus reducing
the affinity of the latter for oxygen. Oxygen is therefore
released by maternal haemoglobin and bound by fetal
haemoglobin. This is known as the double Bohr shift.
Haemoglobin S
Haemoglobin S is a form of haemoglobin found in sickle cell
anaemia. Sickle cell anaemia is an autosomal recessive
disorder in which there is a defect in the β-globulin chain of
the haemoglobin molecule.
There is a substitution of the amino acid valine for
glutamine at position 6 of the β chain, forming haemoglobin
S. The heterozygote has sickle cell trait and the
homozygote 
sickle 
cell 
anaemia. 
The 
abnormal
haemoglobin S molecules polymerize when deoxygenated
and cause the red blood cells containing the abnormal
haemoglobin to sickle. The fragile sickle cells haemolyse
and may block vessels, leading to ischaemia and infarction.
The heterozygous patient usually has an asymptomatic
anaemia, and the homozygote has painful crises with bone
and abdominal pain; there may also be intrapulmonary
shunting.
Thalassaemia
The thalassaemias are autosomal recessive disorders with
decreased production of either the α or the β chain of
haemoglobin. There are two genes for the β chain and,
depending 
on 
the 
number 
of 
normal 
genes, 
the
thalassaemia is quoted as major or minor. There are four
genes which code for the α chain, leading to various
clinical disorders depending on the genetic defect. HbA2 is
present in a small amount in the normal population and
consists of two α and two β chains. It is markedly raised in
β-thalassaemia minor.
Full discussion of these disorders can be found in
Vanbergen et al. (2019).
Carboxyhaemoglobin (carbon monoxide
poisoning)
Carbon 
monoxide 
(CO) 
displaces 
oxygen 
from
oxyhaemoglobin because the affinity of haemoglobin for
carbon monoxide is more than 200 times that for oxygen.
This changes the shape of the oxyhaemoglobin dissociation
curve. Fig. 5.8 shows the effects of carbon monoxide
poisoning:
• In this instance, oxygen capacity is 50% of normal
(i.e., 50% HbO2 and 50% HbCO). The actual value
will depend on the partial pressure of carbon
monoxide (e.g., with a PCO of 16 mmHg, 75% of
haemoglobin will be in the form of HbCO).
• Saturation is achieved at a PO2 of < 40 mmHg
(below venous PO2).
• HbCO causes a shift to the left for the oxygen
dissociation curve (i.e., HbCO has a higher affinity
for oxygen than normal HbO2).
• Carbon monoxide binds to two of the four available
haem groups.
FIG. 5.8  Oxyhaemoglobin curve showing effects of
anaemia and carbon monoxide poisoning (50% HbCO and
anaemia compared with normal haemoglobin (Hb)).
Carbon monoxide takes a long time to be cleared, but this
can be sped up by ventilation with 100% oxygen.
Additionally, the patient is not cyanosed because HbCO is
cherry-red, and oxygen saturation levels recorded by a
pulse oximeter are unable to differentiate HbCO and HbO2,
meaning patient’s saturations can read as normal whilst
they are grossly underoxygenated.
Carbon dioxide transport
(1)
(2)
There are three ways in which carbon dioxide can be
transported in the blood:
1. Dissolved in plasma
2. As bicarbonate ions
3. As carbamino compounds.
Dissolved carbon dioxide
The solubility of carbon dioxide in the blood is much
greater than that of oxygen (20 times greater); so, unlike
oxygen, a significant amount (approximately 10%) of
carbon dioxide is carried in solution.
Bicarbonate ions
Approximately 60% of carbon dioxide is transported as
bicarbonate ions. Dissolved carbon dioxide interacts with
water to form carbonic acid as follows:
  
Carbonic acid rapidly dissociates into ions:
  
The total reaction being:
The first reaction is very slow in plasma, but within the
red blood cell is dramatically speeded up by the enzyme
carbonic anhydrase. Reaction 2 is very fast, but, if allowed
to proceed alone, a large amount of H+ would be formed,
slowing down or halting the reaction. Haemoglobin has the
property that it can bind H+ ions and act as a buffer, thus
allowing the reaction to go on rapidly.
The bicarbonate produced in the red blood cells diffuses
down its concentration gradient into the plasma in
exchange for chloride ions (Cl–). This process is known as
the chloride shift (Fig. 5.9).
FIG. 5.9  The exchange of CO2 and O2 that occurs between
the blood and the alveolar air. Bicarbonate ions (HCO3
−)
enter the red blood cell in exchange for chloride ions (which
are transported out). Carbonic acid is formed once the O2 is
bound to haemoglobin (Hb). Carbonic acid is converted to
CO2 and H2O. The CO2 is then excreted from the cell. CO2
stored in carbamino compound form can be excreted from
the cell passively without the involvement of an enzyme.
2,3-DPG, 2,3-Diphosphoglycerate.
Carbamino compounds
Carbon dioxide is capable of combining with proteins,
interacting with their terminal amine groups to form
carbamino compounds (Fig. 5.9). The most important
protein involved is haemoglobin, as it is the most abundant
in the blood. Approximately 30% of carbon dioxide is
carried as carbamino compounds.
Haldane effect
Carriage of carbon dioxide is increased in deoxygenated
blood because of two factors:
1. Reduced haemoglobin has a greater affinity for
carbon dioxide than does oxyhaemoglobin.
2. Reduced haemoglobin is less acidic (i.e., a better
proton acceptor: H+ buffer) than oxyhaemoglobin.
The Haldane effect minimizes changes in pH of the blood
when gaseous exchange occurs. The decrease in pH caused
by the oxygenation of haemoglobin is offset by the increase
that results from the loss of carbon dioxide to the alveolar
air. The reverse occurs in the tissues. This is an important
effect because:
• In peripheral capillaries, the unloading of oxygen
from haemoglobin aids the binding of carbon dioxide
to haemoglobin.
• In pulmonary capillaries, the loading of oxygen on
haemoglobin reduces the binding of carbon dioxide
to haemoglobin.
This allows efficient gaseous exchange of carbon dioxide
in the tissues and the lungs.
Carbon dioxide dissociation curve
The carriage of carbon dioxide is dependent upon the
partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood. This
relationship is described by the carbon dioxide dissociation
curve. Compared with the oxygen dissociation curve:
• The carbon dioxide curve is more linear.
• The carbon dioxide curve is much steeper than the
oxygen curve (between venous and arterial partial
pressure of respiratory gases).
• The carbon dioxide curve varies according to oxygen
saturation of haemoglobin.
Gas transport and respiratory failure
Hypoventilation and
hyperventilation
If PaCO2 is a measure of ventilation, it is appropriate in a
review of carbon dioxide transport to consider two key
concepts in respiratory medicine: hypoventilation and
hyperventilation. For the body to function normally,
ventilation must meet the metabolic demand of the tissues
(Table 5.1). Thus, metabolic tissue consumption of oxygen
must be equal to the oxygen taken up in the blood from
alveolar gas. Or, metabolic tissue production of carbon
dioxide must be equal to the amount of carbon dioxide
blown off at the alveoli.
Table 5.1
Hypoventilation
The term ‘hypoventilation’ refers to a situation when
ventilation is insufficient to meet metabolic demand.
Hyperventilation
The term ‘hyperventilation’ refers to a situation where
ventilation is excessive to metabolic demand, thus blowing
off carbon dioxide from the lungs.
Hypercapnia and hypocapnia
Hypercapnia
A high partial pressure (concentration) of carbon dioxide in
the blood (PaCO2 > 45 mmHg) is termed ‘hypercapnia’.
Hypocapnia
A low partial pressure of carbon dioxide in the blood
(PaCO2 < 40 mmHg) is termed ‘hypocapnia’.
Respiratory failure
Hypercapnia and hypocapnia are important concepts in the
assessment of respiratory failure. Respiratory failure is
defined as a PaO2 < 8 kPa (60 mmHg) and is divided into
type I and type II, depending on the PaCO2.
In type I respiratory failure, PaCO2 < 6.5 kPa. PaO2 is low
(hypoxaemic), but PaCO2 may be normal or low; this
represents a V:Q mismatch.
In type II respiratory failure, PaCO2 > 6.5 kPa. Both PaO2
and PaCO2 indicate that the lungs are not well ventilated.
The significance of this classification is that in type II
respiratory failure, the patient may have developed
tolerance to increased levels of PaCO2; in other words, the
drive for respiration no longer relies on hypercapnic drive
(high PaCO2) but on hypoxic drive (low PaO2). Thus, if the
patient is given high-concentration oxygen therapy, the
hypoxic drive for ventilation may decrease and the patient
may stop breathing.
Clinical notes 
Acute respiratory failure
Differentiating between type I and type II respiratory
failure is one of the most important key concepts in the
management of an acutely unwell respiratory patient.
Different methods of oxygenation and ventilation are
available to manage each type of failure, both in the
emergency, ward and intensive care settings. See
Chapter 12 for more information on management of
acute respiratory failure.
Hypoxia
This is a condition in which the metabolic demand for
oxygen cannot be met by the circulating blood.
Causes of hypoxia
Many cells can respire anaerobically; however, the neurons
in the brain cannot and therefore need a constant supply of
oxygen to maintain normal function. A severe shortage of
oxygen to the brain can lead to unconsciousness and even
death. Therefore, treatment of hypoxic patients is critically
important. There are four principal types of hypoxia:
1. Hypoxic hypoxia
2. Anaemic hypoxia
3. Stagnant hypoxia (or static hypoxia)
4. Cytotoxic hypoxia (or histotoxic hypoxia).
Hypoxic hypoxia
This occurs when the arterial PaO2 is significantly reduced,
so that haemoglobin in the blood exiting the lungs is not
fully saturated with oxygen.
Causes of hypoxic hypoxia
Physiological
• At high altitude where there is a low oxygen tension
in inspired air, the ΡAO2 and, accordingly, the PaO2
will fall
Pathological
• Hypoventilation:
• Respiratory muscle weakness, e.g., chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, myasthenia
gravis and poliomyelitis patients
• Iatrogenic causes, e.g., general anaesthetics
and analgesics (opiates) which act upon the
respiratory centres in the medulla to decrease
respiratory muscle activity
• Abnormal V/Q matching, e.g., airway obstruction,
pulmonary embolism
• Impaired diffusing capacity, e.g., pulmonary oedema,
as seen in left ventricular failure
• Right-to-left shunting, e.g., cyanotic congenital heart
diseases, severe pneumonia
The haemoglobin saturation is reduced in patients with
hypoxic hypoxia. Most forms of hypoxic hypoxia can be
corrected if patients are given hyperbaric oxygen to
breathe. The high concentration of oxygen will increase the
PAO2, and thus the PaO2, improving the oxygen saturation
status of haemoglobin. In patients with right-to-left shunt,
hyperbaric oxygen may not have any benefit, because the
PAO2 will be normal, but since the blood is being shunted
away from the alveoli the PaO2 will remain low.
Anaemic hypoxia
This occurs when there is a significant reduction in the
concentration of haemoglobin, so the oxygen content of the
arterial blood will be abnormally reduced. There are
numerous causes of anaemia. It can be due to:
• Blood loss (e.g., large haemorrhage).
• Reduced synthesis of haemoglobin (e.g., vitamin B12
deficiency, bone marrow failure).
• Abnormal haemoglobin synthesis owing to a genetic
defect (e.g., sickle cell anaemia).
The PAO2 in anaemic patients is usually normal and the
haemoglobin saturation is also normal. Patients become
hypoxic because there is a reduction in the oxygen content
in the blood as there is less haemoglobin than normal.
Treating anaemic patients with hyperbaric oxygen will be
of limited benefit because the blood leaving the lung will
already be fully saturated. Anaemic patients will not appear
to be cyanosed because the amount of deoxygenated blood
leaving the respiring tissue will not be higher than normal.
Stagnant hypoxia
This is the result of a low blood flow, and hence a reduction
in oxygen supply, to the tissues. This may occur with a
reduced blood flow along an artery to a specific organ, with
only that organ being affected; alternatively, reduced blood
flow to all organs can occur if the cardiac output is
significantly reduced (e.g., because of heart failure). There
is usually nothing wrong with the lungs in terms of
ventilation and perfusion in stagnant hypoxia, so the PAO2
and the PaO2 will be normal. Since the blood flow to the
respiring tissues is slow, the tissues will try to extract as
much available oxygen as possible from the arterial supply,
so the venous PO2 will be lowered and hence give rise to
peripheral cyanosis.
Treatment with hyperbaric oxygen will not be beneficial
to these patients as the blood leaving the lung will already
be fully saturated. Only a slight rise in the level of oxygen
dissolved within the blood plasma will occur.
Cytotoxic hypoxia
This occurs when the respiring cells within the tissues are
unable to use oxygen, mainly due to poisoning of the
oxidative enzymes of the cells. For example, in cyanide
poisoning, cyanide combines with the cytochrome chain
and 
prevents 
oxygen 
being 
used 
in 
oxidative
phosphorylation.
In cytotoxic hypoxia, both the PAO2 and the PaO2 are
normal and so, again, treating these patients with oxygen
will be of limited value. Since the oxygen is unable to be
utilized by the tissues, the venous PO2 will be abnormally
high and cyanosis will not occur in these patients.
Acid–base balance
Normal pH
The pH of the intracellular and extracellular compartments
must be tightly controlled for the body to function
efficiently, or at all. The normal arterial pH lies within a
relatively narrow range: 7.35–7.45 (H+ range, 45–35
mmol/L). An acid–base disturbance arises when arterial pH
lies outside this range. If the blood pH is less than 7.35, an
acidosis is present; if pH is greater than 7.45, the term
alkalosis is used. Although a larger variation in pH can be
tolerated (pH 6.8–7.8) for a short time, recovery is often
impossible if blood remains at pH 6.8 for long.
Such a tight control on blood pH is achieved by a
combination of blood buffers and the respiratory and renal
systems, which make adjustments to return pH towards its
normal levels.
Key concepts in acid–base balance
Metabolic production of acids
Products of metabolism (carbon dioxide, lactic acid,
phosphate, sulphate, etc.) form acidic solutions, thus
increasing the hydrogen ion concentration and reducing
pH. We also have an intake of acids in our diet
(approximately 50–100 mmol H+ per day). We rely on three
methods 
to 
control 
our 
internal 
hydrogen 
ion
concentration:
1. Dilution of body fluids.
2. The physiological buffer system.
3. Excretion of volatile and nonvolatile acids.
Buffers
A buffer is a substance that can either bind or release
hydrogen ions, therefore keeping the pH relatively constant
even when considerable quantities of acid or base are
added. There are four buffers of the blood:
1. Haemoglobin
2. Plasma proteins
3. Phosphate
4. Bicarbonate.
It is the bicarbonate system that acts as the principal
buffer and which is of most interest in respiratory
medicine.
We have already seen that carbon dioxide dissolves in
water and reacts to form carbonic acid, and that this
dissociates to form bicarbonate and protons:
This equilibrium tells us that changes in either CO2 or
 will have an effect on pH. For example, increasing
CO2 will drive the reaction to the right, increasing H+ ion
concentration.
As changes in carbon dioxide and bicarbonate can alter
pH, controlling these elements allows the system to control
acid–base equilibrium. This is why the bicarbonate buffer
system is so useful; the body has control over both
elements:
• Carbon dioxide is regulated through changes in
ventilation.
• Bicarbonate concentrations are determined by the
kidneys.
Acid–base disturbances
As noted above, blood pH can either be higher than normal
(alkalosis) or lower (acidosis). An acidosis can be caused by
either:
• A rise in PCO2
• A fall in HCO3
−.
Similarly, alkalosis can occur through:
• A fall in PCO2
• A rise in HCO3
−.
Where the primary change is in carbon dioxide we term
the disturbance ‘respiratory’, whereas a disturbance in
bicarbonate is termed ‘metabolic’. This allows us to classify
four types of disturbance, outlined in Fig. 5.10:
1. Respiratory alkalosis
2. Respiratory acidosis
3. Metabolic alkalosis
4. Metabolic acidosis.
FIG. 5.10  Differentiating between acid–base disorders.
The disturbance was described as primary because the
kidneys and lungs may try to return the acid–base
disturbance 
towards 
normal 
values. 
This 
is 
called
compensation 
and 
means 
that 
even 
in 
respiratory
disturbances, it may not be just carbon dioxide that is
abnormal; bicarbonate may have altered too. Similarly,
carbon 
dioxide 
may 
be 
abnormal 
in 
a 
metabolic
disturbance. 
The 
ways 
in 
which 
the 
two 
systems
compensate are:
• The respiratory system alters ventilation; this
happens quickly.
• The kidney alters excretion of bicarbonate; this takes
2–3 days.
It is now clear that lung disease that affects gas
exchange, and therefore PCO2, will have major effects on
the body's acid–base status. It is also clear that, whilst the
respiratory system can act quickly to compensate for
metabolic disturbances, it will take time for compensation
to take place in respiratory disease; the renal system
cannot act as quickly. We see this in clinical practice: a
change in bicarbonate is characteristic of chronic lung
disease, rather than acute lung disease.
Full details of assessment of acid–base status and
interpretation of arterial blood gases can be found in
Chapter 10.
Assessing acid–base disturbances
Assessing acid–base disorders is relatively simple if you
approach the problem in stages.
1. Start with the pH: is it outside the normal range?
2. If there is an acidosis or alkalosis, can it be
explained by a change in carbon dioxide?
3. If so, then it is a primary disturbance with a
respiratory cause.
4. Now look at bicarbonate—has this changed to return
the ratio to normal?
5. If so, it is a respiratory disorder with metabolic
compensation.
Clinical notes 
Arterial blood gas sampling
Arterial blood gas (ABG) sampling is the easiest and most
practical method of assessing acid–base disturbances and
differentiating between type I and type II respiratory
failure in clinical practice. Understanding the key
concepts of acid–base disturbance will help you to
interpret ABGs and allow you to manage unwell
respiratory patients. For more information see Chapter
10, Clinical investigations.
Respiratory acidosis
Respiratory acidosis results from an increase in PCO2
caused by:
• Hypoventilation (less carbon dioxide is blown off).
• V:Q mismatch.
From the Henderson–Hasselbach equation, we see that
an increase in PCO2 causes an increase in hydrogen ion
concentration (i.e., a reduction in pH). Thus, plasma
bicarbonate concentration increases to compensate for the
increased hydrogen ion concentration.
Renal compensation
The increase in hydrogen ion concentration in the blood
results in increased filtration of hydrogen ions at the
glomeruli, thus:
• Increasing HCO3
− reabsorption
• Increasing HCO3
− production.
Thus, plasma HCO3
− rises, compensating for the
increased H+, i.e., renal compensation raises pH towards
normal.
Causes of respiratory acidosis
Mechanisms reducing ventilation or causing V/Q mismatch
include:
• Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
• Asthma (severe exacerbation).
• Obesity hypoventilation syndrome.
• Neuromuscular disorders, e.g., Amyotrophic lateral
sclerosis (ALS), motor neurone disease, Guillain–
Barré syndrome, myasthenia gravis.
• Drugs that reduce respiratory drive (ventilation),
including morphine, barbiturates and general
anaesthetics.
• Central nervous system depression—neurological
disease, e.g., trauma, brainstem lesion, infection
(encephalitis), drug induced (above).
Respiratory alkalosis
Respiratory alkalosis results from a decrease in PCO2
generally caused by alveolar hyperventilation (more carbon
dioxide is blown off). This causes a decrease in hydrogen
ion concentration and thus an increase in pH.
Renal compensation
The reduction in hydrogen ion concentration in the blood
results in decreased hydrogen ion filtration at the
glomeruli, thus:
• Reducing HCO3
− reabsorption
• Reducing HCO3
− production.
Thus, plasma HCO3
− falls, compensating for the reduced
H+; i.e., renal compensation reduces pH towards normal.
Causes of respiratory alkalosis
The causes of respiratory alkalosis include:
• Increased ventilation—caused by hypoxic drive in
pneumonia, diffuse interstitial lung diseases, high
altitude, mechanical ventilation, etc.
• Hyperventilation—brainstem damage, infection
causing fever, drugs (e.g., aspirin), hysterical
overbreathing.
Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic acidosis results from an excess of hydrogen ions
in the body, which reduces bicarbonate concentration
(shifting the equation below to the left). Respiration is
unaffected; therefore, PCO2 is initially normal.
Respiratory compensation
The reduction in pH is detected by the peripheral
chemoreceptors. This causes an increase in ventilation,
which lowers PCO2. Also:
• The above equation is driven further to the left,
reducing hydrogen ion concentration and
bicarbonate.
• The decrease in hydrogen ion concentration raises
pH towards normal.
Respiratory compensation cannot fully correct the values
of PCO2, HCO3
− and H+, as there is a limit to how far PCO2
can fall with hyperventilation. Correction can be carried
out only by removing the excess hydrogen ions from the
body or restoring the lost bicarbonate (i.e., correcting the
metabolic fault).
Causes of metabolic acidosis
Causes of metabolic acidosis are:
• Exogenous acid loading (e.g., aspirin overdose).
• Endogenous acid production (e.g., ketogenesis in
diabetes).
• Loss of HCO3
− from the kidneys or gut (e.g.,
diarrhoea).
• Metabolic production of hydrogen ions. The kidneys
may not be able to excrete the excess hydrogen ions
immediately, or at all (as in renal failure).
Metabolic alkalosis
Metabolic alkalosis results from an increase in bicarbonate
concentration or a fall in hydrogen ion concentration.
Removing hydrogen ions from the right of the equation
below 
drives 
the 
reaction 
to 
the 
right, 
increasing
bicarbonate concentration. Decrease in hydrogen ion
concentration raises pH; initially, PCO2 is normal.
Respiratory compensation
The increase in pH is detected by the peripheral
chemoreceptors. This causes a decrease in ventilation
which raises PCO2. Also:
• The above equation is driven further to the right,
increasing hydrogen ion and bicarbonate
concentrations.
• The decrease in hydrogen ion concentration raises
pH towards normal.
Respiratory 
compensation 
is 
through 
alveolar
hypoventilation but ventilation cannot reduce enough to
correct the disturbance. This can only be carried out by
removing the problem either of reduced hydrogen ion
concentration or increased bicarbonate concentration. This
is done by reducing renal hydrogen ion secretion.
More bicarbonate is excreted because more is filtered at
the glomerulus and less is reabsorbed in combination with
hydrogen ions.
Causes of metabolic alkalosis
The causes of metabolic alkalosis include:
• Vomiting (hydrochloric acid loss from the stomach).
• Ingestion of alkaline substances.
• Potassium depletion (e.g., diuretic, excess
aldosterone).
Chapter summary
• The ventilation:perfusion ratio is defined as the ratio
between alveolar ventilation VA and perfusion to the
alveoli by pulmonary capillaries (Q). The V/Q ratio
averages 1 in healthy individuals, with better
ventilation at the lung apices and better perfusion at
the lung bases.
• Oxygen binds to haemoglobin to be transported in the
blood. The amount of oxygen bound to haemoglobin is
dependent upon the partial pressure of oxygen in the
blood, demonstrated by the oxygen dissociation
curve.
• Hypoxia is a condition in which the metabolic demand
for oxygen cannot be met by the circulating blood.
• Type I respiratory failure is defined as hypoxaemia
with a low/normal PaCO2, representing a
ventilation:perfusion mismatch.
• Type II respiratory failure is defined as hypoxaemia
with a raised PaCO2, indicating inadequate
ventilation.
• Normal arterial pH is 7.35–7.45 and is controlled by
respiratory and metabolic variation. Understanding
the physiological changes to pH allows you to
calculate whether there is a primary metabolic,
respiratory or combined pathology in disease states.
Reference
Vanbergen O., Redhouse White G. Crash
Course: Haematology and Immunology. 2019.
Elsevier..
6
Control of respiratory
function
Control of ventilation
Control within the respiratory
system
When considering control of breathing, the main control
variable is PaCO2. We try to control this value near to
40 mmHg or approximately 5.3 kPa, which can be carried
out by adjusting the respiratory rate, the tidal volume, or
both.
By controlling PaCO2, we are effectively controlling
alveolar ventilation and thus PACO2.
Although PaCO2 is the main control variable, PaO2 is also
controlled, but normally to a much lesser extent than
PaCO2. However, the PaO2 control system can take over and
become the main controlling system when the PaO2 drops
below 50 mmHg (~ 6.7 kPa).
Control can be brought about by:
• Metabolic demands of the body (metabolic control)—
tissue oxygen demand and acid–base balance. This
acts in a feedback system whereby the brainstem
looks at the measured level of PaCO2 and relates this
to the desired level, adjusting it as necessary
through methods such as increasing respiratory
rate.
• Behavioural demands of the body (behavioural
control)—singing, coughing, laughing (i.e., control is
voluntary). This system will not be dealt with in this
book.
Metabolic control of breathing
Metabolic control of breathing is a function of the
brainstem (pons and medulla). The controller can be
considered as specific groups of neurones (previously
called respiratory centres).
Pontine neurones
The pontine respiratory group consists of expiratory and
inspiratory neurones. Their role is to regulate (i.e., affect
the activity of) the dorsal respiratory group and possibly
the ventral respiratory group (neurone groups in the
medulla).
Medullary neurones
It is believed that the medulla is responsible for respiratory
rhythm.
Three groups of neurones associated with respiratory
control have been identified in the medulla:
1. The dorsal respiratory group, situated in the nucleus
tractus solitarius.
2. The ventral respiratory group, situated in the
nucleus ambiguus and the nucleus retroambigualis.
3. The Bötzinger complex, situated rostral to the
nucleus ambiguus.
These groups receive sensory information, which is
compared with the desired value of control; adjustments
are made to respiratory muscles to rectify any deviation
from ideal.
• The dorsal respiratory group contains neurone
bodies of inspiratory upper motor neurones. These
inhibit the activity of expiratory neurones in the
ventral respiratory group and have an excitatory
effect on lower motor neurones to the respiratory
muscles, increasing ventilation.
• Ventral respiratory group neurones contain
inspiratory upper motor neurones that go on to
supply, through their lower motor neurons, external
intercostal muscles and accessory muscles.
• The Bötzinger complex contains only expiratory
neurones. It works by inhibiting inspiratory
neurones of the dorsal and ventral respiratory
groups and through excitation of expiratory
neurones in the ventral respiratory group.
Effectors (muscles of respiration)
The major muscle groups involved are the diaphragm,
internal and external intercostals and abdominal muscles.
The strength of contraction and coordination of these
muscles is set by the central controller. If the muscles are
not coordinated, abnormal breathing patterns will result.
Sensors (receptors)
Sensors report to the central controller current values, or
discrepancies from ideal values, for the various variables
being controlled (e.g., PaCO2, PaO2 and pH). There are
many 
types 
of 
sensor 
and 
receptor 
involved 
with
respiratory control:
• Chemoreceptors—central and peripheral.
• Lung receptors—slowly adapting stretch receptors,
rapidly adapting stretch receptors and C-fibres.
• Receptors in the chest wall—muscle spindles and
Golgi tendon organs.
• Other receptors—nasal, tracheal and laryngeal
receptors, arterial baroreceptors, pain receptors.
Chemoreceptors
Chemoreceptors monitor blood gas tensions, PaCO2, PaO2
and pH, and help keep minute volume appropriate to the
metabolic demands of the body. Therefore, chemoreceptors
respond to:
• Hypercapnia
• Hypoxia
• Acidosis.
There are both central and peripheral chemoreceptors.
Central chemoreceptors
Central chemoreceptors are tonically active and vital for
maintenance of respiration; 80% of the drive for ventilation
is a result of stimulation of the central chemoreceptors.
When they are inactivated, respiration ceases. These
receptors are readily depressed by drugs (e.g., opiates and
barbiturates).
The receptors are located in the brainstem on the
ventrolateral surface of the medulla, close to the exit of
cranial nerves IX and X. They are anatomically separate
from the medullary respiratory control centre.
Central 
chemoreceptors 
respond 
to 
hydrogen 
ion
concentration within the surrounding brain tissue and
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
• Raised hydrogen ion concentration increases
ventilation.
• Lowered hydrogen ion concentration decreases
ventilation.
Diffusion of ions across the blood–brain barrier is poor.
Blood levels of hydrogen ions and bicarbonate have little
effect in the short term on the concentrations of hydrogen
ions and bicarbonate in the CSF and thus have little effect
on the central chemoreceptors.
Carbon dioxide, however, can pass freely by diffusion
across the blood–brain barrier. On entering the CSF, the
increase in carbon dioxide increases the free hydrogen ion
concentration. This increase in hydrogen ion concentration
stimulates the central chemoreceptors. Thus:
• Central chemoreceptors are sensitive to PaCO2, not
arterial hydrogen ion concentration.
• Central chemoreceptors are not sensitive to PaO2.
• Because there is less protein in the CSF (< 0.4 g/L)
than in the plasma (60–80 g/L), a rise in PaCO2 has a
larger effect on pH in the CSF than in the blood
(CSF has lower buffering capacity).
Long-standing raised PaCO2 causes the pH of the CSF to
return 
towards 
normal. 
This 
is 
because 
prolonged
hypercapnia alters production of bicarbonate by the glial
cells and allows bicarbonate to cross the blood–brain
barrier. It can therefore diffuse freely into the CSF and
alter the CSF pH. This is seen in patients with chronic
respiratory 
failure, 
e.g., 
those 
with 
severe 
chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Clinical notes 
Patients with chronic compensated type II respiratory
failure (such as in chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease) have much higher PaCO2 levels as a baseline and
a unique blood gas picture, often referred to as CO2
retainers. This has important consequences in acute
respiratory failure, such as in an acute exacerbation of
COPD. Understanding the physiology described here is
vital in assessing treating type II respiratory failure—see
Chapters 12 and 15 for more information.
Peripheral chemoreceptors
Chemoreceptors are located around the carotid sinus and
aortic arch. These are the carotid bodies and aortic bodies,
respectively. Stimulation of peripheral chemoreceptors has
both cardiovascular and respiratory effects. Of the two
receptor groups, the carotid bodies have the greatest effect
on respiration.
Carotid bodies
The carotid bodies contain two different types of cells. Type
I cells are stimulated by hypoxia; they connect with afferent
nerves to the brainstem. Type II cells are supportive
(structural and metabolic), similar to glial cells of the
central nervous system.
There is a rich blood supply to the carotid bodies (blood
flow per mass of tissue far exceeds that to the brain);
venous blood flow, therefore, remains saturated with
oxygen.
The exact mechanism of action of the carotid bodies is
not known. It is believed that type I (glomus) cells are
activated by hypoxia and release transmitter substances
that stimulate afferents to the brainstem.
Peripheral chemoreceptors are sensitive to:
• PaO2
• PaCO2
• pH
• Blood flow
• Temperature.
The carotid bodies are supplied by the autonomic nervous
system, which appears to alter their sensitivity to hypoxia
by regulating blood flow to the chemoreceptor:
• Sympathetic action vasoconstricts, increasing
sensitivity to hypoxia.
• Parasympathetic action vasodilates, reducing
sensitivity to hypoxia.
The relationship between PaO2 and the response from the
carotid bodies is not a linear one. At a low PaO2
(<  50  mmHg or 6.7 kPa), a further decrease in arterial
oxygen tension significantly increases ventilation (Fig. 6.1).
However, at levels of oxygen tension close to 100  mmHg,
changes have little effect on ventilation. If PaO2 increases
above 100 mmHg/13.3 kPa (achieved when breathing high-
concentration oxygen), ventilation is only slightly reduced.
FIG. 6.1  Response of ventilation to PaO2. The response to a
lowered PaO2 is small until the PaO2 falls below a value of 50
mmHg, after which point the response increases
dramatically.
Unlike 
central 
chemoreceptors, 
peripheral
chemoreceptors are directly stimulated by blood pH.
Although peripheral chemoreceptors are stimulated by
PaCO2, their response is much less than that of central
chemoreceptors (less than 10% of the effect).
Hints and tips 
In summary
• Lowered PaO2 (especially below 50 mmHg) increases
ventilation.
• Increased PaCO2 increases ventilation (but this is
< 10% of the effect of central receptors).
• Raised hydrogen ion concentration increases
ventilation (however, aortic bodies do not respond).
• The response of these receptors is very fast and can
oscillate within a respiratory cycle.
Receptors in the lung
Afferent impulses arising from receptors in the lung travel
via the vagal nerve to the respiratory centres of the brain
where they influence the control of breathing. There are
three main types of afferent receptor:
1.    Rapidly adapting receptors.
2.    Slowly adapting receptors.
3.        C-fibre receptors—formerly juxtapulmonary or J
receptors.
Their characteristics are described in Table 6.1 and their
function discussed below.
Table 6.1
Rapidly adapting receptors
Rapidly adapting receptors are involved in lung defence
and form part of the cough reflex. This is reflected in their
location in the upper airways. They produce only transitory
responses 
and 
may 
be 
sensitized 
by 
inflammatory
mediators, making them more sensitive to stimulation.
Slowly adapting receptors
Slowly adapting receptors are important in the control of
breathing, not the cough reflex, and produce sustained
responses. 
They 
are 
stimulated 
by 
inflation 
(which
stretches the lungs):
• Inflation leads to decreased respiration (inflation
reflex or Hering–Breuer reflex).
• Deflation leads to increased respiration (deflation
reflex).
These reflexes are active in the first year of life, but are
weak in adults. Therefore, they are not thought to
determine the rate and depth of breathing in adults.
However, these reflexes are seen to be more active if the
tidal volume increases above 1.0  L and therefore might
have a role in exercise.
Afferent fibres travel to the respiratory centres through
the vagus nerve. The functions of these receptors are:
• The termination of inspiration.
• Regulation of the work of breathing.
• Reinforcement of respiratory rhythm in the first year
of life.
However, if the nerve is blocked by anaesthesia, there is
no change seen in the rate and depth of breathing.
C-fibres
Stimulation of C-fibres results in:
• Closure of the larynx
• Rapid, shallow breathing
• Bradycardia
• Hypotension.
C-fibres also contribute to the breathlessness of heart
failure, and although they are afferent nerve endings, C-
fibres 
are 
able 
to 
release 
inflammatory 
mediators
(neurokinins and substance P).
Receptors in the chest wall
Receptors in the chest wall consist of:
• Joint receptors—measure the velocity of rib
movement.
• Golgi tendon organs—found within the muscles of
respiration (e.g., diaphragm and intercostals) and
detect the strength of muscle contraction.
• Muscle spindles—monitor the length of muscle fibres
both statically and dynamically (i.e., detect muscle
length and velocity).
These receptors help to minimize changes to ventilation
imposed by an external load (e.g., lateral flexion of the
trunk). They achieve this by modifying motor neurone
output to the respiratory muscles. The aim is to achieve the
most efficient respiration in terms of tidal volume and
frequency. 
It 
is 
thought 
that 
stimulation 
of
mechanoreceptors 
in 
the 
chest 
wall, 
along 
with
hypercapnia 
and 
hypoxaemia, 
leads 
to 
increased
respiratory effort in a patient with sleep apnoea. It is this
sudden respiratory effort that then wakes the patient up.
Thus, 
reflexes 
from 
muscles 
and 
joints 
stabilize
ventilation in the face of changing mechanical conditions.
Arterial baroreceptors
Hypertension stimulates arterial baroreceptors, which
inhibit ventilation. Hypotension has the opposite effect.
Pain receptors
Stimulation of pain receptors causes a brief apnoea,
followed by a period of hyperventilation.
Coordinated responses of the
respiratory system
Response to carbon dioxide
Carbon dioxide is the most important factor in the control
of ventilation. Under normal conditions PaCO2 is held
within very tight limits and ventilatory response is very
sensitive to small changes in PaCO2.
The response of ventilation to carbon dioxide has been
measured by inhalation of mixtures of carbon dioxide,
raising the PaCO2 and observing the increase in ventilation
(Fig. 6.2).
FIG. 6.2  The response of ventilation to CO2. Note that at
higher levels of PaO2, an increase in PACO2 has less effect on
ventilation (the curve is less steep).
Note that a small increase in PACO2 causes a significant
increase in ventilation. The response to PaCO2 is also
dependent upon the arterial oxygen tension. At lower
values of PaO2, the ventilatory response is more sensitive to
changes in PaCO2 (steeper slope) and ventilation is greater
for a given PaCO2. If the PaCO2 is reduced, this causes a
significant reduction in ventilation.
Factors that affect ventilatory response to PaCO2 are:
• PaO2
• Blood pH
• Genetics
• Age
• Psychiatric state
• Fitness
• Drugs (e.g., opiates, such as morphine and
diamorphine, which reduce respiratory and
cardiovascular drive).
Response to oxygen
As mentioned previously, the response to reduced PaO2 is
by stimulation of the peripheral chemoreceptors. This
response, however, is not significant until the PaO2 drops to
around 50 mmHg (6.7 kPa). The relationship between PaO2
and ventilation has been studied by measuring changes in
ventilation while a subject breathes hypoxic mixtures (Fig.
6.3). It is assumed that end-expiratory PAO2 and PACO2 are
equivalent to arterial gas tensions.
FIG. 6.3  The response of ventilation to PAO2 at three
values of PACO2. Lowered PAO2 has a much greater effect on
ventilation when increased values of PACO2 are present.
BTPS, Body temperature pressure saturated.
The response to PAO2 is also seen to change with
different levels of PACO2.
• The greater the carbon dioxide tension, the earlier
the response to low oxygen tension.
• Therefore, at high PACO2, a decrease in oxygen
tension below 100 mmHg (13.3 kPa) causes an
increase in ventilation.
Under normal conditions, PaO2 does not fall to values of
around 50 mmHg (6.7 kPa) and, therefore, daily control of
ventilation does not rely on hypoxic drive. However, under
conditions of severe lung disease, or at high altitude,
hypoxic drive becomes increasingly important. A patient
with COPD may rely almost entirely on hypoxic drive alone,
having 
lost 
ventilatory 
response 
to 
carbon 
dioxide
(described 
previously). 
Central 
chemoreceptors 
have
become unresponsive to carbon dioxide; in addition,
ventilatory drive from the effects of reduced pH on
peripheral 
chemoreceptors 
is 
lessened 
by 
renal
compensation 
for 
the 
acid–base 
abnormality.
Administration of high-concentration oxygen therapy (e.g.,
100% O2) may abolish any hypoxic drive that the patient
was previously relying upon, depressing ventilation and
worsening the patient's condition.
Response to pH
Remember that hydrogen ions do not cross the blood–brain
barrier 
and 
therefore 
affect 
only 
peripheral
chemoreceptors. It is difficult to separate the response
from increased PaCO2 and decreased pH. Any change in pH
may be compensated for in the long term by the kidneys
and therefore has less effect on ventilation than might be
expected.
An example of how pH may drive ventilation is seen in
the case of metabolic acidosis. The patient will try to
achieve a reduction in hydrogen ion concentration by
blowing off more carbon dioxide from the lungs. This is
achieved by increasing ventilation.
Response to exercise
As human beings, we are capable of a huge increase in
ventilation in response to exercise: approximately 15 times
the resting level. In moderate exercise, the carbon dioxide
output and oxygen uptake are well matched. Increases in
respiratory 
rate 
and 
tidal 
volume 
do 
not 
cause
hyperventilation, and the subject is said to be hyperpnoeic
(i.e., have increased depth of breathing):
• PaCO2 does not increase, but may fall slightly.
• PaO2 does not decrease.
• In moderate exercise, arterial pH varies very little.
So where does the drive for ventilation come from? Many
causes have been suggested for the increase in ventilation
seen during exercise, but none is completely satisfactory:
• Carbon dioxide load within venous blood returning to
the lungs affects ventilation.
• There is a change in the pattern of oscillations of
PaCO2 (Fig. 6.4).
FIG. 6.4  Cyclical changes of PaCO2 with inspiration
and expiration: (A) at rest; (B) during exercise.
Larger oscillations are thought to alter ventilation.
• Central control of PaCO2 is reset to a lower value and
held constant during exercise.
• Movement of limbs activates joint receptors, which
contribute to increased ventilation.
• Increase in body temperature during exercise may
also stimulate ventilation.
• The motor cortex stimulates respiratory centres.
• Adrenaline released in exercise also stimulates
respiration.
The possible role of oscillations of PaCO2
It is suggested that there are cyclical changes of PaCO2,
with inspiration and expiration. Although mean PaCO2 does
not change during moderate exercise, the amplitude of
these oscillations may increase, providing the stimulus for
ventilation.
In heavy exercise, there can be measurable changes in
PaO2 and PaCO2, which stimulate respiration. In addition,
the pH falls because anaerobic metabolism leads to
production of lactic acid (blood lactate levels increase 10-
fold). This lactic acid is not oxidized because the oxygen
supply cannot keep up with the demands of the exercising
muscles (i.e., an ‘oxygen debt’ is incurred). Rises in
potassium ion concentration and temperature may also
contribute to the increase in ventilation.
When exercise stops, respiration does not immediately
return to basal levels. It remains elevated to provide an
increased supply of oxygen to the tissues to oxidize the
products of anaerobic metabolism (‘repaying the oxygen
debt’).
Abnormalities of ventilatory control
Cheyne–Stokes respiration
In 
Cheyne–Stokes 
respiration, 
ventilation 
alternates
between progressively deeper breaths and progressively
shallower breaths, in a cyclical manner. Ventilatory control
is not achieved and the respiratory system appears to
become unstable:
• Arterial carbon dioxide and oxygen tensions vary
significantly.
• Tidal volumes wax and wane (Fig. 6.5).
FIG. 6.5  Cheyne–Stokes respiration.
• There are short periods of apnoea separated by
periods of hyperventilation.
• Cheyne–Stokes breathing is observed at various
times:
• At altitude—often when asleep.
• During sleep.
• During periods of hypoxia.
• After voluntary hyperventilation.
• During disease, particularly with combined right and
left heart failure and uraemia.
• Secondary to brainstem lesions or compression.
Respiratory response to extreme
environments
Response to high altitude
At high altitude, the barometric pressure is much lower
than at sea level. Hence, the partial pressure of oxygen is
lower.
In addition, the partial pressure of water vapour is
constant, because inspired air is saturated at body
temperature. Therefore, the partial pressure of oxygen in
the alveoli (and in the blood) is significantly lower than at
sea level.
The carriage of oxygen in the blood is dependent on:
• Partial pressure of oxygen in the blood.
• Haemoglobin concentration.
• The oxyhaemoglobin dissociation curve.
At altitude the partial pressure of oxygen in the blood is
lowered. This would tend to limit the amount of oxygen
carriage. To combat this problem the body can:
• Hyperventilate in an attempt to decrease the partial
pressure of carbon dioxide in the alveoli and
therefore increase the partial pressure of oxygen.
• Increase the amount of haemoglobin in the blood,
thereby increasing oxygen carriage (oxygen
capacity).
• Shift the oxygen dissociation curve.
• Alter the circulation.
• Increase anaerobic metabolism in tissues, increase
cytochrome oxidase activity and increase myoglobin
in muscle tissue.
As a result of the physiological adjustments made at
altitude, a number of unique medical problems can occur in
high altitude environments, including hyperventilation,
altitude sickness, pulmonary and cerebral oedema.
Scuba diving
Scuba diving is an increasingly popular recreational
activity, as well as a scientific tool for underwater
discovery. Scuba diving is performed with a compressed air
system to deliver adequate oxygenation whilst swimming
underwater at varying depths. The resulting barometric
pressure effects created at increasing depths create unique
challenges for human physiology. Hypoxia can occur with
air delivery failures, whilst hypercapnia can occur with
inadequate ventilation with the aim to conserve oxygen
supply, compounded by inhaling higher than normal carbon
dioxide concentrations in dead air space systems. The
result is that hypoxic and hypercapnic states are dangerous
realities requiring prompt recognition and treatment in an
underwater environment.
The increasing pressure on descent causes compression
of all gases in the body, with lung volume being reduced as
per the pressure–volume relationship described by Boyle’s
law. This compression effect is counteracted by the process
of equalization and pressurized air systems, but can cause
significant morbidity, especially in free diving. By the same
principle, ascent causes compressed gases to expand
which, without controlled ascent to allow adjustment, leads
to rapid expansion of all gases in tissues throughout the
body. In the lungs, barotrauma through rapid reexpansion
is common, exacerbating existing lung conditions and
complicated by pneumothorax, arterial air embolism,
subcutaneous emphysema and many other life-threatening
conditions. Whilst the take home message for any medical
exam is that if you have ever had a pneumothorax you are
banned from diving for life (the risk of recurrence is high),
diving medicine is a complex multisystem speciality
requiring a strong understanding of the control of
respiratory function.
Chapter Summary
• Breathing is controlled centrally by the medulla and
pons, with control regulated by central and peripheral
chemoreceptors.
• Peripheral chemoreceptors are located in the carotid
and aortic bodies. They are sensitive to PaO2, PaCO2,
pH, blood flow and temperature changes.
• Carbon dioxide is the most important factor in the
control of ventilation in the healthy individual,
regulated largely by central chemoreceptors and kept
within a tight range.
• In pathological states of chronic hypercapnia, such as
in severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, the
regulation of ventilation is instead largely determined
by the oxygen concentration, known as the hypoxic
drive.
• Huge levels of compensation in ventilation are
possible, owing to changes made during exercise.
Separate compensations are also made at high
altitude and whilst scuba diving.
7
Basic pharmacology
Overview
The aim of this chapter is to introduce classes of drugs that
are 
commonly 
prescribed 
in 
respiratory 
medicine,
particularly inhaled drugs used in airways disease and
medication used in smoking cessation. Drugs used to treat
specific conditions are covered within the relevant clinical
chapters.
Bronchodilators
Bronchodilators are medications that reduce the resistance
to air flow in the respiratory tract, thus increasing air flow
to the lungs. They are most commonly used in asthma and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and can be
grouped as follows:
• Short-acting β2-agonists
• Long-acting β2-agonists
• Short-acting anticholinergics
• Long-acting anticholinergics
• Theophylline.
Short-acting β2-agonists
Bronchial smooth muscle contains numerous β2-receptors,
which act through an adenylate cyclase/cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP) second-messenger system to cause
smooth-muscle relaxation and hence bronchodilatation
(Fig. 7.1). Examples of short-acting β2-agonists are:
• Salbutamol
• Terbutaline sulphate.
FIG. 7.1  Mechanisms of action of β2-agonists—relaxation
of bronchial muscle (which leads to bronchodilatation) and
inhibition of mast cell degranulation (β-receptors on mast
cell). ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; cAMP, cyclic adenosine
monophosphate GS, alpha subunit.
These drugs are usually inhaled as an aerosol, a powder
or a nebulized solution but can also be given intravenously
in life-threatening asthma. They are used for acute
symptoms and act within minutes, producing effects lasting
4–5 hours. When used in asthma, they are commonly
referred to as ‘reliever inhalers’.
The β2-agonists are not completely specific and have
some β1-agonistic effects, especially in high doses:
• Tachycardia
• Fine tremor
• Nervous tension
• Headache.
At the doses given by aerosol, these side-effects seldom
occur. Tolerance may occur with high repeated doses.
Long-acting β2-agonists
Like the short-acting β2-agonists, these drugs also relax
bronchial smooth muscle. They differ from the short-acting
drugs in that:
• Their effects last for much longer (up to 24 hours)
• The full effect is only achieved after regular
administration of several doses and, generally, less
desensitization occurs.
For these reasons long-acting β2-agonists are not used to
treat acute attacks of asthma. The main long-acting β2-
agonists are:
• Salmeterol (partial agonist)
• Formoterol (full agonist)
• Indacaterol
• Olodaterol
• Vilanterol.
Long-acting 
β2-agonists 
should 
not 
be 
used 
a
monotherapy in asthma, but can be used alone in patients
with COPD. They are available in a combined preparation
with a corticosteroid. Combination inhalers are more
convenient and there may also be pharmacological
advantages when administered together. They are used in
asthma and COPD. Commonly used combination inhalers
are:
• Salmeterol and fluticasone (Seretide)
• Formoterol and budesonide (Symbicort)
• Formoterol and beclometasone (Fostair).
Due to the differing β-agonist drug profiles, only
combination inhalers containing a full, rather than a partial
β-agonist can be used as single maintenance and reliever
therapy (SMART) for asthma. More details can be found in
Chapter 14.
Anticholinergics
Anticholinergics are competitive antagonists of muscarinic
acetylcholine receptors. They therefore block the vagal
control of bronchial smooth-muscle tone in response to
irritants 
and 
reduce 
reflex 
bronchoconstriction.
Ipratropium bromide and oxitropium bromide are both
anticholinergics; they have two mechanisms of action:
• Reduction of reflex bronchoconstriction (e.g., from
dust or pollen) by antagonizing muscarinic receptors
on bronchial smooth muscle.
• Reduction of mucus secretions by antagonizing
muscarinic receptors on goblet cells.
Anticholinergics are available in short-acting forms, e.g.,
ipratropium, which reach their maximum effect within 60–
90 minutes and act for 4–6 hours. Long-acting forms, e.g.,
tiotropium, aclidinium, glycopyrronium and umeclidinium,
exert their effects for up to 24 hours. They are poorly
absorbed orally and are therefore given by aerosol via an
inhaler or nebulizer.
Anticholinergics as monotherapy are not the first-choice
bronchodilator in asthma treatment because they only
reduce 
the 
vagally 
mediated 
element 
of
bronchoconstriction, having no effect on other important
causes 
of 
bronchoconstriction 
such 
as 
inflammatory
mediators. However, they are licensed as add-on therapy in
patients with moderate to severe asthma. There is some
evidence that anticholinergics are effective when given
together with a β2-agonist in severe acute asthma by
nebulized therapy. Contrastingly, in COPD, cholinergic
hyperactivity 
significantly 
contributes 
to
bronchoconstriction 
and 
therefore 
monotherapy 
with
anticholinergics is more effective than bronchodilators.
Side-effects are rare as systemic absorption is poor, but
can include:
• Dry mouth
• Urinary retention
• Constipation.
Long-acting muscarinic antagonists are also available as
combination therapy with long-acting β2-agonists for use in
patients with COPD, where complementary additive effects
of both drugs may allow better bronchodilation than either
drug alone. Commonly used combination inhalers are:
• Olodaterol and tiotropium (Spiolto)
• Vilanterol and umeclidinium (Anoro)
• Indacaterol and glycopyrronium (Ultibro)
• Formoterol and aclidinium (Duaklir).
Theophylline
Theophylline 
appears 
to 
work 
by 
inhibiting
phosphodiesterase, thereby preventing the breakdown of
cAMP (Fig. 7.2). The amount of cAMP within the bronchial
smooth-muscle cells is therefore increased, which causes
bronchodilation in a similar way to β2-agonists.
FIG. 7.2  Xanthines. The inhibition of phosphodiesterase
(PDE) leads to an increase in cellular cyclic adenosine
monophosphate (cAMP). AMP, Adenosine monophosphate;
ATP, Adenosine triphosphate; 5AMP, GS, alpha subunit.
Theophylline 
is 
metabolized 
by 
cytochrome 
P450
enzymes in the liver and there is considerable variation in
half-life between individuals. Theophylline therefore has a
small therapeutic window, meaning the therapeutic dose is
close to the toxic dose. Consequently, blood serum levels
must 
be 
checked 
in 
patients 
admitted 
unwell 
on
theophylline or after drug initiation. Some factors that alter
theophylline clearance are shown in Table 7.1.
Table 7.1
Factors altering theophylline clearance
Increased clearance
(lower serum levels)
Decreased clearance (high
serum levels)
Cytochrome P450
enzyme-inducing
drugs, e.g., rifampicin
Cytochrome P450 enzyme-
inhibiting drugs, e.g.,
clarithromycin
Smoking
Liver disease
Alcohol
Viral infections
Young age
Old age
Oral theophylline has modest symptomatic benefit when
given as a bronchodilator in stable COPD. It can be given
intravenously in the form of aminophylline (theophylline
with ethylenediamine), but must be administered slowly to
prevent side-effects. Side-effects include arrhythmias,
hypotension, central nervous system stimulation leading to
seizures and gastrointestinal effects, including diarrhoea
and nausea. Aminophylline may be given in cases of severe
asthma that do not respond to initial treatment with
bronchodilators and steroids following senior input.
Glucocorticosteroids
Corticosteroids reduce the formation, release and action of
many different mediators involved in inflammation. Their
mode of action is complex and involves gene modulation
after binding to steroid receptors in the cytoplasm of cells
and translocation of the active receptor into the nucleus.
This has a number of effects, including:
• Downregulation of proinflammatory cytokines and
mediators, e.g., phospholipase A2.
• Production of antiinflammatory proteins.
Corticosteroids in respiratory treatment may be topical
(inhaled) or systemic (oral or parenteral).
Inhaled corticosteroids
These include:
• Beclometasone dipropionate
• Budesonide
• Ciclesonide
• Fluticasone propionate
• Fluticasone fuorate
Side-effects of inhaled steroids in adults include a hoarse
voice, 
oral 
candidiasis, 
skin 
bruising 
and 
possibly
pneumonia in patients with COPD. Corticosteroid inhalers
in asthma are commonly known as ‘preventer inhalers’.
Oral steroids
The primary oral steroid is prednisolone. Side-effects of
systemic steroids include:
• Adrenal suppression
• Myopathy
• Effects on bones (including growth retardation in
children and osteoporosis in adults)
• Diabetes mellitus
• Increased susceptibility to infection
• Weight gain
• Effects on skin (e.g., bruising and atrophy)
• Mood changes.
Because of these side-effects, regular oral steroids are
avoided wherever possible.
Mucolytics
Mucolytics (e.g., carbocisteine) are designed to reduce the
viscosity of sputum. They have limited research evidence to
support their use, however carbocisteine is used commonly
in COPD and bronchiectasis, both during stable and acute
disease, to aid sputum expectoration. The main side-effect
is gastric ulceration and it should be avoided in those with
active ulceration.
Drug delivery devices
Inhalers
These are devices used to deliver drugs to the bronchial
tree. Despite inhalers being the most commonly prescribed
drugs in the United Kingdom, one-third of asthmatics do
not use their inhaler device correctly. The percentage of
drug delivered with each dose ranges from 15%–40%,
assuming good technique. In the last few years, there has
been an explosion of new types of inhaler devices onto the
market, to try to improve drug delivery (Fig. 7.3). Factors
including advancing age, use of multiple devices and lack
of education all contribute to poor inhaler usage. Common
errors with use include problems with the inhalation rate
and duration, coordination of breath with actuation,
preparation prior to dose, poor exhalation prior to
inhalation 
and 
difficulties 
with 
breath 
holding. 
For
example, an elderly patient with arthritis may struggle to
coordinate pressing a device with their breathing. Prior to
starting therapy, patients should have the chance to try a
full range of inhalers to find the correct device for them.
They should have an education session prior to starting
treatment and regular inhaler technique checks once
established. All devices have different methods for priming
and for counting the number of doses left until empty, and
patients need to be aware of how their specific inhaler
works.
FIG. 7.3  Inhaler device examples. From: Dolovich MB,
Dhand R. Aerosol drug delivery: developments in device
design and clinical use. Lancet, 2011;377(9770):1032–45.
Broadly, inhalers exist in two types as detailed below,
with different techniques for use.
Pressurised metered-dose inhaler
The medication is stored in a pressurized canister with
propellant. As these inhalers are pressurized, inhaler
technique should include a ‘slow and steady’ inspiratory
breath coordinated with actuation of the device. Classic
pressurised 
metered-dose 
inhalers 
(MDIs) 
require
coordinated inspiration with depression of the medicated
canister. Where possible, to improve drug delivery classic
MDIs should be used in conjunction with a valve-holding
chamber or spacer device. Newer devices such as
Autohaler and Easi-breathe devices can be primed and
breath 
activated, 
removing 
the 
need 
for 
complex
coordination.
Soft mist inhaler
Soft mist inhalers are aerosol delivery devices that release
an aerosolized measured dose of a medication by pressing
a button. Like a pressurized MDI, the inhalation technique
should include a slow and steady inspiratory breath
coordinated with pressing the dose release button. An
example of this inhaler type is the Respimat soft mist
inhaler.
Dry powder inhalers
Examples 
of 
dry 
powder 
inhalers 
are 
Accuhaler,
Turbohaler, Diskhaler, Nexthaler and Easyhaler.
These inhalers release dry powdered medication to the
lungs and require a ‘fast and deep’ inhalation by the
patient. The delivery of medication is dependent on the
patient's inspiratory effort and therefore unsuitable for
patients with poor inspiratory flow.
Hints and tips 
How to use a metered-dose inhaler
Demonstrating inhaler technique to a patient is an
important medical skill and commonly appears in ‘OSCE’
examinations 
at 
medical 
school. 
Helpful 
videos
demonstrating different devices can be found on the
Asthma UK website (Asthma.org.uk). It is worth spending
time with an asthma nurse who can demonstrate
different devices.
Nebulizers
Nebulizers are driven by air or oxygen and aerosolize liquid
medication for inhalation. They are used in patients with:
1. Acute respiratory illnesses
2. Very severe disease
3. Patients who are unable to use inhalers.
Occasionally patients are prescribed nebulizers at home;
however, guidelines advocate the use of an MDI with
spacer in the majority of outpatient clinical scenarios and
patients should therefore should be seen by a respiratory
physician prior to starting nebulized treatment at home.
Red flag 
Smoking cessation
Over 8 million adults (roughly 20%) in the United
Kingdom smoke tobacco. It remains the leading cause of
preventable death and illness worldwide. Five percent of
hospital admissions are attributable to smoking. The
National Smoking Cessation Audit 2016 found that only 1
in 13 patients who smoke were referred to community- or
hospital-based 
smoking 
cessation 
services. 
When
assessing any patient remember:
1. ASK—do you smoke? Have you ever smoked? When
did you stop?
2. ADVISE—provide advice on cognitive and
pharmacological methods of smoking cessation.
3. ACT—refer to local smoking cessation providers.
Drugs used in smoking cessation
A 
combination 
of 
motivational 
interviewing 
and
pharmacotherapy has been shown to be more successful
than monotherapy alone for smoking cessation. The three
main drugs used are:
1. Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT)
2. Varenicline
3. Bupropion.
NRT products (gums, patches and nasal sprays) are
classified as over-the-counter medicines and have been
shown to be effective in treating tobacco withdrawal and
dependence. Long-acting preparations such as patches
should 
be 
used 
in 
combination 
with 
short-acting
preparations such as lozenges to both prevent and treat
cravings as they arise. Current guidance suggests that e-
cigarettes can be used as NRT as an aid in smoking
cessation. As the long-term effects of e-cigarettes are not
yet known, potential harm from long-term use cannot be
excluded and is therefore not advised.
Varenicline is a nicotine receptor partial agonist available
as an oral preparation that helps relieve cravings and
prevent withdrawal symptoms by decreasing the ‘reward’
from smoking. When used with NRT and motivational
interviewing it may double a person’s chance of quitting. It
should be started 2 weeks prior to stopping smoking and
the dose increased over the first weeks of treatment. Side-
effects include nausea, and the dose should be decreased in
renal failure.
Bupropion is an oral medication that helps decrease the
urge to smoke. Similarly to varenicline, it should be started
prior to stopping. It should be avoided in patients at risk of
seizures as it can lower seizure threshold.
E-cigarettes
Electronic cigarettes are battery-operated devices that
deliver nicotine via vapour that can be inhaled in a similar
manner to a cigarette. They do not contain tobacco;
however, they contain nicotine, propylene glycol or
glycerine, and flavourings. Use of e-cigarettes is increasing.
In 2015, Action for Smoking and Health (ASH) estimated
that there were 2.6 million adult e-cigarette users in the
UK. Of those users, two in five were ex-smokers whilst
three in five were current smokers.
E-cigarettes are generally considered to be less harmful
than smoking tobacco as they contain fewer harmful
components than traditional cigarettes, and are therefore
generally accepted to have a role in smoking cessation.
However, there is limited research evidence currently to
support their role in smoking cessation and there are
concerns that the long-term risks of e-cigarette smoking
are as yet unknown.
Palliative medications used in
respiratory medicine
Some respiratory diseases are progressive and incurable,
and palliative care at the end stage of life of these patients
can improve quality of life for both patients and families.
The emphasis is on preempting and treating symptoms and
preventing suffering. This is achieved by a combination of
pharmacological 
measures 
and 
psychosocial 
support.
Specialist palliative care services should be involved early.
The main pharmacological treatments used are:
• Opiates—used for analgesia and, in much smaller
doses, to relieve dyspnoea.
• Benzodiazepines—used to treat anxiety associated
with dyspnoea, in conjunction with complementary
therapies and relaxation techniques.
• Steroids—used in low doses to encourage appetite in
those with anorexia, in conjunction with nutritional
support. Also used in higher doses to reduce
cerebral oedema from intracranial metastases from
malignant disease.
These 
medications 
have 
side-effects, 
particularly
respiratory depression for opiates and benzodiazepines,
therefore caution must be taken when prescribing.
References and further reading:
1. Asthma UK (www.asthma.org.uk)
2. BTS Tobacco Specialist Advisory Group Slide Set:
Stopping Smoking – What health professionals
should know (March 2016)
3. British National Formulary.
Chapter Summary
• Bronchodilator medications reduce resistance to
airflow in the respiratory tract and increase airflow
into the lungs. Commonly prescribed inhaled
bronchodilators include β2-agonists and
anticholinergics.
• Drug delivery devices for inhaled medications include
inhalers (pressurized metered-dose inhalers (MDIs),
soft mist inhalers, dry powder inhalers) and
nebulizers.
• It is crucial to check a patient’s inhaler technique
during each inpatient hospital stay, at outpatient
reviews and regularly in the community, via their
specialist nurse.
• A combination of motivational interviewing and
pharmacotherapy with medications (including
nicotine replacement therapy and varenicline) has
been shown to be most successful for smoking
cessation.
• E-cigarettes are less harmful than smoking tobacco
and may have a role in smoking cessation; however,
the long-term effects of their use are as yet unknown.
SECTION 2
Clinical Assessment
8
Taking a respiratory
history
Introduction
Taking a good history is the most important part of any
clinical assessment. The key to identifying and successfully
treating the respiratory patient is to understand the
interplay between the underlying pathophysiology and the
principal symptoms of respiratory disease. These symptoms
—breathlessness, cough, haemoptysis, wheeze and chest
pain—are common to many different conditions and this
can make diagnosis seem difficult. However, a good history
focusing on the time course and progression of the illness
will often reveal recognizable patterns of symptoms and
enable you to narrow down the differential diagnoses.
Indeed, the history should give you the diagnosis in
between 50% and 80% of cases, and if not, at least a very
short list of differential diagnoses.
As well as giving you clinical information, history-taking
also allows you to get to know your patient and build a
therapeutic partnership with them. A good history takes
into account the patient’s ideas and concerns, and
addressing these will lay a foundation of trust, which is
vital in treating the patient as a whole.
The respiratory history follows the same format as for the
other systems, and this should be familiar to you. At every
stage, the goal is to be asking questions to either rule in or
rule out diagnoses. Remember that common things are
common and serious things are serious.
General steps
Ensure you are as prepared as possible for the patient
encounter and have set distractions aside. Preferably find a
quiet venue for taking the history; if things are busy on the
ward consider taking the patient to the day room.
Select an appropriate time if possible—avoid drug rounds
and meal times. A good history can take some time,
especially when new to history taking or with complicated
patients. Starting out with a clear history structure ensures
important 
points 
are 
not 
missed, 
whilst 
the 
more
experienced can take a focused history with key questions
used to rule in (or rule out) key diagnoses. Sometimes
patients are confused or too unwell to provide a clear
history, in which case a collateral history from a relative,
friend or carer can give you the valuable information you
need.
In the clinical setting (as opposed to an exam), it is often
useful to find out as much about the patient as you can
before you see them: read the referral letter, review old
notes and look up any electronic records of medication
lists, discharge summaries or previous clinic letters. This
may give you valuable details of previous encounters, keep
you up to speed with any current investigations or
treatments and save you time.
Introduce yourself to the patient and confirm the
patient's name and date of birth. Explain what you wish to
do and gain consent.
History of presenting complaint
Start by finding out why the patient has come to seek
medical advice. Ask open questions and allow the patient
time to talk to describe their problems, before closing in on
specifics. A good clinician is a good listener, and clues to
the diagnosis will often be in how the patient describes
their unique symptoms. Below is information on the most
commonly presenting respiratory complaints.
Breathlessness
Breathlessness, or dyspnoea, is difficulty or distress in
breathing and is a symptom of many different diseases.
Breathlessness is a very common reason for referral to a
respiratory clinic.
The patient may describe the symptom in a variety of
ways. Common terms used are ‘puffed’, ‘can't get enough
air’ and ‘feeling suffocated’. A number of physiological
factors underlie this sensation and sometimes several
mechanisms coexist to cause breathlessness.
Key points to establish include the speed of onset of
breathlessness, 
its 
progression 
and 
variability,
exacerbating and relieving factors and response to any
treatment. This can help to establish the severity of the
underlying disease process: e.g., shortness of breath even
at rest suggests much worse disease than that only causing
breathlessness 
on 
exercise. 
Quantifying 
exertional
breathlessness can provide valuable prognostic information
and often guide treatment options, with several scoring
systems in place to grade symptom severity (see Table 8.1
for the Medical Research Council Dyspnoea Scale). It is
vital 
to 
question 
patients 
about 
the 
impact 
the
breathlessness has on their quality of life, as severe lung
disease can be debilitating, leading to depression and
poorer outcomes. Breathlessness may be episodic, and
timing is key. The diurnal variation (severity altering at
different times of day) of symptoms is characteristic of
asthma. Orthopnoea (breathlessness on lying flat) is a
common feature of pulmonary oedema but is seen in any
severe respiratory disease. Paroxysmal nocturnal dyspnoea
(waking up breathless in the night) again is classic of
pulmonary oedema but also of asthma, with differentiation
made by extra features and clinical context.
Table 8.1
Medical Research Council Dyspnoea Scalea
Grade
Degree of breathlessness related to activity
1
Not troubled by breathlessness except on
strenuous exercise
2
Short of breath when hurrying on a level or when
walking up a slight hill
3
Walks slower than most people on the level, stops
after a mile or so, or stops after 15 minutes
walking at own pace
4
Stops for breath after walking 100 yards, or after
a few minutes on level ground
5
Too breathless to leave the house, or breathless
when dressing/undressing
a A widely used tool for grading the impact of breathlessness on patients’ lives.
Nonrespiratory 
causes 
of 
breathlessness 
include
anaemia, heart failure, cardiac arrhythmias, anxiety or
even a sign of respiratory compensation in diabetic
ketoacidosis.
Cough
Everybody produces airway secretions. In a healthy
nonsmoker, approximately 100–150  mL of mucus is
produced every day. Normally, this mucus is transported
up the airway's ciliary mucus escalator and swallowed. This
process is not normally perceived. However, coughing or
expectorating sputum is always abnormal, and is a sign
that excess mucus has been generated.
Coughing is a physiological mechanism of removing
excess sputum or foreign material by creating large
positive pressure within the thorax to create a sharp
forceful expiration. This can result from irritation of the
respiratory tract by infection, inflammation, excess sputum
production, inhaled irritants such as smoking or other
foreign bodies (see airway clearance in Chapter 2 for more
details).
Sputum may be classified as:
• Mucoid: clear, grey or white.
• Serous: watery or frothy.
• Mucopurulent: a yellowish tinge.
• Purulent: dark green/yellow.
Always try to inspect the sputum and note its volume,
colour, consistency and odour. These details can provide
clues as to the underlying pathology. A yellow/green colour
usually means infection and is caused by myeloperoxidase
produced by eosinophils or neutrophils. However, note that
sputum in asthma contains high numbers of eosinophils and
is often yellow or green without underlying infection.
You may have to prompt the patient when investigating
the volume of sputum. Is enough coughed up to fill a
teaspoon/tablespoon/eggcup/sputum pot?
Most bronchogenic carcinomas do not produce sputum
themselves. However, they do commonly cause irritation of
the respiratory tract and hence stimulate the cough reflex.
The exception is the rare alveolar cell carcinoma, which
produces copious amounts of mucoid sputum. Coughing is
reliant on adequate closure of the vocal cords whilst
intrathoracic pressure is raised. Invasion of the recurrent
laryngeal 
nerve 
by 
a 
bronchial 
tumour 
can 
cause
incomplete vocal cord closure and a characteristic ‘bovine
cough’. Persistent cough is the most common presenting
symptom in lung cancers and hence any unexplained cough
lasting 3 weeks or more warrants an urgent referral for a
chest X-ray.
Chronic bronchitis is a particularly important cause of
sputum production. This is defined as a cough productive of
sputum for most days during at least 3 consecutive months,
for more than 2 successive years. Detailed questioning
about cough is needed in patients with chronic bronchitis.
Useful questions include:
• Do you cough up sputum/spit/phlegm from your
chest on most mornings?
• Would you say you cough up sputum on most days
for as much as 3 months a year?
• Do you often need antibiotics from your GP in
winter?
• Do you currently smoke or have you ever smoked?
(Chronic bronchitis is significantly more common in
smokers.)
Chronic bronchitis is a component of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD), which is a very common
respiratory disease discussed in detail in Chapter 15. It can
be controlled well with smoking cessation and inhaled
therapies; therefore, it is important that the symptoms are
detected early to give the patient the best possible
outcome. A summary of the differences between cough in
asthma and that in chronic bronchitis is shown in Table 8.2.
Table 8.2
Patterns of cough in asthma and chronic bronchitis
Asthma
Chronic
bronchitis
Timing
Worse at night
Worse in the
morning
Nature
Dry (may be green
sputum)
Productive
Chronicity
Intermittent
Persistent
Response to
treatment
Associated wheeze
is reversible
Associated wheeze
is irreversible
Nonrespiratory causes of cough include gastroesophageal
reflux (laryngeal irritation and sometimes aspiration),
postnasal drip secondary to sinusitis or drug induced
(classically, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors can
cause a chronic dry cough).
Haemoptysis
Haemoptysis is the coughing up of blood; this needs to be
differentiated from other sources of bleeding within the
oral cavity and haematemesis (vomiting blood). This
distinction is usually obvious from the history. Haemoptysis
is not usually a solitary event and so, if possible, the
sputum sample should be inspected.
Haemoptysis is a serious and often alarming symptom
that requires immediate investigation. A chest radiograph
is mandatory in a patient with haemoptysis, and the
symptom should be treated as bronchogenic carcinoma
until proved otherwise. Despite appropriate investigations,
often no obvious cause can be found and the episode is
attributed to a simple bronchial infection. Important
respiratory causes of haemoptysis are:
• Bronchial carcinoma
• Pulmonary embolism
• Tuberculosis (TB)
• Pneumonia (particularly pneumococcal)
• Bronchiectasis
• Acute/chronic bronchitis
• Pulmonary vasculitis (e.g., Goodpasture syndrome,
granulomatosis with polyangiitis).
In investigating the cause of haemoptysis, ask about any
preceding events such as respiratory infection or a history
of deep vein thrombosis, and establish the frequency and
volume, whether it is fresh or altered blood and if clots are
present.
You must also establish what, if any, risk factors the
patient has for a particular differential diagnosis. Therefore
it is important to ask about things such as smoking history
(bronchial carcinoma), foreign travel and infective contacts
(TB), recent immobilization owing to a long-haul flight or
surgery (pulmonary embolism), rashes, joint pains and
upper respiratory tract symptoms (vasculitis), and a history
of 
recurrent 
chest 
infections 
requiring 
treatment
(bronchiectasis).
Wheeze
Wheezing is a common complaint, complicating many
different disease processes. Establish exactly what a
patient means by ‘wheeze’; used correctly, the term
describes musical notes heard mainly on expiration, caused
by narrowed airways. It is important to differentiate
wheeze as a symptom and wheeze as a clinical sign.
Wheeze as a physical sign is classified as either
polyphonic (of many different notes) or monophonic (just
one note) and occurs during expiration. These are
indistinguishable by history alone and require physical
examination (Chapter 9). Polyphonic wheeze is common in
widespread air flow obstruction; it is the characteristic
wheeze heard in asthmatics. A localized monophonic
wheeze 
suggests 
that 
a 
single 
airway 
is 
partially
obstructed; this can also occur in asthma (e.g., by a mucus
plug) but may be a sign of narrowing caused by a tumour.
The symptom of wheezing is not diagnostic of asthma,
although asthma and COPD are the commonest causes and
they can be difficult to distinguish. You should establish the
pattern of symptom onset: in asthma, the wheeze is often
worst first thing in the morning, with cold air or on physical
exertion. Wheezing may be worse during the week and
better on weekends, suggesting occupational asthma.
Wheezing can also occur in pulmonary oedema, owing to
the swelling of airway walls with fluid.
Stridor is an audible inspiratory noise and indicates
partial obstruction of the upper, larger airways, such as the
larynx, trachea and main bronchus. It is very important that
you differentiate between a wheeze and stridor because
stridor is a serious sign requiring urgent investigation and
can often be a medical emergency. Causes of obstruction
include tumour, epiglottitis and inhalation of a foreign
body.
Chest pain
Pain can originate from most of the structures in the chest
and can be classified as central or lateral. As with pain
anywhere in the body, enquire about site, onset, character,
radiation, associated factors, time, exacerbating/relieving
factors and severity (SOCRATES). Make sure you ask
specifically about the pain's relationship to deep breathing,
coughing or movement; if it is made worse by these factors,
it is likely to be pleural in origin. Pleural pain is sharp and
stabbing in character and may be referred to the shoulder
tip if the diaphragmatic pleura is involved. It can be very
severe and often leads to shallow breathing, avoidance of
movement and cough suppression. The commonest causes
of pleural pain are pulmonary embolus or infection. Fig. 8.1
summarizes the main causes of chest pain, including
nonrespiratory causes.
FIG. 8.1  Summary of causes of chest pain. MI, Myocardial
infarction; PE, pulmonary embolism.
Respiratory causes of central, or retrosternal, chest pain
include bronchitis and acute tracheitis. This pain is often
made worse by coughing and may be relieved when the
patient coughs up sputum.
Other associated symptoms
In addition to the principal presentations, there are several
other symptoms that you should note.
Hoarseness
Ask if the patient's voice has changed at all in recent times
and, if so, was there anything that preceded the change
such as overuse of the voice or previous thyroidectomy.
There may be a simple, benign cause of hoarseness, such
as:
• Cigarette smoking
• Acute laryngitis as part of an acute upper respiratory
tract infection
• Use of inhaled steroids.
However, there may be a more sinister cause: like the
bovine cough noted previously, hoarseness may be a sign
that a lung tumour is compressing the recurrent laryngeal
nerve. Therefore in a smoker, any change in voice lasting
longer than a few days should be investigated urgently to
rule out malignancy.
Weight loss
Unintentional weight loss is always an important sign,
raising suspicion of carcinoma. Establish how much weight
the patient has lost, over what period, and whether there is
any loss of appetite. Note, however, that it is common for
patients with severe emphysema to lose weight.
Weight loss can also occur from infection, particularly
TB. Additional features to suggest TB as the underlying
cause include chronic cough, night sweats and recent
travel to/emigration from a country or region with a high
prevalence of the disease, such as India and South Asia.
Ankle swelling
Patients with COPD may comment that their ankles swell
during acute exacerbations. Ask about this and check for
oedema as part of your examination. It is an important sign
of cor pulmonale, which is right-sided heart failure
secondary to chronic lung disease.
Fevers and sweats
Fevers and rigors are classically associated with infection,
with 
the 
patient 
experiencing 
sudden 
changes 
in
temperature—shivering cold followed by burning hot, as
their temperature increases. Also consider night sweats,
which are a separate entity without rigors where the
patient becomes drenched with sweat, often soaking
through clothes or bedsheets. Night sweats suggest an
underlying malignancy or a more chronic infective process
such as TB.
Systems review
Go through a systems review to ensure no other key
information is missed.
Past medical history
Ask about any illnesses and/or operations the patient has
had in the past (medical and surgical history) and create a
list. Does the patient see the general practitioner (GP) for
anything regularly?
If a patient tells you he or she has a diagnosis of a
respiratory disease, then explore this. The patient's current
presentation may or may not be related to this, however.
Patients may know considerably more than you about their
condition; try not to let this disturb you and use it as a
learning opportunity. Important things to clarify are:
• When and where were they diagnosed?
• Who do they see for follow up?
• Have they been admitted to hospital before with
their respiratory disease?
• If so, did they have to attend the intensive therapy
unit and, if so, were they ventilated?
• If they have medication they can use as required,
have they been using more recently, e.g., inhalers or
COPD rescue packs?
• Have they had to have oral steroids in the past, or
are they currently on them?
• Do they use oxygen at home?
Past infections can be very important. Childhood
infections such as pneumonia can lead to bronchiectasis in
later life. Always ask about previous infections with or
exposure to TB.
In certain populations a vaccination history is relevant—
the elderly, young and those with chronic conditions are
often eligible for seasonal influenza and pneumococcal
vaccines in the United Kingdom.
Many patients with chronic disease also suffer with low
mood and depression—ask questions around this to
uncover hidden disease burdens.
Drug history
Make a comprehensive list of medications the patient is
taking, along with doses. If the patient is unsure, then a
quick call to the GP may be needed, or look up online
records. Be sure to ask specifically about over-the-counter
medications, and contraceptives in women. Also of note are
whether the patient uses any inhaler regimens, whether
these have changed recently and what inhaler technique
they use (see Chapter 7: Pharmacology).
Ensure patients know what each of their medications is
for and check their compliance—a surprising number of
patients do not use their medications regularly or correctly.
If you identify the reasons why you can look for alternative
treatments.
Always ask about allergies!
Family history
A specific knowledge of respiratory disorders that run in
the family can be useful in aiding diagnosis of atopic
disorders such as asthma, but also rarer conditions such as
cystic 
fibrosis 
and 
α1-antitrypsin 
deficiency. 
More
generally, a significant history of cardiac risk factors or
death at a young age may be relevant.
Social history
Understanding a patient’s social situation is of utmost
importance in respiratory medicine. You are able to assess
specific risk factors for diseases and understand the burden
their illness has on their daily lives.
Always ask about smoking and quantify the amount
smoked—how long have they smoked for and how many
cigarettes a day (see Box 8.1: Clinical notes: Pack-years).
Ask about passive smoking. Occupation is often important—
always ask about current or previous jobs to gain clues of
exposure to hazardous materials. For example, mining (and
type of material mined, e.g., coal, metals such as
beryllium), building/plumbing (often asbestos exposure
risks), roadwork (silica or dust exposure) or bartending
(high passive smoking rates) are just some of many
occupations relevant to respiratory disease. Ask specifically
about previous asbestos exposure—patients may or may not
be aware of occupational or incidental contact. Other
important exposures include pets (both the patient’s own
and those in close contact) and travel history (consider
infectious diseases endemic to an area and long-haul flight
risks). Has the patient ever lived abroad for a significant
period of time or been away in the last 12 months?
Clinical notes 
Pack-years
This is a simple and useful method of quantifying
cigarette smoking.
Number of pack-years = (packs smoked per day)  ×
(years as a smoker).
Next consider how the patient lives with their symptoms.
Establish who is at home, whether they live in a house with
stairs 
or 
in 
a 
bungalow 
and 
whether 
they 
live
independently or require assistance with daily activities
such as cooking, cleaning and getting dressed. Ask about
mobility specifically and quantify the distances they can
mobilize before having to stop, both on the flat and stairs,
as well as if walking aids are needed. Are they housebound
or can they walk long distances; how do they manage
shopping?
Addressing patient’s concerns
One of the most important aspects to building a therapeutic
relationship is understanding the patient’s perspective of
their illness. Explore the patient’s ideas, concerns and
expectations by asking them what they think is wrong.
Empower the patient to ask questions and address any
concerns that they raise.
Summary
It is good practice to summarize things briefly back to the
patient, cementing the story in your own mind as well as
giving the patient a chance to correct unclear points or
expand on any unresolved issues.
Chapter Summary
You should now be able to:
● Describe the most common presentations of
respiratory disease.
● Give nonrespiratory differential diagnoses for
symptoms such as cough, chest pain and
breathlessness.
● Identify the symptoms and signs that indicate serious
pathology.
● Be comfortable with the structure and content of a
respiratory history.
9
Examination of the
respiratory system
Introduction
As with any examination, it is important that you:
• Introduce yourself to the patient
• Explain to the patient the purpose of the examination
and gain consent
• Wash your hands before you begin and when you
finish the examination
• Ask the patient if they are in any pain or discomfort,
adjusting your examination accordingly.
For a respiratory examination, patients should be fully
exposed to the waist, comfortable and sitting at a 45-
degree angle, with their hands by their sides. The structure
of the respiratory examination is always:
• Inspection
• Palpation
• Percussion
• Auscultation.
Peripheral examination
General inspection
The purpose of general inspection is to gain as much
information about the patient as possible before you begin
examining him or her. It is an important skill to learn as a
doctor, as you will often decide how sick a patient is purely
on the basis of your initial observations and this will then
guide whether you do a thorough history and examination
or begin emergency management.
General inspection is hugely important in respiratory
examination as a large amount of information can be learnt
about the patient by simply observing from the bedside.
When inspecting the patient, you should ask yourself the
following questions:
• Is this patient in respiratory distress (Fig. 9.1)?
FIG. 9.1  Features of respiratory distress. The
clinical findings shown are important signs of
respiratory distress—with these features the
patient will require urgent attention.
• What is the patient's respiratory rate (Table 9.1)?
Table 9.1
Respiratory rate
Normal respiratory rate
12–20 breaths/min
Tachypnoea
> 20 breaths/min
Bradypnoea
< 12 breaths/min
• Can the patient talk to me in full sentences without
becoming breathless?
• Is the patient's breathing noisy (is there wheeze or
stridor?)?
• What is the patient's pattern of breathing (Table
9.2)?
Table 9.2
Abnormal breathing patterns
Breathing pattern
Causes
Kussmaul respiration (hyperventilation with
deep sighing respirations)
Diabetic
ketoacidosis
Aspirin
overdose
Acute massive
pulmonary
embolism
Cheyne–Stokes respiration (increased rate and
volume of respiration followed by periods of
apnoea)
Terminal disease
Increased
intracranial
pressure
Prolongation of expiration
Air flow limitation
Pursed-lip breathing
Air trapping
• Are there inhalers, sputum pots or oxygen around
the bedside?
• Is there any hint as to the underlying cause of the
respiratory disease, e.g., cachexia in lung cancer or
classic features of scleroderma in lung fibrosis?
• Is there any evidence of potential side-effects of
respiratory medications, i.e., signs of use of
corticosteroids (Fig. 9.2), or tremor with salbutamol
excess?
FIG. 9.2  Side-effects of long-term steroid
treatment.
Hands
Examination of the hands is a key stage in the respiratory
examination as there are many important peripheral
manifestations of respiratory disease. Ask patients to place
their hands in front of them and carefully inspect for the
following features:
• Tar staining
• Clubbing
• Peripheral cyanosis
• Carbon dioxide retention
• Tremor
• Muscle wasting
• Rheumatoid arthritis.
Tar staining
Tar staining is an important clinical feature to note as
smoking is an important risk factor for many lung diseases,
including chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
and lung cancer. Tar staining is a yellow discoloration of
the fingers and is usually most notable around the
fingertips (Fig. 9.3).
FIG. 9.3  Tar staining. From: Devereux G, Douglas G, The
respiratory system. In: Douglas, G et al. (eds), Macleod's
Clinical Examination, 13th edition, 2013. Elsevier.
Clubbing
Clubbing is a painless, bulbous enlargement of the distal
fingers, which is accompanied by softening of the nail bed
and loss of nail bed angle (Fig. 9.4). One method of
detecting clubbing is to look for Schamroth sign (Fig. 9.5).
The respiratory causes of clubbing include the following:
• Congenital illness
• Cystic fibrosis
• Bronchial carcinoma
• Mesothelioma
• Pulmonary metastases
• Empyema
• Bronchiectasis
• Lung fibrosis.
FIG. 9.4  Clubbing. From: Little JW, Falace DA, Miller CS, et
al. Patient Evaluation and Risk Assessment, In: Little and
Falace's Dental Management of the Medically Compromised
Patient, 8th edition, Mosby 2013, Elsevier.
FIG. 9.5  Schamroth sign (finger clubbing). Based on:
Schamroth L. “Personal Experience.” S Afr Med J.
1976;50(9):297-300
There are other, nonrespiratory, causes, which include
inflammatory bowel disease, liver cirrhosis, congenital
cyanotic 
heart 
disease, 
infective 
endocarditis 
and
hyperthyroidism (thyroid acropachy).
Common pitfalls
Note chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is
NOT a cause of clubbing. If a patient with COPD is seen
with clubbing, a diagnosis of lung cancer must be
excluded. Bronchiectasis is a common differential.
Peripheral cyanosis
Peripheral cyanosis is bluish discoloration of the skin,
particularly the fingers. In lung disease this is caused by
inadequate oxygenation and warrants further investigation;
however, this change may reflect circulatory disorders or
cold peripheries.
Carbon dioxide retention
There are several signs of carbon dioxide retention that can
be detected in the hands:
• Warm, well-perfused hands
• Palmar erythema (reddening of the palms)
• Bounding radial pulse
• Carbon dioxide retention flap.
The carbon dioxide retention flap is elicited by asking
patients to hold their arms outstretched and to extend their
wrists fully. Patients should remain in this position for 30
seconds; in the presence of carbon dioxide retention they
will develop a coarse, irregular tremor as their fingers
‘flap’ backwards and forwards.
Tremor
It is common for respiratory patients using β2-agonists (i.e.,
salbutamol) to develop a fine resting tremor. This tremor is
again assessed by asking patients to hold their arms
outstretched. Unlike carbon dioxide retention, this tremor
is very fine and regular, and can be exaggerated by laying a
piece of paper over the patient's hands.
Muscle wasting and bony deformities of the
hands
These signs are often indirectly related to lung disease and
thus are not essential to detect in the respiratory
examination. However, if they are detected, they can
provide useful information as to the underlying pathology
of lung disease. Unilateral muscle wasting of the hands
(particularly in T1 distribution) may hint at the presence of
a Pancoast tumour. Patients with rheumatoid arthritis have
classical hand deformities (Fig. 9.6): this autoimmune
condition 
is 
associated 
with 
lung 
fibrosis. 
Other
rheumatological diseases with pulmonary manifestations
may be present, such as sclerodactyly (hard thickening of
the skin of the fingers) in systemic sclerosis.
FIG. 9.6  Rheumatoid hands showing (A) swan neck, (B)
boutonnière, (C) ulnar deviation and (D) Z thumbs.
Radial pulse
A normal resting pulse in an adult is 60–100 beats per
minute (bpm). Bradycardia is defined as a pulse rate of less
than 60  bpm and tachycardia of greater than 100  bpm.
Palpate the radial pulse and count for 15 seconds, then
multiply by four to give a rate per minute. Is the pulse
regular (Table 9.3)?
Table 9.3
The radial pulse can also be assessed for the presence of
pulsus 
paradoxus. 
In 
normal 
individuals, 
the 
pulse
decreases slightly in volume on inspiration and systolic
blood pressure falls by 3–5  mmHg. In severe obstructive
diseases (e.g., severe asthma), the contractile force of
respiratory muscles is so great that there is a marked fall in
systolic pressure on inspiration. A fall of greater than
10 mmHg is pathological.
Hints and tips 
You will gain marks if your examination looks fluent and
professional. 
It 
is 
easy 
to 
move 
smoothly 
from
introducing yourself and shaking the patient's hand, to
examination of the hands, to testing the radial pulse. You
can then discreetly test for respiratory rate without
patients realizing and altering their breathing.
Head and neck
Examination of the face
First, observe the face generally. You may notice:
• Signs of superior vena cava obstruction (Fig. 9.7)
FIG. 9.7  Superior vena cava obstruction. This can
occur in patients with an apical lung tumour.
• Cushingoid features (see Fig. 9.2).
Look at the mouth for signs of:
• Candida infection—white coating on tongue, often
seen after steroids or antibiotics
• Central cyanosis.
Central cyanosis is blue discoloration of the mucous
membranes of the mouth and represents >  5 g/dL of
haemoglobin in its reduced form. With normal haemoglobin
concentrations, true cyanosis roughly corresponds to a fall
in arterial oxygen saturation of < 90% or PaO2 of < 8 kPa.
In anaemia or hypovolaemia, this sign will only present at
lower oxygen concentrations. In lung disease, this is caused
by inadequate oxygenation, i.e., in asthma, COPD or
pulmonary embolism.
Eyes
Examine the eyes for evidence of anaemia by asking the
patient to look up whilst pulling down (gently) the lower
eyelid. A pale conjunctiva is indicative of anaemia.
Examine the eyes carefully, looking for evidence of
Horner syndrome (Fig. 9.8), which is characterized by:
• Partial ptosis (drooping of the eyelid)
• Miosis (small pupil)
• Anhydrosis (lack of sweating)
• Enopthalmos (sunken eyeball, not always present).
FIG. 9.8  Horner syndrome.
In respiratory medicine, Horner syndrome can be caused
by a Pancoast tumour (see Chapter 17), which is an apical
lung tumour. This tumour can press on the sympathetic
chain as it ascends in the neck, causing Horner syndrome.
Examination of the neck
In the neck it is important to examine:
• Trachea (Fig. 9.9) and cricosternal distance (Fig.
9.10)
A 
B 
, 
, 
', 
I 
' 
I 
' 
, 
Sternomastoid 
Pneumothorax 
Effusion 
fluid 
FIG. 9.9  Tracheal deviation. (A) Tracheal deviation
is measured by placing the index and ring fingers
on either head of the clavicle. The middle finger is
then placed gently on the trachea. In normal
patients the trachea will be equidistant between
the two heads of the clavicle, i.e., your middle
finger will be the same distance from index and
ring fingers. (B) In the presence of a tension
pneumothorax on the left, the pressure of air in the
pleural space causes the trachea to shift to the
right. On clinical examination, the trachea would be
closer to the right clavicular head than the left.
FIG. 9.10  Cricosternal distance. Measure the
distance (using your fingers) between the sternal
notch and the cricoid cartilage. This distance is
normally three to four fingers. Less than three
fingers is indicative of air flow limitation (common
in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease).
• Jugular venous pressure (JVP)
• Lymph nodes (Fig. 9.11).
FIG. 9.11  Anatomy of cervical lymph nodes.
When examining the JVP, ensure the patient is sitting at a
45-degree angle and ask the patient to turn the head to the
left (Fig. 9.12). A normal JVP is visible just above the
clavicle 
in 
between 
the 
two 
heads 
of 
the
sternocleidomastoid. The JVP can be difficult to see and so
it can be accentuated by the hepatojugular reflux (i.e.,
press down gently over the liver; this increases venous
return to the heart and thus increases the JVP). Once
found, the height of the JVP should be measured from the
sternal notch. If this is > 4 cm, the JVP is said to be raised
(Table 9.4).
FIG. 9.12  Jugular venous pressure.
Table 9.4
Abnormalities of the jugular venous pressure
Abnormality
Cause
Raised with normal
waveform
Cor pulmonale
Fluid overload
Raised with absent
waveform
Superior vena cava
obstruction
Absent
Dehydration, shock
Develop a set system of palpating the lymph nodes of the
neck. Sit the patient up and examine from behind with both
hands (see Fig. 9.11).
The chest
General inspection of the chest
When undertaking a close inspection of the chest it is
important to pay specific attention to:
• Chest wall deformities (Fig. 9.13)
FIG. 9.13  Chest wall deformities. (A) Pectus
excavatum: a benign condition whereby the
sternum is depressed in relation to the ribs. (B)
Pectus carinatum (pigeon chest): the sternum is
more prominent in comparison to the ribs—often
caused by severe childhood asthma. (C) Barrel
chest: the anteroposterior diameter of the chest is
greater than the lateral diameter. Caused by
hyperinflation of the lungs.
• Abnormalities of the spine (Fig. 9.14)
FIG. 9.14  Spinal deformities. Scoliosis increased
lateral curvature of the spine. Kyphosis increased
forward curvature of the spine
(osteoporosis/ankylosing spondylitis). Both cause
ventilatory defects and can cause respiratory
failure.
• Surgical thoracic incisions (Fig. 9.15)
FIG. 9.15  Common thoracic surgical incisions. (A)
Lateral thoracotomy; (B) midline sternotomy.
• Radiotherapy tattoos.
Deformities of the chest wall and spine are important
clinically as they can restrict the ventilatory capacity of the
lungs.
Common pitfalls
Remember to look at both the front and back of the
patient, as key signs may be hidden on initial inspection.
Palpation
Palpation in the respiratory examination primarily involves
assessing chest expansion both anteroposteriorly (AP) and
laterally (Fig. 9.16). When testing chest expansion in the
AP direction, place the palms of both hands on the pectoral
region and ask the patient to take a deep breath. The chest
should expand symmetrically. Any asymmetry suggests
pathology on the side that fails to expand adequately.
Testing lateral expansion of the chest involves gripping the
chest (Fig. 9.16) between both hands and then asking the
patient to take a deep breath whilst observing the
movement of your own thumbs. Again, the movement of
your thumbs should be symmetrical and any asymmetry
suggests pathology on the side of the chest that does not
expand fully.
Inspiration 
FIG. 9.16  Chest expansion.
Next, examine for the position of the apex beat of the
heart by moving your hand inwards from the lateral chest
until you feel the pulsation. The apex beat should be in the
fifth 
intercostal 
space 
at 
the 
midclavicular 
line.
Displacement 
of 
the 
apex 
beat 
normally 
signifies
cardiomegaly, but other respiratory conditions may cause
the apex beat to become displaced, including:
• Pulmonary fibrosis
• Bronchiectasis
• Pleural effusions
• Pneumothoraces.
Finally, in palpation you may find it useful to perform
tactile vocal fremitus by placing the ulnar edge of your
hand on the chest wall whilst asking the patient to say ‘99’
repeatedly. This is repeated throughout the chest both
front and back, comparing opposite zones. The vibrations
produced by this manoeuvre are transmitted through the
lung parenchyma and felt by the hand. Tactile vocal
fremitus is increased by consolidation of the lungs and
decreased by pleural effusions and pleural thickening.
Percussion
Percussion is an extremely useful tool in the respiratory
examination, as the percussion note provides information
about the consistency of the lung matter underlying the
chest wall, i.e., whether it is air, fluid or solid.
Percussion is performed by placing the middle finger of
your nondominant hand on the chest wall palm downwards
in an intercostal space. You then strike this finger with the
terminal phalanx (fingertip) of the middle finger of your
dominant hand. To achieve a good percussion note, the
striking finger should be partially flexed and struck at right
angles to the other finger.
Percuss in a logical order. Begin percussion at the apices
by percussing (gently) on to the clavicles directly and then
move down the chest wall, remembering to compare both
sides directly. A normal percussion note is described as
resonant; in the presence of lung pathology the percussion
note may be described as dull, stony dull or hyperresonant
(Table 9.5).
Table 9.5
Map out any abnormality you find but do not confuse the
cardiac borders or liver edge with lung pathology; they will
sound dull normally. The note also sounds muffled in a very
muscular or obese patient.
Hints and tips 
When percussing, remember that the upper lobe
predominates anteriorly and the lower lobe predominates
posteriorly.
Auscultation
Normal breath sounds are described as vesicular and have
a rustling quality heard in inspiration and the first part of
expiration. Listen to the patient's chest:
• Using the bell of the stethoscope in the apices
(supraclavicular area)
• Using the diaphragm of the stethoscope elsewhere
on the chest.
Auscultate in a logical order, comparing the two sides (as
for percussion) and ask the patient to breathe through an
open mouth.
You should be listening for:
• Diminished breath sounds
• Bronchial breathing
• Added sounds, such as wheezes or stridor, crackles
or pleural rubs. Crackles are characterized by their
timing: fine crackles usually indicate an interstitial
process and may be in early or late inspiration (early
indicates pulmonary oedema, late inspiratory
indicates pulmonary fibrosis). Course crackles
usually indicate an airways disease such as
bronchiectasis and are in early inspiration.
It is important to remember that added sounds that
disappear when the patient coughs are not significant
(Table 9.6).
Table 9.6
BB, bronchial breathing; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Vocal resonance
Vocal resonance is the auscultatory equivalent of tactile
vocal fremitus. It is performed using the diaphragm of the
stethoscope on the chest and asking the patient to say ‘99’.
Vocal resonance is increased by consolidation and reduced
by conditions such as pleural effusion and pneumothoraces.
Whispering pectoriloquy
Whispering pectoriloquy is a variation of vocal resonance
that can be used to confirm the presence of consolidation.
The patient is asked to whisper ‘99’. In normal lung, this
cannot be heard by auscultation. However, solid lung
conducts sound better than normal aerated lung and thus
in patients with areas of consolidation the words are clear
and seem to be spoken into the examiner's ear.
Examination summary
Once you have finished your examination, summarize your
findings in a clear and concise manner. Give an overview of
the patient’s general condition and present your positive
examination findings, as well as relevant negatives. Based
on your examination findings, you should give a differential
diagnosis and explain the relevant next investigation steps
to confirm this. Normally, to complete the respiratory
examination you would inform the examiner that you would
like to:
• Examine a sputum pot
• Take a peak flow reading
• View the patient's observations, including
temperature and oxygen saturations
• Consider an erect chest X-ray.
Table 9.7 summarizes the common clinical findings for
the most common respiratory conditions.
Table 9.7
Chapter Summary
• A full respiratory examination comprises inspection,
palpation, percussion and auscultation.
• Features of respiratory distress seen on inspection
determine whether urgent intervention is needed.
• Differences in percussion and auscultation allow you
to differentiate between pleural effusion,
consolidation and pneumothorax.
• Advanced examination techniques such as tactile
vocal fremitus and whispering pectoriloquy
distinguish finer examination points.
• Giving a clear summary of relevant examination
findings allows you to form a differential diagnosis.
This can be used to guide next steps for investigation
and treatment.
10
The respiratory patient:
clinical investigations
Introduction
There are a large number of investigations used in
respiratory medicine, ranging from basic bedside tests to
more invasive procedures such as bronchoscopy. As you
read this chapter, you should bear in mind that some of the
investigations detailed are performed only rarely in
specialized pulmonary laboratories, whilst others are
performed 
by 
patients 
at 
home 
every 
day. 
The
investigations that are most commonly performed, and of
which you should have a thorough knowledge, include:
• Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis
• Sputum examination
• Basic tests of pulmonary function
• Bronchoscopy
• Chest radiographs (chest X-rays).
Other, less commonly performed, investigations will be
discussed in less detail in this chapter.
Routine investigations
Blood tests
In the associated figures, you will find some of the
commonly performed haematological tests:
• Full blood count (Table 10.1)
Table 10.1
COPD, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; MCV, mean cell volume.
• Differential white blood cell count (Table 10.2).
Table 10.2
Clinical chemistry
The commonly performed biochemical tests include:
• Renal function—baseline important prior to imaging
with contrast or when prescribing medications.
• Calcium levels—may be raised in metastatic disease,
paraneoplastic syndromes or sarcoidosis.
• Liver function tests—may be abnormal in
malignancy.
• C-reactive protein (CRP)—inflammatory marker
useful in acute and chronic infections.
In addition, endocrine tests should be performed for
paraneoplastic 
manifestations, 
such 
as 
syndrome 
of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone, if clinically appropriate
(see Chapter 17 for more detail).
Measures of oxygenations
Pulse oximetry
This is a simple, noninvasive method of monitoring the
percentage of haemoglobin that is saturated with oxygen.
The patient wears a probe on a finger or earlobe linked to a
unit which displays the readings. The unit can be set to
sound an alarm when saturation drops below a certain level
(usually 90%). The pulse oximeter works by calculating the
absorption of light by haemoglobin, which alters depending
on whether it is saturated with oxygen or desaturated. A
number of factors may lead to inaccurate oximeter
readings. These include:
• Poor peripheral perfusion, such as in hypothermia or
Raynaud disease
• Carbon monoxide poisoning
• Skin pigmentation
• Nail varnish
• Dirty hands.
A more accurate assessment of oxygen saturation, if
necessary, can be obtained by ABG analysis.
Arterial blood gas analysis
In Chapter 5 we learnt about the role of the lungs in acid–
base balance. Analysis of an ABG sample tells us about the
patient’s gas exchange and their acid–base status. Consider
performing an ABG in all acutely unwell patients. If
possible, the analysis should be performed initially on room
air and then repeated soon after starting oxygen therapy to
assess response to treatment; however, in the acutely
unwell this may not be appropriate.
An ABG sample is normally taken from a patient’s radial
artery using a heparinized syringe. The radial artery is
preferred to other sites (e.g., brachial or femoral arteries)
because it is easily accessed on the radial aspect of a
patient’s wrist, it is palpable as it is relatively superficial
and it has collateral blood supply to the hand via the ulnar
artery. The sample should be tested immediately using a
standard automated machine, which measures:
• PaO2
• PaCO2
• pH.
Bicarbonate, oxygen saturations and base excess are
derived by the analyser from the above measurements and
given on the standard readout, along with other values
including electrolytes, glucose and lactate.
The patient's results are compared with the normal
ranges (Table 10.3) and assessed in two parts:
• Oxygenation and ventilation—is the patient hypoxic?
Is the patient hypercapnic?
○ Type I respiratory failure—PaO2 < 8 kPa and
PaCO2 < 6 kPa
○ Type II respiratory failure—PaO2 < 8 kPa
and PaCO2 > 6 kPa
• Acid–base balance disturbances—is the patient
acidotic or alkalotic? What is the cause for this
disturbance? Look at the PaCO2 and bicarbonate
levels.
Table 10.3
Arterial blood gas normal values
Test
Normal value
pH
7.35–7.45
PaO2
> 10.6 kPa
PaCO2
4.7–6.0 kPa
Base excess
+/−2 mmol/L
Bicarbonate
22–25 mmol/L
Lactate
< 2 mmol/L
ABG results should always be interpreted within the
clinical picture. Different underlying pathologies will cause
different patterns in the ABG. It is important to remember
that a metabolic disturbance (such as high lactate from
shock) can be partially or completely compensated for by
the respiratory system, which may be seen clinically as an
increased respiratory rate and will be demonstrated in the
ABG result by a low PaCO2. Table 10.4 shows a summary of
ABG findings and their possible underlying pathologies. An
approach to interpreting a blood gas can be found in
Chapter 12.
Table 10.4
Microbiology
Microbiological examination is possible with samples of
sputum, bronchial aspirate, pleural aspirate, throat swabs
and blood. The aim of examination is to identify bacteria,
viruses or fungi.
Tests to request are microscopy, culture and antibiotic
sensitivity (M, C & S). The microbiological findings should
be interpreted in view of the whole clinical picture.
Sputum culture
Testing of sputum for the presence of bacteria is the most
common microbiological test performed. If the patient is
expectorating, obtain a sample of sputum, preferably
before antibiotic treatment is started. Collect in a sterile
container, inspect the sample and send it to the laboratory.
A sputum sample is valuable in diagnosing the causative
organism in severe pneumonia or when mycobacterial or
fungal infection is suspected. Failure to isolate an organism
from the sputum is not uncommon. As antimicrobial
resistance is increasing if an organism is isolated,
sensitivity to antibiotics should be checked to guide
antibacterial treatment choice. If tuberculosis (TB) is
suspected, samples should be sent for Ziehl–Neelsen
staining to look for acid fast bacilli—further information
can be found in Chapter 18: Respiratory infections.
If the patient is unable to expectorate sputum, a
physiotherapist can help to obtain induced sputum using
nebulized hypertonic saline. If chronic infection is present
or an atypical pathogen is suspected, bronchoscopy may be
required to obtain bronchial washings for microbiological
analysis.
Blood culture
Blood cultures identify systemic bacterial and fungal
infections. Results may be positive while sputum culture is
negative. It is important to collect at least one set of
cultures before starting antibiotic therapy. A blood culture
should always be performed in patients with fever and
signs of a lower respiratory tract infection, or if a patient
meets sepsis criteria as defined by the National Institute
for Clinical Excellence Sepsis Guideline 2016.
When collecting blood cultures, it is important to clean
the skin site thoroughly prior to taking blood, using 2%
chlorhexidine in 70% isopropyl alcohol to disinfect the skin.
Using a sterile nontouch technique and a blood-sampling
device with blood culture adapter, collect 10  mL of blood
into both the aerobic and anaerobic culture bottles. Ideally,
two sets of blood cultures should be taken within the first
hour.
Viral tests
Testing for viruses has changed from traditional viral
culture and serology techniques to molecular diagnostics,
including viral polymerase chain reaction (PCR) tests.
Molecular diagnostics are much faster and often give
results within 24 hours. This can help guide patient
management and is also useful when monitoring for viral
epidemics. A throat swab can be sent for viral PCR testing
if a patient has signs suggesting a viral respiratory tract
infection. Viral testing of sputum samples or bronchial
washings may be considered in immunocompromised or
very sick patients with suspected viral pneumonia.
Invasive procedures
Bronchoscopy
Bronchoscopy is the passing of a telescope via the nose or
mouth into the trachea to inspect the large and medium-
sized airways via visualization with a camera (Fig. 10.1). It
can be used to sample tissues via brushings, lavage or
biopsy. Two types of bronchoscope are used:
• Flexible fibreoptic bronchoscope—used by
respiratory physicians normally under light sedation
to reduce anxiety and suppress cough mechanisms.
Topical lidocaine is used as a local anaesthetic to
numb the pharynx, vocal cords and bronchial tree.
• Rigid bronchoscope—used by thoracic surgeons in
theatre with the patient under general anaesthetic.
FIG. 10.1  Bronchoscopy.
Flexible bronchoscopy is most commonly used. The main
indications for bronchoscopy are:
• Diagnosis and staging of lung cancer—if the
diagnosis is suspected following symptoms or
suspicious imaging.
• Diagnosis of infections—especially useful in
immunocompromised patients and those with
atypical infections or suspected TB.
• Diagnosis of interstitial lung disease—transbronchial
biopsy may be required.
• Removal of suspected proximal foreign body, e.g., an
inhaled pea.
• Investigating unexplained haemoptysis.
Flexible bronchoscopy is generally a safe procedure with
very 
low 
mortality 
rates 
but 
complications 
include
respiratory depression, laryngospasm and haemorrhage
following scope trauma. It usually takes place as a day case
procedure. Relative contraindications to performing the
procedure include low oxygen levels at rest (<  90%) and
clotting 
abnormalities 
or 
a 
low 
platelet 
count
(< 50,000/mm3).
Bronchoalveolar lavage
Sterile saline (usually around 100 mL) is infused down the
flexible bronchoscope into the bronchioles and then
aspirated. This technique is commonly used to look for
evidence of neoplasms or opportunistic infections in
immunocompromised patients. If this is done in the acute
setting and the patient is unwell, a smaller volume of saline
(usually around 10–20 mL) is used to avoid airway
compromise, known as bronchial washing.
Transbronchial biopsy
Transbronchial biopsy provides samples from outside the
airways, e.g., of parenchymal tissue. The technique is
performed using biopsy forceps fed through a flexible
bronchoscope. The bronchoscopist cannot directly visualize
the biopsy site (‘blind’ biopsy) as the biopsy forceps is
passed down to the terminal bronchus out of sight of the
scope. There is an increased risk of haemorrhage and
pneumothorax with this procedure and therefore a chest X-
ray 
should 
be 
performed 
as 
routine 
following 
the
bronchoscopy.
Endobronchial ultrasound
Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) is a technique in which
an ultrasound probe is placed down the bronchoscope,
allowing real-time visualization of deeper structures
through the bronchial wall, such as lymph nodes, major
vessels and paratracheal masses. This allows image-guided
transbronchial needle aspiration (TBNA) of lymph nodes
and is therefore very useful in both diagnosing and staging
lung cancer.
Lung biopsy
Percutaneous fine-needle aspiration
This technique is used to sample lung lesions under the
guidance of radiography. It is commonly performed by
interventional radiologists under computed tomography
guidance. Complications include pneumothorax post biopsy
which may require a chest drain.
Surgical lung biopsy
In some cases of diffuse lung disease, or where a lesion
cannot easily be reached, a more extensive lung biopsy is
required for diagnosis. Surgical lung biopsy can be
performed using video-assisted thorascopic surgery (VATS)
techniques 
or 
via 
open-lung 
biopsy. 
Both 
surgical
interventions require general anaesthesia; however, VATS
is less invasive as it does not require thoracotomy. Surgical
techniques allow therapeutic intervention at the same time
as biopsy.
Pleural procedures
Details on pleural aspiration and interpretation of results
can be found in Chapter 20: Pleural disease.
Thoracoscopy
Respiratory physicians perform medical thoracoscopy
under local anaesthetic and light sedation. The procedure
allows the examination and biopsy of the pleura, the
drainage of fluid from the pleural space and, if indicated,
chemical 
pleurodesis. 
The 
main 
indication 
for 
the
procedure is to investigate the cause of an exudative
pleural effusion and diagnose diseases such as cancer or
TB. The pleural effusion is first identified using pleural
ultrasound, then the port is inserted through an intercostal
space via blunt dissection through which the fluid is
drained and an iatrogenic pneumothorax is created. A rigid
thorascope with a camera is then passed into the pleural
space and the pleura can be inspected and biopsied. If the
appearance is consistent with malignancy, 4 g of sterile talc
can be inserted into the pleural space to irritate the pleural
surface and try to achieve pleurodesis (the visceral and
parietal pleura to ‘stick’ together) and prevent fluid
reaccumulation. At the end of the procedure, a chest drain
is inserted down the tract made by the port to allow
drainage of the pneumothorax. The patient normally
requires an overnight stay in hospital, but can be
discharged once the lung has reinflated and the chest drain
is removed.
Investigations of pulmonary function
Tests of pulmonary function are used in:
• Diagnosis of lung disease
• Monitoring disease progression
• Assessing patient response to treatment.
Tests of ventilation
Ventilation can be impaired in two basic ways:
• The airways become narrowed (obstructive
disorders)
• Expansion of the lungs is reduced (restrictive
disorders).
These two types of disorder have characteristic patterns
of lung function which can be measured using the tests
below.
Peak expiratory flow rate
Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) is a simple and cheap test
that uses a peak flow meter (Fig. 10.2) to measure the
maximum expiratory rate in the first 10  ms of expiration.
Peak flow meters can be issued on prescription and used at
home by patients to monitor their lung function.
FIG. 10.2  Peak flow meter. From Lissauer T, Carroll W.
Illustrated Textbook of Paediatrics. 5th edition, 2018.
Elsevier.
Before measuring PEFR, the practitioner should instruct
the patient to:
• Take a full inspiration to maximum lung capacity.
• Seal the lips tightly around the mouthpiece.
• Blow out forcefully into the peak flow meter, which is
held horizontally.
The best of three measurements is recorded and plotted
on the appropriate graph. Normal PEFR is 400–650 L/min
in healthy adults. At least two recordings per day are
required to obtain an accurate pattern. A patient would
normally be asked to do this for a couple of weeks in order
to obtain a peak flow diary, which could then be analysed
to look at the type of airways disease.
PEFR is reduced in conditions that cause airway
obstruction:
• Asthma, where there is wide diurnal variation in
PEFR, known as ‘morning dipping’ (Fig. 10.3)
FIG. 10.3  Typical peak expiratory flow rate graph
for an asthmatic patient.
• Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
• Upper airway tumours
• Expiratory muscle weakness.
Other causes of reduced PEFR include inadequate effort
and poor technique. PEFR is not a good measure of airflow
limitation because it measures only initial expiration; it is
best used to monitor progression of disease and response
to treatment.
Spirometry
Clinical notes 
Peak expiratory flow rate home monitoring in
asthma
In asthma, regular monitoring of peak expiratory flow
rate with a home device can be useful for predicting the
onset and severity of an exacerbation. Asthma patients
are issued with a personalized asthma action plan telling
them what to do if their peak flow is lower than normal,
depending on how severe the reduction is. By increasing
treatment earlier, this can help reduce the severity and
length of exacerbations and also ensures that the sickest
patients seek medical help sooner.
The forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) and the
forced vital capacity (FVC) are measured using a
spirometer. The spirometer works by converting volumes of
inspiration and expiration into a single line trace.
Spirometry is now performed using electronic devices with
a mouthpiece into which the subject breathes. In addition
to producing FEV1 and FVC readings, some spirometers
produce flow–volume loops and calculate the results as a
percentage of the normal predicted value for the patient.
The test should be performed with the patient seated and
with a nose clip in place. To obtain an FEV1 measurement,
the patient should take a full breath in and blow out into
the mouthpiece forcibly, as hard and fast as possible, for as
long as possible. The test should be repeated three times to
achieve at least two comparable readings.
Hints and tips 
Pulmonary function tests
Pulmonary function tests can seem confusing, but there
are just three basic questions that most tests aim to
answer:
• Are the airways narrowed? (PEFR, FEV1, FEV1:FVC,
flow–volume loops)
• Are the lungs a normal size? (TLC, RV and FRC)
• Is gas uptake normal? (TLCO and KCO).
So, as a minimum, make sure you have a good
understanding of peak flow monitoring and spirometry
and know how you would measure RV, FRC and gas
transfer.
FEV1, Forced expiratory volume in 1 second; FRC,
functional residual capacity; FVC, forced vital capacity;
KCO, transfer coefficient; PEFR, peak expiratory flow
rate; RV, residual volume; TLC, total lung capacity; TLCO,
transfer factor.
FEV1 and FVC
FEV1 and FVC are related to the height, age and sex of the
patient. FEV1 is the volume of air expelled in the first
second of a forced expiration, starting from full inspiration.
FVC is a measure of total lung volume exhaled; the patient
is asked to exhale with maximal effort after a full
inspiration.
FEV1:FVC ratio
The FEV1:FVC ratio is a more useful measurement than
FEV1 or FVC alone. FEV1 is 80% of FVC in normal subjects.
The FEV1:FVC ratio is an excellent measure of airway
limitation and allows us to differentiate obstructive from
restrictive lung disease.
In restrictive disease:
• Both FEV1 and FVC are reduced, often in proportion
to each other
• FEV1:FVC ratio is normal or increased (> 80%)
whereas in obstructive diseases:
• High intrathoracic pressures generated by forced
expiration cause premature closure of the airways
with trapping of air in the chest
• FEV1 is reduced much more than FVC
• FEV1:FVC ratio is reduced (< 80%).
Flow–volume loops
Flow–volume loops are graphs constructed from maximal
expiratory and inspiratory manoeuvres performed on a
spirometer. The loop is made up of two halves: above the x-
axis is the flow of air out of the mouth on expiration, and
below the x-axis, flow into the mouth on inspiration. The
loop shape can identify the type and distribution of airway
obstruction. After a small amount of gas has been exhaled,
flow is limited by:
• Elastic recoil force of the lung
• Resistance of airways upstream of collapse.
When looking at flow–volume loops, look for a normal-
shaped loop (Fig. 10.4): a triangular expiratory curve
created by an initially fast expiration of air, slowing down
as total lung capacity (TLC) is reached, and a semicircular
inspiratory curve. Any deviation away from this triangle
and semicircle pattern suggests pathology. Additionally,
read off the FEV1 (marked by a star) from the x-axis.
Reduced FEV1 suggests an obstructive airway disease.
FIG. 10.4  Typical flow–volume loops. (A) Normal. (B)
Restrictive defect (phrenic palsy). (C) Volume-dependent
obstruction (e.g., asthma). (D) Pressure-dependent
obstruction (e.g., severe emphysema). (E) Rigid obstruction
(e.g., tracheal stenosis). FEV1, Forced expiratory volume in 1
second.
Flow–volume loops are useful in diagnosing upper airway
obstruction, restrictive and obstructive disease (Fig. 10.4).
In restrictive diseases:
• Maximum flow rate is reduced (read from y-axis).
• Total volume exhaled is reduced (read from x-axis).
• Flow rate is high during the latter part of expiration
because of increased lung recoil.
In obstructive diseases:
• Flow rate is low in relation to lung volume.
• Expiration ends prematurely because of early airway
closure, most easily spotted by a scooped-out
appearance after the point of maximum flow rather
than the triangular-shaped expiratory curve seen in
healthy lungs.
Tests of diffusion
Oxygen and carbon dioxide pass by diffusion between the
alveoli and pulmonary capillary blood. The diffusing
capacity of carbon monoxide measures the ability of gas to
diffuse from inspired air to capillary blood, and also reflects
the uptake of oxygen from the alveolus into the red blood
cells. Carbon monoxide (CO) is used because:
• It is highly soluble.
• It combines rapidly with haemoglobin.
The single-breath test is the test most commonly used to
determine diffusing capacity.
Single-breath test
The patient takes a single breath from residual volume (RV)
to TLC. The inhaled gas contains 0.28% CO and 13.5%
helium. The patient is instructed to hold the breath for 10
seconds before expiring. The concentration of helium and
carbon monoxide in the final part of the expired gas
mixture is measured and the diffusing capacity of carbon
monoxide is calculated. You need to know the haemoglobin
level before the test as the amount of CO transferred will
drop with a lower Hb. This test allows measurement of:
1. TLCO (transfer factor/Diffusing capacity of the lungs
for carbon monoxide [DLCO])—the total amount of
CO transferred by the lung per minute, corrected for
the concentration gradient of CO across the alveolar–
capillary membrane.
2. kCO (transfer coefficient)—the gas transfer per unit
lung volume. This is calculated by dividing the TLCO
by the total lung volume during breath hold.
Transfer factor in lung disease
Measurement of the diffusing capacity of the lungs is used
in the evaluation of dyspnoea and hypoxia, diagnosis and
monitoring of interstitial lung disease (ILD) and detection
of pulmonary vascular disease. TLCO and KCO may be
reduced in:
• Emphysema following destruction of the alveoli.
• ILDs, owing to a thickened alveolar capillary
membrane.
The causes of a low TLCO by can be seen in Table 10.5.
The TLCO may be raised following pulmonary haemorrhage
(e.g., in vasculitis) as the extra red cells in the lungs absorb
CO and falsely elevate the TLCO.
Table 10.5
Causes of low TLCO
Normal spirometry
Obstructive
spirometry
Restrictive
spirometry
Pulmonary vascular
disease
Early interstitial
lung disease
Anaemia
Emphysema
Interstitial lung
disease
TLCO, Transfer Factor of the Lung for Carbon Monoxide.
Tests of lung volumes
The amount of gas in the lungs can be thought of as being
split into subdivisions, with disease processes altering
these volumes in specific ways (see Chapter 4, Fig. 4.1). In
measuring tidal volume and vital capacity, we use
spirometry; alternative techniques are needed for the other
volumes.
Residual volume and functional residual
capacity
One important lung volume, RV, is not measured in simple
spirometry, because gas remains in the lungs at the end of
each breath (otherwise the lungs would collapse). Without
a measure for RV, we cannot calculate FRC or TLC.
RV is a useful measure in assessing obstructive disease.
In a healthy subject, RV is approximately 30% of TLC. In
obstructive diseases such as COPD, the lungs are
hyperinflated with ‘air trapping’ so that RV is greatly
increased and the ratio of RV:TLC is also increased. There
are three methods of measuring RV: helium dilution,
plethysmography and nitrogen washout.
Helium dilution
The patient is connected to a spirometer containing a
mixture of 10% helium in air. Helium does not cross the
alveolar–capillary membrane into the bloodstream and so,
after several breaths, the helium concentration in the
spirometer and lung becomes equal. TLC can be calculated
from the difference in helium concentration at the start of
the test and at equilibrium; then RV can be calculated by
subtracting vital capacity from TLC.
This method only measures gas that is in communication
with the airways and therefore can underestimate the TLC
in lower airway obstruction.
Body plethysmography
Plethysmography determines changes in lung volume by
recording changes in pressure. The patient sits in a large
airtight box and breathes through a mouthpiece (Fig. 10.5).
At the end of a normal expiration, a shutter closes the
mouthpiece and the patient is asked to make respiratory
efforts. As the patient tries to inhale, box pressure
increases. 
Using 
Boyle's 
law, 
lung 
volume 
can 
be
calculated.
FIG. 10.5  Plethysmography. This assumes pressure at the
mouth is the pressure within the lung. P , pressure; V,
volume.
In contrast to the helium dilution method, body
plethysmography measures all intrathoracic gas, including
cysts, bullae and pneumothoraces, i.e., noncommunicating
air spaces. This is important in patients with emphysema
who have bullae, in whom helium dilution underestimates
RV.
This technique tends to be performed in specialized
respiratory centres in respiratory function laboratories.
Nitrogen washout
Following a normal expiration, the patient breathes 100%
oxygen. This ‘washes out’ the nitrogen in the lungs. The gas
exhaled subsequently is collected and its total volume and
the 
concentration 
of 
nitrogen 
are 
measured. 
The
concentration of nitrogen in the lung before washout is
80%. The concentration of nitrogen left in the lung can be
measured by a nitrogen meter at the lips, measuring end-
expiration gas. Assuming no net change in the amount of
nitrogen (it does not participate in gas exchange), it is
possible to estimate the FRC.
Exercise testing
Exercise testing is primarily used to:
• Diagnose unexplained breathlessness that is minimal
at rest.
• Assess the extent of lung disease, by stressing the
system.
• Determine the level of impairment in disability
testing.
• Assist in differential diagnosis (e.g., when it is not
known whether a patient is limited by cardiac or
lung disease).
• Test the effects of therapy on exercise capacity.
• Prescribe a safe and effective exercise regime.
There are a number of established tests, including the
shuttle test, and a progressive exercise test, which is
commonly performed on a cycle ergometer.
Shuttle test
This is a standardized test in which the patient walks up
and down a 10-metre course, marked by cones, in a set
time interval. The time intervals are indicated by bleeps
played from a tape recorder and become progressively
shorter. The test is stopped if patients become too
breathless or if they cannot reach the cone in the time
allowed. Usually, oxygen saturations, heart rate and
breathlessness (using the Medical Research Council
Dyspnoea Scale: Table 10.6) are measured at the beginning
and the end to provide objective and subjective measures of
the level of dyspnoea.
Table 10.6
Medical Research Council Dyspnoea Scale
Grade
Degree of breathlessness related to activities
1
Not troubled by breathlessness except on
strenuous exercise
2
Short of breath when hurrying or walking up a
slight hill
3
Walks slower than contemporaries on level
ground because of breathlessness, or has to
stop for breath when walking at own pace
4
Stops for breath after walking about 100 metres
or after a few minutes on level ground
5
Too breathless to leave the house, or breathless
when dressing or undressing
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing
This is performed in a laboratory and stresses the patient
to a predetermined level based on heart rate. It is usually
performed 
on 
a 
cycle 
ergometer. 
It 
is 
useful 
for
preoperative 
assessment 
to 
assess 
suitability 
for
anaesthetic and surgery and also in the diagnosis of the
cause of exercise limitation (either cardiac or respiratory).
A number of tests are performed as the patient exercises,
including:
• Electrocardiograph
• Volume of gas exhaled
• Concentration of oxygen and carbon dioxide in
exhaled gas.
The volume of gas exhaled per minute (Minute ventilate
VE L/min), oxygen consumption (VO2 L/min) and carbon
dioxide output (VCO2 L/min) are calculated both at rest
and throughout exercise. The ventilatory threshold marks
the onset of anaerobic respiration and can be determined
during the test. The test indicates whether exercise
tolerance is limited by the cardiovascular or respiratory
system and assesses increases in heart rate and ventilation
against a known oxygen uptake.
Chapter Summary
• Investigations in respiratory medicine range from
simple bedside tests such as peak flow monitoring to
invasive procedures including bronchoscopy and
thoracoscopy.
• Arterial blood gas sampling is useful in determining if
a patient has type I or II respiratory failure and
assessing their acid–base status.
• Flexible bronchoscopy is used commonly in
respiratory medicine to aid in the diagnosis of
suspected lung cancer, chronic or atypical infections
and interstitial lung diseases.
• Bedside spirometry and flow–volume loops may reveal
an obstructive or restrictive airflow pattern and may
indicate the underlying diagnosis.
• The TLCO is a measure of diffusion and represents
the total amount of carbon monoxide transferred by
the lung per minute. It measures the ability of the
lungs to transfer inhaled air to the red blood cells in
the pulmonary capillaries. It is decreased in diseases
such as interstitial lung disease.
• Cardiopulmonary exercise testing is a useful test
when trying to differentiate exercise limitation caused
by respiratory disease from that caused by cardiac
disease. It is also used as a preoperative assessment
tool.
11
The respiratory patient:
Imaging investigations
Introduction
Imaging is one of the most important components of
modern respiratory medicine. It is used to confirm
diagnosis, guide treatment and monitor treatment response
in a variety of conditions. Owing to technological advances
and a greater number of detailed imaging modalities,
respiratory imaging has improved significantly in the last
20 years, including the use of bedside testing and
interventional procedures.
Plain radiography
The plain film radiograph is of paramount importance in
the 
evaluation 
of 
pulmonary 
disease. 
The 
standard
radiographic examinations of the chest are described
below.
Posteroanterior erect chest
radiograph
In the posteroanterior (PA) erect radiograph, X-rays travel
from the posterior of the patient to the film, which is held
against the front of the patient (Fig. 11.1). The scapula can
be rotated out of the way, and accurate assessment of
cardiac size is possible. The radiograph is performed in the
erect position because:
• Gas passes upwards, making the detection of
pneumothorax easier.
• Fluid passes downwards, making pleural effusions
easier to diagnose.
• Blood vessels in mediastinum and lung are
represented accurately.
FIG. 11.1  Normal posteroanterior chest radiograph. The
lungs are equally transradiant; the pulmonary vascular
pattern is symmetrical. AA, Aortic arch; IVC, inferior vena
cava. LAA, left atrial appendage; LV, left ventricle; PA,
pulmonary artery; RA, right atrium; SVC, superior vena cava.
(Courtesy of Dr D Sutton and Dr JWR Young.)
Anteroposterior chest radiograph
As 
the 
name 
suggests, 
the 
anteroposterior 
chest
radiograph (AP chest) is performed in the opposite way to a
PA chest film, with X-rays travelling anterior to posterior
before being captured on film. Owing to the differing angle
of projection, the cardiac shadow is superficially enlarged
and cannot be commented on, which, coupled with
increasing projection of the scapulae, make this an inferior
method of imaging. The significant advantage to AP chest
imaging is that it can be performed with a portable
machine and in patients too breathless to comply with an
erect PA film. It is therefore often done in the critically
unwell patient as a secondary format where PA film is not
possible.
Lateral radiograph
Largely a historic modality, lateral films have now become
largely superseded by computed tomography (CT) imaging.
Lateral views help to localize lesions seen in PA views, as
well as giving views of the mediastinum and thoracic
vertebrae (Fig. 11.2).
FIG. 11.2  Normal lateral chest radiograph. AA, Aortic arch;
IVC, inferior vena cava; LPA, left pulmonary artery. (Courtesy
of Dr D Sutton and Dr JWR Young.)
In women of reproductive age, radiography should be
performed within 28 days of last menstruation.
Reporting a chest X-ray
Whilst images used to be reported on viewing boxes, the
advance of digital imaging is such that most reporting is
performed on a high-resolution digital screen. Always
follow a set routine for reporting plain films. If possible,
compare with the patient's previous films.
Clinical data
Take down the following details:
• Patient’s name
• Age and sex
• Clinical problem
• Date of radiography.
Technical qualities
Note that radiographs contain right- or left-side markers.
With good penetration of X-rays, you should just be able to
see the vertebral bodies through the cardiac shadow. In
overpenetration, 
the 
lung 
fields 
appear 
too 
black.
Conversely, in underpenetration, the lung fields appear too
white. These settings can often be adjusted on a digital
image.
Note the projection (AP, PA or lateral; erect or supine).
This can give a good indication of the overall health of the
patient, e.g., an erect PA film suggests the patient could sit
or stand unaided, whereas a supine AP film suggests the
patient was too unwell to move at all. To deduce whether
the patient was straight or rotated, compare the sternal
ends of both clavicles.
With adequate inspiration, you should be able to count six
ribs anterior to the diaphragm. Make sure that the whole
lung field is included.
Also note any foreign bodies, such as endotracheal tubes,
electrocardiograph leads or pacemakers. These can point
towards the overall state of the patient, as well as possible
comorbidities.
Lungs
The lung fields should look symmetrical, with fine lung
markings throughout. It is easiest when describing an
abnormality to divide the lung into approximate upper,
middle and lower zones, rather than trying to guess a lobe.
If the lung fields are asymmetrical, combine with clinical
findings to determine which is the abnormal side. If the
lung fields look symmetrical but abnormal, think of a
pathology that would affect both lungs.
Some examples of common findings include:
• Reduced lung markings in one lung only—you should
always rule out a pneumothorax. Look for a lung
edge and tracheal deviation away from the affected
side.
• Reduced lung markings in both lungs—think of
destructive parenchymal disease such as
emphysema.
• Patchy change in one lung—most likely an infectious
process, such as bacterial pneumonia. If it is in the
apex, consider tuberculosis.
• Patchy change in both lungs—consider parenchymal
disease such as pulmonary fibrosis. Also consider
nonrespiratory causes, such as cardiogenic
pulmonary oedema. This would be made more likely
by a large heart shadow.
• Dense shadowing on one or both sides with a
meniscus (air–fluid level)—likely a pleural effusion.
• Dense shadowing on one or both sides without a
meniscus—could be consolidation, secondary to
infection. If there is a complete ‘white-out’ of one
lung, consider severe infection. Also check the
history and make sure the patient hasn't had a
pneumonectomy!
• Well-demarcated, round patches of shadowing—the
most important thing to rule out here is malignancy.
Further imaging and, if possible, a biopsy are
needed. If the clinical findings are suggestive of
infection, it could be an abscess—look for an air–
fluid level.
Heart and mediastinum
When examining the cardiac shadow, observe the position,
size and shape of the heart. It is important to note that,
owing to the projection of the X-rays in an AP film, you
cannot accurately assess heart size, as it will always look
bigger than it actually is. This can only be done on a PA
film. A normal-size heart should be less than 50% of the
width of the whole thorax. You must also assess if the
cardiac borders are clearly visible. If they are not, this may
indicate consolidation of the lung immediately next to
them, which will be of similar density and will blur the
border.
Note whether the trachea is central or deviated to either
side. This information should be combined with findings in
the lung fields. If the trachea is moving away from a lung
field which has very few lung markings and looks very
dark, think of a pneumothorax. If it is moving towards a
lung field which has increased lung markings and
shadowing, consider lobar collapse. Identify blood vessels
and each hilum. Very prominent blood vessels may be a
sign of pulmonary hypertension.
Other
Note the following points:
• Diaphragm—visible behind the heart; costophrenic
angles are acute and sharp. An erect chest X-ray can
also be used by surgeons to rule out bowel
perforation. If this is the case, air can be seen under
the diaphragm (pneumoperitoneum).
• Bones—ribs, clavicles, sternum, thoracic vertebrae.
• Finally, recheck the apices, behind the heart, and
hilar and retrodiaphragmatic regions.
Lateral radiograph
On a lateral radiograph, note the following:
• Diaphragm—right hemidiaphragm seen passing
through the heart border.
• Lungs—divide lungs into area in front, behind and
above the heart.
• Retrosternal space—an anterior mass will cause this
space to be white.
• Fissures—horizontal fissure (faint white line that
passes from midpoint of hilum to anterior chest
wall); oblique fissure (passes from T4/5 through
hilum to the anterior third of the diaphragm).
• Hilum.
• Bones—check vertebral bodies for shape, size and
density; check sternum.
Interpreting abnormalities
Once you have completed your overall review of the film,
return to any areas of abnormal lucency or opacity and
assess them according to:
• Number—single or multiple
• Position and distribution (lobar, etc.)
• Size, shape and contour
• Texture (homogeneous, calcified, etc.).
The radiological features of common lung conditions are
described below.
Collapse
Atelectasis (collapse) is loss of volume of a lung, lobe or
segment for any cause. The most important mechanism is
obstruction of a major bronchus by tumour, foreign body or
bronchial plug.
A new collapse with no clear cause is considered tumour
until proven otherwise and requires CT imaging to further
assess. Compare with old films where available. The
silhouette sign can help localize the lesion (Table 11.1).
Table 11.1
The silhouette sign
Nonaerated area of
lung
Border that is obscured
Right upper lobe
Right border of ascending aorta
Right middle lobe
Right heart border
Right lower lobe
Right diaphragm
Left upper lobe
Aortic knuckle and upper left
cardiac border
Lingula of left lung
Left heart border
Left lower lobe
Left diaphragm
Hints and tips 
The lateral borders of the mediastinum are silhouetted
against the air-filled lung that lies underneath. This
silhouette is lost if there is consolidation in the
underlying lung.
Signs of lobar collapse
Signs of lobar collapse are:
• Decreased lung volume.
• Displacement of pulmonary fissures.
• Compensatory hyperinflation of remaining part of the
ipsilateral lung.
• Elevation of hemidiaphragm on ipsilateral side.
• Mediastinal and hilar displacement; trachea pulled to
side of collapse.
• Radiopacity (white lung).
• Absence of air bronchogram.
Some signs are specific to lobe involvement.
In upper-lobe collapse of the right lung, a PA film is most
valuable in making the diagnosis; the collapsed lobe lies
adjacent to the mediastinum (Fig. 11.3A).
FIG. 11.3  (A and B) Right upper-lobe collapse. The
horizontal and oblique fissures (black arrowheads) are
displaced. There is a mass (white arrow) at the right hilum.
(Courtesy of Dr D Sutton and Dr JWR Young.)
In the left lung, a lateral film can be used to aid the
diagnosis; the lobe collapses superomedially and anteriorly
(Fig. 11.3B).
Lower-lobe collapse causes rotation and visualization of
the oblique fissure on PA film.
A lateral film is most valuable in diagnosing middle-lobe
collapse. A thin, wedge-shaped opacity between horizontal
and oblique fissures is seen.
Consolidation
Consolidation is seen as an area of white lung and
represents fluid or cellular matter where there would
normally be air (Table 11.2 and Fig. 11.4). There are many
causes of consolidation, including:
• Pneumonia
• Pulmonary oedema
• Pulmonary haemorrhage.
Table 11.2
FIG. 11.4  Consolidation of the right upper lobe. (Courtesy
of Professor CD Forbes and Dr WF Jackson.)
In contrast to collapse:
• The shadowing is typically heterogeneous (i.e., not
uniform)
• The border is ill defined
• Fissures retain their normal position.
There are two patterns of distribution:
• Segmental or lobar distribution
• Bat-wing distribution.
Peripheral lung fields may be spared (e.g., in pulmonary
oedema). Air bronchograms may be seen, because they are
delineated by surrounding consolidated lung.
Clinical notes 
An elderly woman presented to her general practitioner
with fever, a productive cough and general malaise. A
chest X-ray showed left lower-lobe consolidation with air
bronchograms. Air bronchograms are mostly seen in
infection, when consolidated alveoli are lying adjacent to
air-filled 
small 
and 
medium 
bronchioles. 
These
radiographic 
features 
suggested 
a 
left 
lower-lobe
pneumonia, for which she was treated accordingly.
Interstitial patterns
Three types of interstitial pattern exist (linear, nodular and
honeycomb), and overlap may occur.
Linear pattern
A linear pattern is seen as a network of fine lines running
throughout the lungs. These lines represent thickened
connective tissue and are termed Kerley A and B lines:
Hints and tips 
Kerley B lines can help to limit the possible diagnoses.
They are caused by increased fluid between alveoli, in
the interlobular septa. They are seen in pulmonary
oedema and malignant lymphatic infiltration.
Nodular pattern
This pattern is seen as numerous well-defined small
nodules (1–5  mm) evenly distributed throughout the lung.
Causes 
include 
miliary 
tuberculosis 
and 
chickenpox
pneumonia.
Honeycomb pattern
A honeycomb pattern indicates extensive destruction of
lung tissue, with lung parenchyma replaced by thin-walled
cysts. Pneumothorax may be present. Normal pulmonary
vasculature is absent. Pulmonary fibrosis leads to a
honeycomb pattern. This must be quite severe to be seen
on chest X-ray. It is more commonly identified on CT scan.
Pulmonary nodules
Solitary nodules
The finding of a solitary pulmonary nodule on a plain chest
radiograph is not an uncommon event. The nodule, which is
commonly referred to as a coin lesion, is usually well
circumscribed, less than 6 cm in diameter, lying within the
lung. The rest of the lung appears normal and the patient is
often asymptomatic.
A solitary nodule on a chest radiograph may be an
artefact or it may be owing to:
• Malignant tumour—bronchial carcinoma or
secondary deposits.
• Infection—tuberculosis (Fig. 11.5), abscess or
aspergilloma.
FIG. 11.5  Tuberculosis in a Greek immigrant to the
UK. The film shows multiple areas of shadowing,
especially in the upper lobes, and several lesions
have started to cavitate. (Courtesy of Professor CD Forbes
and Dr WF Jackson.)
• Benign tumour—hamartoma.
The presence of a suspicious-looking nodule, particularly
where malignancy is considered, should be further
investigated with CT imaging rather than plain radiography
alone. If the patient is older than 35 years of age,
malignancy should be at the top of the list of differential
diagnoses. If the lesion is static for a long period of time, as
determined by reviewing previous images, then it is likely
to be a benign lesion. However, a slow-growing nodule in
an elderly patient is likely to be malignant.
It is important to take into account clinical history and
compare with a past chest image if available. You should be
able to distinguish carcinoma from other causes:
• Size of lesion—if lesion is > 4 cm diameter, be
suspicious of malignancy.
• Margin— an ill-defined margin suggests malignancy.
• Cavitation indicates infection or malignancy.
• Calcification—unlikely to be malignancy.
• Presence of air bronchogram—sign of consolidation,
not malignancy.
If the lesion is too small to biopsy but is considered to
look suspicious for malignancy, a repeat image should be
performed to compare the nodule, known as an interval
scan. Time intervals depend on the nature of the lesion, but
are typically between 3–6 months apart. See Chapter 17,
Lung cancer for more information.
Multiple nodules
Metastases are usually seen as well-defined nodules
varying in size, which are more common at the periphery of
lower lobes (Fig. 11.6)—they are also known as cannonball
metastases; cavitation may be present. Abscesses are
cavitated with a thick and irregular wall. Cysts are often
large.
FIG. 11.6  Snowstorm mottling in both lung fields. In this
case, the underlying diagnosis was testicular seminoma,
with disseminated haematogenous metastases. (Courtesy of
Professor CD Forbes and Dr WF Jackson.)
Other nodules include:
• Rheumatoid nodules
• Granulomatosis with polyangiitis (formerly Wegener
granulomatosis)
• Multiple arteriovenous malformations
• Tuberculosis
• Sarcoidosis.
Hilar masses
Normal hilar complex includes:
• Proximal pulmonary arteries and bifurcations
• Bronchus
• Pulmonary veins
• Lymph nodes, not seen unless enlarged.
Hilar size varies from person to person, so enlargement is
difficult to diagnose (Table 11.3). Radiological features of
the hilum are:
• Concave lateral margin
• Equal radiopacity
• Left hilum lies higher than right.
Table 11.3
Clinical notes 
Sarcoidosis commonly presents as an incidental finding
of bilateral hilar lymphadenopathy on chest radiography.
PA films are most valuable in assessing hilar shadow, but
to accurately view the area, CT imaging is necessary. In
chest radiography, technical qualities of the film need to be
adequately assessed before conclusions can be made,
because 
patient 
rotation 
commonly 
mimics 
hilar
enlargement.
Mediastinal masses
A mediastinal mass typically has a sharp, concave margin,
visible because of the silhouette sign. Lateral films may be
particularly useful. Mediastinal masses are frequently
asymptomatic 
and 
are 
grouped 
according 
to 
their
anatomical position (Table 11.4). CT is advised where there
is doubt as to the nature of the lesion.
Table 11.4
Mediastinal masses
Anterior masses
Middle masses
Posterior masses
Retrosternal
thyroid
Bronchial
carcinoma
Neurogenic
tumour
Thymic mass
Lymphoma
Paravertebral
abscess
Dermoid cyst
Sarcoidosis
Oesophageal
lesions
Lymphomas
Primary
tuberculosis
Aortic aneurysm
Aortic aneurysm
Bronchogenic
cyst
—
Anterior mediastinal masses
Characteristics of anterior mediastinal masses:
• Hilar structures still visible
• Mass merges with the cardiac border
• A mass passing into the neck is not seen above the
clavicles
• Small anterior mediastinal masses are difficult to see
on PA films.
Middle mediastinal masses
• A middle mediastinal mass merges with hila and
cardiac borders
• The majority are caused by enlarged lymph nodes.
Posterior mediastinal masses
In posterior mediastinal masses the cardiac border and hila
are seen but the posterior aorta is obscured. Vertebral
changes may be present.
Clinical notes 
Tension pneumothorax is seen as a displacement of the
mediastinum and trachea to the contralateral side,
depressed ipsilateral diaphragm and increased space
between the ribs.
Pleural lesions
Pneumothorax
Pneumothorax is usually obvious on normal inspiratory PA
films. 
Look 
carefully 
at 
upper 
zones, 
because 
air
accumulates first here; you will see an area devoid of lung
markings (black lung), with the lung edge outlined by air in
the pleural space. Small pneumothoraces can be identified
on the expiratory film and may be missed in the supine film.
Tension pneumothorax
Tension pneumothorax is a medical emergency. You should
never see a chest X-ray of a tension pneumothorax, as it is
life threatening. If you suspect your patient has one and he
or she is increasingly dyspnoeic, you must treat the
condition immediately.
Pleural effusions
PA erect radiography is performed. Classically, there is a
radiopaque mass at the base of the lung and blunting of the
costophrenic angle, with the pleural meniscus higher
laterally than medially. Large effusions can displace the
mediastinum contralaterally.
A horizontal upper border implies that a pneumothorax is
also present. An effusion has a more homogeneous texture
than consolidation and air bronchograms are absent.
Mesothelioma
Mesothelioma is a malignant tumour of the pleura, which
may present as discrete pleural deposits or as a localized
lesion.
On chest X-ray, thickened pleura is seen; in 50% of cases
the pleural plaques lie on the medial pleura, causing the
medial margin to be irregular. Pleural effusions are
common, 
usually 
containing 
blood 
(Fig. 
11.7). 
Rib
destruction is uncommon.
FIG. 11.7  Small pleural effusions. Both costophrenic
angles are blunted. (Courtesy of Dr D Sutton and Dr JWR
Young.)
Vascular patterns
Normal vascular pattern
Lung markings are vascular in nature. Arteries branch
vertically to upper and lower lobes. On erect films, upper-
lobe vessels are smaller than lower-lobe vessels. It is
difficult to see vessels in the peripheral one-third of lung
fields.
Pulmonary venous hypertension
On erect films, upper-lobe vessels are larger than lower-
lobe vessels. Pulmonary venous hypertension is associated
with oedema and pleural effusions.
Pulmonary arterial hypertension
Pulmonary arterial hypertension is seen as bilateral hilar
enlargement associated with long-standing pulmonary
disease.
Computed tomography
CT is the imaging modality of choice for mediastinal and
many pulmonary conditions. CT scans provide detailed
cross-sectional images of the thorax. The images can be
electronically modified to display different tissues (e.g., by
using a bone setting compared with a soft tissue setting).
The patient passes through a rotating gantry which has
X-ray tubes on one side and a set of detectors on the other.
Information from the detectors is analysed and displayed as
a two-dimensional image on visual display units, recorded
as slices.
The frequency and definition of the slices determines the
type of CT performed. A standard CT performs slices at
frequent intervals and averages the information between
slices (volume averaging), meaning small masses are better
detected but the definition if each image is less fine. This
modality is better looking for small nodules such as in lung
cancer. A high-resolution CT image gives a very detailed
single resolution slice but at wider intervals and without
volume averaging, meaning a small mass may be missed
between slices. This modality is better for looking at the
texture of the lung itself (for interstitial lung disease). A
greater number of advanced CT techniques exist, which
can be used for a variety of conditions.
Typically, CT chest imaging gives a dose of radiation
approximately 100 times that of a standard plain film chest
radiograph.
Applications of computed tomography
Detection of pulmonary nodules
CT can evaluate the presence of metastases in a patient
with known malignancy; however, it cannot definitively
distinguish between benign and malignant masses. It can
also be a useful imaging modality for biopsy of these
lesions 
through 
interventional 
radiology, 
typically
performed for lesions located more peripherally that cannot
be accessed via bronchoscopy.
Mediastinal masses
CT is a useful technique in searching for lymphadenopathy
in a person with primary lung carcinoma.
Carcinoma of the lung
CT can evaluate the size of a lung carcinoma, and detect
mediastinal extension and staging, including the detection
of metastases in other organs. A typical lung cancer staging
CT will include the liver and adrenal glands in the
abdomen, as these are typical sites of metastases (see
Chapter 17 for more information).
Pleural lesions
CT is effective at detecting small pleural effusions and
identifying pleural plaques (Fig. 11.8).
FIG. 11.8  Computed tomography (CT) scan of a pleural
mass. Enhanced CT scan at level of bifurcation of main
pulmonary artery. The left lung is surrounded by pleural
masses (arrowheads), and the posterior mass is invading the
chest wall. The vascular anatomy of the mediastinum is well
shown. a, Azygos vein (left of descending aorta); AA,
ascending aorta; DA, descending aorta; LPA, left pulmonary
artery; RPA, right pulmonary artery; SVC, superior vena
cava. (Courtesy of Dr D Sutton and Dr JWR Young.)
Vascular lesions
Contrast studies allow imaging of vascular lesions (e.g.,
aortic aneurysms or aortic dissection). Contrast is injected
intravenously, which highlights the vascular structures.
The timing of the contrast injection is synchronized to
whether the arterial or venous system is being imaged, and
so it is important to state the type of abnormality you are
suspecting.
Application of high-resolution
computed tomography
High-resolution CT is useful in imaging diffuse lung
disease: thinner sections of 1–2  mm show greater lung
detail (Fig. 11.9).
FIG. 11.9  Technical differences between computed
tomography (CT) and high-resolution CT (HRCT).
Bronchiectasis
High-resolution 
CT 
is 
used 
for 
the 
diagnosis 
of
bronchiectasis, 
demonstrating 
characteristic 
dilated
bronchi. Other features include:
• Collapse
• Scarring
• Consolidation.
Interstitial lung disease
High-resolution CT is more specific than plain film
radiography. Disorders that have specific appearances on
high-resolution CT include sarcoidosis, occupational lung
disease and interstitial pneumonia.
High-resolution CT can be used for biopsy guidance.
Atypical infections
High-resolution CT provides diagnosis earlier than plain
chest radiography and is useful in monitoring disease and
response to treatment. It also provides good delineation of
disease activity and destruction.
High-resolution CT is used in imaging of patients with
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (e.g., Pneumocystis
jiroveci pneumonia).
Lymphangitis carcinomatosis
High-resolution CT can be used in the diagnosis of
lymphangitis carcinomatosis, a condition of inflammation of
the lymph vessels caused by malignancy.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
High-resolution CT can be used to measure small-airways
thickening, gas trapping and emphysema found in chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD).
Computed pulmonary angiogram
A special type of CT scan called a CT pulmonary angiogram
(CTPA) is a noninvasive and accurate method of detecting
blood clots in the lungs or pulmonary embolism (PE). It is a
contrast study performed by injecting dye intravenously in
a peripheral cannula in order to image the pulmonary
vasculature. Filling defects of the pulmonary arterial tree
are seen demonstrating pulmonary emboli. In massive PE,
there may be signs of right heart strain also seen on CT
imaging. CTPA has replaced pulmonary angiography (an
invasive test where a catheter is inserted into the main
pulmonary artery) as the gold standard for PE diagnosis.
There are problems with CTPA. There is a radiation dose
to consider, particularly important in pregnant women,
both for the developing baby and the patient’s breast
tissue, carrying an increase in risk of breast cancer.
Contrast allergies can produce anaphylactic reactions,
whilst the contrast die can be nephrotoxic and should only
be used with suitable renal function. In cases where
complication risks are high, other imaging techniques such
as ventilation:perfusion (V/Q) scans may be performed,
discussed below.
Ventilation:perfusion scans
V/Q relationships are measured by means of isotope scans
(also known as V/Q scans).
Ventilation scans
Ventilation is detected by inhalation of a gas or aerosol
labelled with the radioisotope Xe. The patient breathes and
rebreathes the gas until it comes into equilibrium with
other gases in the lung.
Inequality of ventilation
In diseases such as asthma or COPD the lungs may be
unevenly ventilated. Inequality of ventilation is measured
using the single-breath nitrogen test, similar to the method
for measuring anatomical dead space, described previously.
Perfusion scans
Radioactive particles larger than the diameter of the
pulmonary capillaries are injected intravenously, where
they 
remain 
for 
several 
hours. 
99mTc-labelled
macroaggregated albumin (MAA) is used. A gamma camera
is then used to detect the position of the MAA particles.
The pattern indicates the distribution of pulmonary blood
flow.
Inequality of perfusion
This occurs in conditions such as a pulmonary embolus,
where there is good ventilation of the lung but poor
perfusion owing to venous thrombosis.
Ventilation:perfusion scans
V/Q scans are primarily used to detect pulmonary emboli.
The principle is that a pulmonary embolus produces a
defect on the perfusion scan (a filling defect) that is not
matched by a defect on the ventilation scan, i.e., there is an
area of the lung that is ventilated but not perfused. As the
clot itself is not visualized, small emboli may be missed,
and other lung conditions affecting ventilation may mask
areas of poor perfusion on the scan. As a result, V/Q scans
are less sensitive than CTPA scans for diagnosis of PE, but
do not carry the same radiation and contrast risks. They
are therefore preferred in select clinical circumstances.
Ultrasound
Ultrasound uses high-frequency sound waves to image
internal structures. A transducer probe is pressed against
the patient with a gel used to provide optimum contact. The
transducer emits pulses of ultrasound waves into the body.
Different structures in the body have different acoustic
impedances, meaning some waves can travel further than
others before being reflected back to the transducer. The
reflected waves are processed and combined to generate
an image. Ultrasound is safe, portable and fast; it can be
used at the bedside and is increasingly used in modern
clinical practice.
In respiratory medicine the technique is primarily used in
the investigation of pleural effusions and empyemas.
Ultrasound can differentiate between consolidation and
effusion, or localize an effusion before it is drained by
thoracentesis. Ultrasound imaging can assess whether the
effusion is simple or loculated—meaning separated into
multiple different pockets by fibrotic scar tissue, and can,
in experienced hands, even differentiate fluid densities to
suggest empyema, haemothorax or transudate effusions.
Ultrasound is so effective that British thoracic guidelines
currently state that thoracentesis for pleural effusions
should always be performed with bedside ultrasound
guidance.
A variation on this technique, Doppler ultrasound, is a
noninvasive method for detecting deep vein thrombosis. It
is used in investigating patients with suspected pulmonary
thromboembolism. The technique examines blood flow and
can detect thrombus in the veins above the popliteal fossa.
Positron emission tomography
Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning is used for
the staging of lung cancer and assessing unknown lesions
previously detected on CT. Malignant cells have a higher
metabolic uptake of glucose than nonmalignant cells. A
positron-emitting glucose analogue is injected into the
patient and then detected by the scanner, with suspicious
lesions lighting up on PET scan. False positives can occur
in 
other 
metabolically 
active 
nodules 
such 
as 
in
tuberculosis or sarcoidosis, whilst false negatives can occur
if the lesion is small (< 1 cm).
Magnetic resonance imaging
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) uses the magnetic
properties of the hydrogen atom to produce images. MRI
gives excellent imaging of soft tissues and the heart and its
role in respiratory disease is increasing. It was initially not
used much because air does not generate a signal on an
MRI scan. However, it is being developed as a technique to
obtain dynamic images of the lungs, through the inhalation
of hyperpolarized inert gases such as xenon and helium.
Flowing blood does not provide a signal for MRI, and
vascular structures appear as hollow tubes. MRI can be
used to differentiate masses around the aorta or in the hilar
regions. It has the advantage of not using ionizing
radiation, making it safer to use than a CT scan. However,
scans require the patient to lie flat for 30–60 minutes,
which can be difficult for a breathless patient.
Chapter Summary
• Posteroanterior (PA) plain film chest radiograph
remains one of the most important imaging
techniques in respiratory medicine.
• Based on plain film appearance it is possible in many
cases to differentiate between collapse, consolidation
and effusion.
• Ultrasound is useful to differentiate simple and
complex effusions from consolidation and guide
interventions such as thoracentesis.
• Computed tomography (CT) is the main investigation
for further imaging of the chest. Depending on the
pathology suspected, the most appropriate CT can be
ordered, differentiating between plain CT, high-
resolution CT and CT pulmonary angiogram (CTPA).
• There remains a role in certain clinical circumstances
for ventilation:perfusion (V/Q) scanning in the
investigation of pulmonary embolism, although CTPA
is often the preferred modality where possible.
SECTION 3
Respiratory Conditions
12
Acute respiratory failure
Introduction
Acute respiratory failure is a life-threatening consequence
of many disease processes and is the most common
emergency 
presentation 
of 
respiratory 
medicine. 
It
requires early recognition and correction, or it can be fatal.
We will describe the assessment of the critically ill patient
in respiratory medicine, then discuss the different types of
respiratory failure and how to manage them. Whilst this
section focuses on the emergency resuscitation of the
patient, you should always be thinking about identifying the
underlying pathology and how to treat it.
Initial assessment of the acutely
breathless patient
When you are called to see a patient, it is important to be
able to make a basic assessment of the seriousness of that
patient's condition before starting a more thorough
examination. It is definitely not good practice to start
carefully looking at a patient's hands for clubbing, oblivious
to the fact that your patient is extremely short of breath or
very hypoxic! The method used by all doctors is very easy
to remember, it is as easy as ‘ABC’.
ABCDE assessment
This is a common tool for assessing any unwell patient.
Work through the sequence and whenever you encounter a
problem, make sure you act to correct it where you can
before moving to the next step.
A – airway
Is your patient's airway patent? A simple way of
determining this is to ask the patient a question. If the
patient can speak a reply, then it is obvious that the airway
is patent. Listen for added sounds, such as stridor (a high-
pitched wheezing noise) or gurgling, which may indicate
obstruction of the upper airways. If this is the case, try
simple techniques such as tilting the patient's head and
lifting the chin, or thrusting the jaw forward, to open up the
upper airways. If this is still not helping, an airway adjunct
such as a nasopharyngeal or oropharyngeal airway may be
of help. If this is not helping, more complex adjuncts, such
as a laryngeal mask airway or even an endotracheal tube,
may be necessary. It is important that if you begin to feel
out of your depth, you must call a senior for help.
Furthermore, only those trained to do so (such as
anaesthetists) should intubate a patient.
B – breathing
Once you have established a patent airway, the next
assessment is breathing. Patients with a respiratory
emergency will need supplemental oxygen. There are a
number of ways in which oxygen can be delivered. These
include via nasal cannulae, or controlled oxygen via a
Venturi mask (which ensures only a specific percentage of
oxygen is delivered) or a nonrebreather mask (Fig 12.1). In
an emergency setting, you usually want as much oxygen as
possible; therefore, a nonrebreather mask is the most
effective, as it delivers high oxygen volumes in a ward
setting.
FIG. 12.1  Venturi and nonrebreather masks.
Next you must assess the breathing itself. What is the
patient's respiratory rate? Normal is between 12 and 16
breaths per minute. If the patient is talking to you, can they
talk in full sentences or are they so breathless that they
must stop after every couple of words? You can use a finger
probe to measure oxygen saturation. In a healthy person at
rest, it should be 98%–100%. However, in someone with
chronic airways disease [such as chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD)], normal for that individual
might be anywhere from 88% upwards.
Next, it is time to examine the chest, including
inspection, percussion and auscultation. In this crucial
initial assessment, you can omit certain parts of the
respiratory examination, such as examining the hands, as
this can be done later and any signs will not be immediately
helpful in saving the life of your patient. It may be
appropriate to think about ordering tests at this stage, such
as an arterial blood gas (ABG) test or chest radiograph,
whilst you continue your assessment.
C – circulation
Once you are happy with the patient's breathing, you can
assess the circulation. What is the patient's pulse and blood
pressure? Feel for a central and peripheral pulse and check
capillary refill. If the patient is tachycardic or hypotensive,
now is the time to establish intravenous (IV) access. You
should attempt to insert one cannula in each arm, using as
large a size as possible. Here, IV fluids may be appropriate,
given as a bolus to assess response. In significant
tachycardia 
an 
electrocardiogram 
may 
demonstrate
underlying arrhythmias or cardiac ischaemia. Also think
about appropriate and relevant blood tests necessary at
this stage.
D – disability
Whilst the ABC assessment is most crucial and certainly
most relevant to respiratory patients, further assessments
can give vital clues to the underlying diagnosis or how
unwell the patient is. Assessing consciousness level, either
using the AVPU scale (alert, responds to voice, responds to
pain, unconscious) or the Glasgow Coma Scale can give you
information on how well the patient can protect their own
airway. Even subtle signs such as new confusion can
indicate an underlying sepsis. Also, always check the blood
glucose here—do not forget hypo- or hyperglycaemia.
E – exposure (and everything else)
Have a look at the rest of the patient from top to toe.
Always lift up the covers—a swollen leg demonstrating a
deep vein thrombosis may give a vital clue to the cause of
the patient’s respiratory failure [pulmonary embolism
(PE)]. Examine the abdomen and any other relevant areas.
Once you have completed your assessment, think about
the underlying diagnosis, as well as assessing response to
your given treatment. For example, if you are suspecting a
chest infection, antibiotics may be appropriate. It is
important to remember that the ABC approach involves
constant reassessment and is a continuous loop. Also, you
must never move on to the next step before you are
completely satisfied with the current one. There is no point
administering oxygen to a patient who does not have a
patent airway!
As a junior doctor, you must never be afraid to get senior
help. If you are worried about a patient and feel you need
more support, it is the responsible thing to do.
How to read an arterial blood gas
result
ABG analysis is the definitive method for assessing for
respiratory failure and should be performed in any patient
requiring oxygen therapy. It gives vital information
allowing differentiation between type I and type II
respiratory failure, as well as providing information on
many 
other 
metabolic 
parameters. 
Performing 
and
interpreting the test is discussed in Chapter 10, while Table
12.1 is a brief guide to interpreting an ABG result.
1. Always know the clinical context. Why was the test
performed and why is the patient unwell? Is the
patient on oxygen; if so, how much? Without this
knowledge you cannot interpret anything
successfully.
2. Look at the PO2 (normal range 10–14 kPa)—is the
patient in respiratory failure (PaO2 < 8 kPa)?
Remember to consider the inspired O2. If the patient
is on high-flow oxygen, is the PO2 appropriate?
3. Look at the pH (normal range 7.35–7.45)—is the
patient acidaemic or alkalaemic (pH < 7.35 or >
7.45, respectively)? If so, the next steps will help you
work out the underlying cause (metabolic versus
respiratory).
4. Look at the PCO2 (normal range 4.5–6.0 kPa)—raised
PCO2 may be causing a respiratory acidosis, whilst a
low PCO2 could reflect the respiratory compensation
of a metabolic acidosis. Remember respiratory
compensation can begin quickly whilst metabolic
compensation takes days to occur.
5. Look at the HCO3 (normal range 22–26 mmol/L) and
base excess (− 2 to + 2 mmol/L)—low bicarbonate
may demonstrate underlying metabolic acidosis,
whilst a raised bicarbonate can demonstrate chronic
compensation of respiratory acidosis secondary to
CO2 retention.
6. Is there compensation? Remember the body will
never overcompensate an acidosis or alkalosis.
7. Look at all other features on the blood gas—often
additional tests will be performed by the blood gas
analyser, such electrolytes, lactate and glucose.
Table 12.1
Example normal ranges for arterial blood gas
analysis
Parameter
Normal range
pH
7.35–7.45
PO2
10–14 kPa
PCO2
4.5–6 kPa
HCO3
22–26 mmol/L
Base excess
− 2–2 mmol/L
Hints and tips 
Arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis is a common topic for
exam questions, and its interpretation is also a very
useful skill in clinical practice. It can be difficult and is
often confused. Everyone develops their own way of
reading ABG results; try to find a system you like, stick to
it and keep practising.
Respiratory failure
Definition
Respiratory failure is defined as a failure to maintain
adequate gas exchange, with a PaO2 < 8 kPa by blood gas
analysis. Respiratory failure can be further subdivided into
type I or type II, depending on PaCO2 level.
• Type I respiratory failure—PaO2 < 8 kPa with a low
or normal PaCO2.
• Type II respiratory failure—PaO2 < 8 kPa with a
raised PaCO2.
Respiratory failure is not a presentation seen in isolation,
but a possible outcome of many different respiratory
diseases. During the initial stages of lung disease, the body
maintains adequate oxygenation by adapting to increased
ventilatory demand. However, if the underlying disease
progresses, ventilatory workload may become excessive,
which results in failure to oxygenate blood adequately, as
well as possible failure to effectively remove carbon dioxide
by ventilation.
Type I respiratory failure
• Acute hypoxaemia: PaO2 low (< 8 kPa)
• PaCO2 is normal or low.
Type I respiratory failure is primarily caused by
ventilation:perfusion (V/Q) mismatch.
Common causes include:
• Severe acute asthma
• Pneumonia
• PE
• Pulmonary oedema.
Type II respiratory failure
• Low PaO2 < 8 kPa.
• High PaCO2 > 6.0 kPa.
Type II respiratory failure is also known as ventilatory
failure; the rise in PaCO2 is no longer matched by an
increase in alveolar ventilation. This can be because:
• Ventilatory drive is insufficient
• The work of breathing is excessive
• The lungs are unable to pump air in and out
efficiently.
As a result, patients are unable to ‘blow off’ the excess
CO2 causing PaCO2 levels to rise. In the acute setting this
can lead to a respiratory acidosis, as the excess CO2 is
converted to carbonic acid in the bloodstream.
In chronic type II respiratory failure the patient may be
able to metabolically compensate with a gradual rise in
serum bicarbonate preventing acidaemia.
Common causes are displayed in Table 12.2. The
commonest cause is an acute exacerbation of COPD.
Patients with COPD are often hypoxaemic and hypercapnic
for many years, with morning headache being the only sign
that PaCO2 is slightly raised. An acute exacerbation (e.g.,
caused by respiratory infection) further increases the work
of breathing, leading to ‘acute-on-chronic’ respiratory
failure.
Table 12.2
Common causes of respiratory failure divided into
categories of aetiology
Pulmonary
Reduced
respiratory
drive
Neuromuscular
Chronic
obstructive
pulmonary
disease
Trauma
Cervical cord
lesions
Asthma
Sedative drugs
Paralysis of
diaphragm
Pneumonia
Central nervous
system
trauma
Myasthenia gravis
Pulmonary
fibrosis
Guillain–Barré
syndrome
Obstructive
sleep apnoea
Clinical features
Depending on the type of respiratory failure, patients will
demonstrate features of hypoxia ± hypercapnia (Table
12.3). The most common feature is breathlessness, and in
any breathless patient respiratory failure should be
suspected.
Table 12.3
Symptoms of hypoxia and hypercapnia
Hypoxia (type I and II
respiratory failure)
Hypercapnia (type I
respiratory failure only)
Dyspnoea
Headaches
Restlessness and agitation
Drowsiness
Confusion
Confusion
Cyanosis (peripheral and
central)
Tachycardia with a bounding
pulse
CO2 retention hand flap
Peripheral vasodilation
Papilloedema
Investigations
Investigations used to confirm respiratory failure include
initial peripheral oxygen saturation monitoring, then ABG
sampling as the definitive test. Further investigations
should primarily focus on determining the underlying cause
of respiratory failure. Some useful investigations include:
• Blood tests and blood cultures
• Chest radiograph
• Sputum culture
• Bedside spirometry testing.
Once initial investigations are complete, more specialist
tests can be used if the diagnosis is not yet confirmed. For
example, a pulmonary embolus may require computed
tomography (CT) imaging to confirm, whilst specialist
serological or imaging tests may be required if a particular
infection is suspected.
Management
Ultimately, management is dependent on the underlying
cause of respiratory failure (Table 12.4). However,
adequate oxygenation and respiratory support is often
needed whilst diagnosis is confirmed and the treatment
takes time to take effect. Respiratory support can be
divided into three broad categories—oxygen delivery,
noninvasive ventilation and invasive ventilation. The type of
support required depends on the type and severity of the
respiratory failure. The goal of respiratory support is to
provide adequate oxygenation, with effective removal of
carbon dioxide.
Table 12.4
Common respiratory presentations causing acute
respiratory failure
Emergency presentation
Chapter
Anaphylaxis
13
Foreign body aspiration
13
Asthma exacerbation
14
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
exacerbation
15
Pneumonia
18
Infective exacerbation of bronchiectasis
19
Empyema
20
Pneumothorax
20
Pulmonary embolism
21
Special care should be taken in patients at risk of type II
respiratory failure, such as those with severe COPD.
Respiratory drive in these patients has become relatively
insensitive to high PaCO2 (hypercapnia) and so their drive
to breathe is stimulated by low PaO2 (hypoxic drive to
breathe). 
Overoxygenation 
leads 
to 
suppression 
of
ventilation and PaCO2 may rise rather than fall. This can
result in a respiratory acidosis which can be fatal if not
recognized and treated, known as decompensated type II
respiratory failure. In such patients, controlled oxygen
therapy with target saturations of 88%–92% are preferred
to standard targets of 94%–98%.
Oxygen delivery and ventilation
Oxygen delivery
Oxygen delivery can be provided in a variety of forms,
depending on the severity of the hypoxia. In the initial
assessment of a critically unwell patient, delivery of high-
flow oxygen is recommended until further investigations
can be performed, as hypoxia is often the most imminent
threat to the patient. Once the patient is stabilized, oxygen
can be stepped down and delivered in a controlled manner
where appropriate.
Controlled oxygen can be delivered via a number of
devices and at different rates, providing varying oxygen
concentrations:
• Nasal cannulae—used for low-flow oxygen delivery,
comfortable and easily administered.
• Simple oxygen mask—used for medium-
concentration oxygen delivery. Can be delivered
with humidification if required to prevent mouth
drying.
• Venturi mask—provides fixed oxygen delivery using
separate adapters for different oxygen
concentrations. Good for giving reliable controlled
oxygen at medium concentration. Comes in different
colours to guide use.
• Nonrebreather mask—has a reservoir bag attached
which is filled prior to use, meaning patients are
only able to breathe in the concentrated oxygen.
Delivers the highest concentrated oxygen available
in a nonspecialist ward setting.
Table 12.5
Continuous positive airway pressure
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) provides
oxygen 
delivery 
plus 
added 
fixed 
positive 
pressure
throughout the respiratory cycle. CPAP is used for patients
with type I respiratory failure to correct hypoxaemia and,
whilst the strongest evidence for successful use is with
cardiogenic pulmonary oedema, it is used in a variety of
settings for critically unwell patients, with specialist advice.
In the nonemergency setting, CPAP is used for obstructive
sleep apnoea (see Chapter 22). The continuous airway
pressure is used to stent open the small airways and
minimize alveolar collapse. This aims to reduce the work of
breathing and improves any existing ventilation:perfusion
mismatching.
CPAP can be delivered either nasally or via a tight-fitting
mask. The pressure delivered can vary from 5–15  cmH2O
(higher in specialist cases) and oxygen can be delivered in
higher concentrations than standard oxygen mask therapy.
CPAP should be delivered with trained staff who know
how to fit the mask and set up the equipment required. The
patient should be alert and cooperative, and without facial
trauma that prevents the mask from being fitted. The
pressure can be uncomfortable and some patients are not
able to tolerate the device.
Noninvasive ventilation
Whilst CPAP provides a continuous pressure, noninvasive
ventilation (NIV) varies this airway pressure to provide
ventilation support, rather than simply supplying maximum
oxygen concentrations to treat hypoxaemia (Fig. 12.2).
FIG 12.2  Patient wearing a noninvasive ventilation mask.
From Smith TA, Davidson PM, Jenkins CR, Ingham JM: Life
behind the mask: the patient experience of NIV. Lancet
Respir Med 3:1, 2015.
Although different methods of NIV exist, the most
common form is bilevel positive airway pressure (BiPAP),
which will be discussed here. Again, a mask is attached to
the patient’s face with a tight seal to prevent oxygen
escaping and pressure changing. The machine recognizes
the patient’s breathing pattern and aims to synchronize
support within both inspiration and expiration. As the
patient breathes in, air at a higher pressure is delivered,
opening the airways to promote a strong inspiratory phase
and 
aiding 
oxygenation 
[inspiratory 
positive 
airway
pressure (IPAP)]. As the patient breathes out, this is again
detected by the machine and the pressure drops, aiding
expiration and promoting the expulsion of carbon dioxide,
whilst still providing enough pressure to splint open the
small airways and maximize efficient gas exchange
[expiratory positive airway pressure (EPAP)]. This variation
of pressure (pressure support) acts to aid ventilation and is
used in type II respiratory failure, promoting not only
oxygenation but adequate expulsion of CO2 (Fig. 12.3).
FIG. 12.3  Pressure differences in bilevel positive airway
pressure (BiPAP). BiPAP provides two fixed levels of positive
airway pressure. The difference between the inspiratory
positive airway pressure (IPAP) and expiratory positive
airway pressure (EPAP) is known as pressure support, and
can be varied to increase the expulsion of excess CO2.
Modified from Kato T, Suda S, Kasai T: Positive airway
pressure therapy for heart failure. World J Cardiol, 6:11,
2015.
The use of NIV has strict criteria for use, set out in Table
12.6. It should not be used in situations where invasive
ventilation is more appropriate, but is often preferred
initially, as a trial in circumstances where it is thought
possible reverse respiratory failure with noninvasive
techniques alone. It requires regular ABG analysis before
treatment, 1 hour after initiation and to guide subsequent
adjustments to therapy. Where ventilation support alone is
not sufficient to maintain oxygenation, supplemental
oxygen can be delivered through the device. Given the high
levels of monitoring required, NIV should be delivered only
on a specialist ward with trained staff, typically a high
dependency unit or specialist respiratory ward.
Table 12.6
Ethics
The ethics of ventilation
For any patient who is critically unwell and potentially
requiring ventilator support, consideration should be
made about what level of treatment is suitable. Some
patients with severe, irreversible lung disease, or other
significant comorbidities such as cardiac failure, do not
have the physiological reserve to survive intensive
ventilator support. Such patients would never be able to
be weaned off the ventilator machines if treatment is
started on them, leading to an undignified, protracted
and difficult death. For other patients, ventilation may be
the only chance of survival. Some patients do not wish to
be ventilated and have advanced directive decisions on
the matter.
Decisions about ventilation are complex and should
only be made by senior clinicians and intensive care
specialists. It is important to establish the ceiling of
treatment before starting noninvasive treatments, and to
involve the patient and family in the decision-making
process.
Invasive ventilation
Invasive ventilation occurs when a patient has an
endotracheal or tracheostomy tube in place. It aims to
optimize oxygenation, remove carbon dioxide and decrease
the work of breathing. The ventilator can be adjusted to
provide different inspiratory and expiratory pressures,
depending on the patient's needs.
Broadly, mechanical ventilation is used for patients who
are unable to maintain their own airway or for those in
respiratory failure unresponsive to less invasive measures.
Criteria for ventilation that are more objective are based on
blood gas results, such as pH < 7.3, PaO2 < 8 kPa or PaCO2
> 6  kPa, but these need to be used in combination with
clinical features such as apnoea or respiratory distress with
altered mental state.
Ventilated patients are managed on intensive therapy
units, as they almost always need further invasive
monitoring and treatment. Once the reversible cause of the
respiratory failure is treated, the patient can be weaned off
the ventilator machine and extubated. This process can
take 
a 
long 
time, 
and 
patients 
become 
physically
deconditioned during the weaning process. Complications
of 
mechanical 
ventilation 
include 
airway 
damage,
haemodynamic instability, barotrauma and ventilator-
acquired pneumonias.
Chapter Summary
• An acutely unwell patient should be assessed using
the ABCDE approach, correcting adverse features as
you progress through each step.
• Arterial blood gas interpretation is vital in the
management of respiratory failure. Having a
systematic approach ensures reliable interpretation
and management.
• Type I respiratory failure is defined as PaO2 < 8 kPa
with a low or normal PaCO2. This represents a
ventilation:perfusion mismatch.
• Type II respiratory failure is defined as PaO2 < 8 kPa
with a raised PaCO2. This represents a failure of
ventilation.
• Respiratory failure is managed with oxygen support
+/− ventilator support, with immediate attention to
the underlying cause of the respiratory failure.
• Endotracheal intubation and mechanical ventilation
are employed when less invasive manoeuvres have
failed or there is airway compromise. Patients must
be fit enough to tolerate invasive ventilation.
Useful links
https://www.resus.org.uk/resuscitation-
guidelines/abcde-approach/.
BTS/ICS guideline for the ventilatory
management of acute hypercapnic respiratory
failure in adults, British Thoracic
Society/Intensive Care Society Acute
Hypercapnic Respiratory Failure Guideline
Development Group, Craig Davidson et al.,
Volume 71 Supplement 2 | THORAX April
2016
https://www.brit-thoracic.org.uk/document-
library/clinical- information/niv/niv-
guidelines/btsrcpics-guideline-on-niv- in-
copd/.
13
The upper respiratory
tract
Introduction
The upper respiratory tract comprises the nose and nasal
passages, the sinuses, pharynx and the part of the larynx
above the vocal chords. Whilst much upper respiratory
tract pathology is managed by ear nose and throat (ENT)
specialists, in modern practice a number of conditions
overlap into respiratory medicine. We will outline some of
these 
conditions, 
beginning 
with 
the 
emergency
presentations of upper airway pathology.
Emergency presentations of the
upper respiratory tract
Anaphylaxis
Anaphylaxis is a serious allergic reaction that is potentially
life threatening.
Pathogenesis
Anaphylaxis is an immune-mediated systemic reaction to a
particular pathogen. It is an acute type 1 immune reaction
mediated by IgE and mast cells, which release a wide
variety of cytokines and inflammatory mediators such as
histamine. This causes constriction of bronchial smooth
muscle and vascular leakage throughout the body.
Aetiology
Various foodstuffs and environmental agents can provoke
an anaphylactic reaction. Common agents include nuts, bee
stings and drugs such as penicillin. The incidence of
anaphylaxis is higher in those with other allergic diseases
such as asthma or hay fever.
Clinical features
• Rash
• Generalized itchiness
• Wheeze and stridor
• Shortness of breath
• Tachycardia
• Hypotension
• Gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea and
diarrhoea.
Investigations
• The diagnosis of anaphylaxis is clinical.
• Mast cell tryptase is an enzyme that serves as a
marker for mast cell activation. It is used to confirm
whether a reaction is anaphylactic in suspected
cases, to differentiate between pseudoallergic or
anaphylactoid reactions. Blood tests for mast cell
tryptase should be taken as soon as possible after
resuscitation, at 1 hour and at 24 hours post event.
Note that measurements should never delay acute
management.
• After the event, skin patch testing can be used to
establish the likely cause of the reaction.
Management
• Resuscitation with intravenous (IV) fluids and
oxygen.
• Intramuscular (IM) adrenaline 0.5 mL of 1:1000.
• Chlorphenamine (an antihistamine) 10 mg IM or
slow IV infusion.
• Hydrocortisone 200 mg IM or slow IV infusion.
Note that the above doses are for adults and children
over the age of 12 years. Specific doses should be sought
for children under the age of 12 years.
Red flag 
Upper airway compromise
Any upper airway compromise is an emergency. The
presence of stridor, tachypnoea, cyanosis and respiratory
distress in the setting of airway compromise may require
advanced 
airway 
management 
techniques 
such 
as
intubation. In the emergency setting this is only
performed by trained individuals such as anaesthetists or
emergency doctors. In severe cases where intubation is
not possible, emergency tracheotomy may be required. In
any airway compromise, call for help early.
Foreign body aspiration
Aspiration of a foreign body can be life threatening. It is
most commonly seen in children but can occur at any age.
The most serious cases are those where the foreign body
lodges in the larynx or trachea, as this causes complete
airway obstruction. If the object tracks down to below the
carina (more commonly to the right main bronchus as it has
a more vertical position), it can often go unnoticed for some
time, with only mild symptoms.
Prevalence
The prevalence of foreign body aspiration is variable
depending on age group. It is most common in the very
young and very old.
Aetiology
Foreign bodies encompass a wide variety of objects. In
young children, these tend to be toys and small household
objects, which are put in the mouth out of curiosity.
However, in the older population, aspiration may occur in
those who have a poor swallow (such as following a stroke).
Clinical features
In upper airways:
• Stridor
• Respiratory distress
• Cyanosis
• Respiratory arrest
Beyond the carina:
• Recurrent cough
• Pneumonia
• Shortness of breath
• Haemoptysis.
Investigations
• Blood tests—may demonstrate an inflammatory
response.
• Chest X-ray—will show up any radiopaque objects
and may also demonstrate pneumonia.
• Bronchoscopy—direct visualization of the object.
Management
• Management depends on the severity and location of
the obstruction. In mild cases, encourage coughing.
• If the object is in the proximal airways and the
symptoms are severe or coughing alone is not
working, try simple techniques such as five back
slaps then five abdominal thrusts (the Heimlich
manoeuvre).
• Airway suction.
• If the object is further down the airways, remove it at
bronchoscopy.
• Antibiotics to prevent/treat pneumonia. If secondary
to aspiration of gastric contents, antibiotics need to
cover anaerobic gut bacteria.
Disorders of the nose
Infectious rhinitis (acute coryza or
common cold)
Rhinitis is inflammation of the mucosal membrane lining
the nose. Inflammation seen in the common cold is caused
by a number of viral infections:
• Rhinovirus (commonest cause)
• Coronavirus
• Adenovirus
• Parainfluenza virus
• Respiratory syncytial virus.
The common cold is a highly contagious, self-limiting
condition, with the highest incidence in children. Symptoms
are nasal obstruction, rhinorrhoea (runny nose) and
sneezing. Complications include sinusitis, otitis media and
lower respiratory tract infections.
Pathology
There is acute inflammation with oedema, glandular
hypersecretion and loss of surface epithelium.
Treatment
Infections with such viruses are self-limiting and no
medical treatment is required. Analgesia and nasal
decongestants can be used to relieve symptoms.
Chronic rhinitis
Chronic 
rhinitis 
may 
develop 
following 
an 
acute
inflammatory 
episode. 
Predisposing 
factors 
such 
as
inadequate drainage of sinuses, nasal obstruction caused
by polyps and enlargement of the adenoids increase the
risk of developing chronic rhinitis.
Allergic rhinitis
Allergic rhinitis is an inflammatory condition of the nasal
mucosa caused by an IgE-mediated response to common
environmental allergens.
Epidemiology
Allergic rhinitis is a common condition: prevalence has
been estimated to be 15%–20%. Symptoms of allergic
rhinitis 
most 
commonly 
present 
in 
childhood 
and
adolescence; it is estimated that 80% of people with the
condition develop symptoms before the age of 20 years.
The prevalence of allergic rhinitis is equal in men and
women; however, the age at which men and women
develop symptoms differs. Men are more likely to develop
allergic rhinitis in childhood, whereas the peak incidence in
women occurs during adolescence. There is a geographical
variation in the prevalence of allergic rhinitis—is much
more common in developed countries than in developing
countries.
Aetiology
The development of allergic rhinitis cannot be attributed to
one single genetic or environmental factor. It is likely to
arise as a result of interaction between multiple genes and
specific environmental variables (Fig. 13.1).
FIG. 13.1  Polygenic inheritance of allergic rhinitis.
A family history of atopy is an important risk factor for
developing allergic rhinitis. Studies have suggested that
the risk of developing atopic disease in the absence of
parental family history is only 13%. This risk increases to
47% if both parents are atopic and 72% if both parents
have the same atopic manifestation.
Environmental factors also play a large role in the
development of allergic rhinitis; many believe the ‘hygiene
hypothesis’ can account for the increasing prevalence of
allergic rhinitis in the Western world. The hygiene
hypothesis suggests that lack of exposure to bacteria and
microorganisms in childhood (i.e., our environment is too
clean) increases the risk of developing allergic rhinitis and
other atopic diseases (Fig. 13.2).
FIG. 13.2  Hygiene hypothesis. T, thymus
Pathology
Symptoms 
are 
caused 
by 
a 
type 
1 
IgE-mediated
hypersensitivity reaction. IgE fixes on to mast cells in nasal
mucous membranes. Upon reexposure to allergen, cross-
linking of the IgE receptor occurs on the surface of the
mast cells, leading to mast cell degranulation and release
of histamine and leukotrienes (Fig. 13.3).
FIG. 13.3  Type 1 hypersensitivity reactions. ECF, Eosinophil
chemotactic factor; Fc, Fc receptor; IgE Fc, immunoglobulin
E; NCF, neutrophil chemotactic factor; PAF, platelet-
activating factor.
Classification
Allergic rhinitis can be classified into seasonal or perennial
rhinitis, depending on whether a patient is allergic to
pollens (seasonal, also known as hay fever) or allergens
that are present year-round, such as house dust mites, pets
and moulds.
However, it is much more useful clinically to classify
allergic rhinitis in terms of severity and the impact on a
patient's quality of life (Table 13.1).
Table 13.1
Symptoms
The common symptoms of allergic rhinitis include:
• Nasal congestion
• Rhinorrhoea
• Sneezing
• Itching (eyes/nose/throat)
• Fatigue.
Investigation
Allergic rhinitis is mainly a clinical diagnosis based on
taking an accurate history of common symptoms and
identifying risk factors and potential allergens.
Skin prick testing can be undertaken to identify specific
allergens to which the patient is allergic; however, in
clinical practice, a diagnosis is usually made by treating
empirically, 
with 
trial 
of 
antihistamines 
and 
nasal
corticosteroids producing an improvement in a patient's
symptoms.
Management
Management of allergic rhinitis largely depends on the
frequency and severity of a patient’s symptoms and the
extent to which they impact on the patient's life. Table 13.2
provides broad guidance for the management of allergic
rhinitis.
Table 13.2
Management of allergic rhinitis
Mild intermittent symptoms
Allergen avoidance
Oral antihistamine
Mild persistent symptoms or
moderate to severe
intermittent symptoms
Allergen avoidance
Oral antihistamine
Intranasal
corticosteroid
Moderate to severe persistent
symptoms
Allergen avoidance
Oral antihistamine
Intranasal
corticosteroid ± oral
corticosteroid
Acute sinusitis
Sinusitis is an inflammatory process involving the lining of
paranasal sinuses (Fig. 13.4). The maxillary sinus is most
commonly clinically infected. The majority of infections are
rhinogenic in origin and are classified as either acute or
chronic.
FIG. 13.4  Anatomy of the sinuses.
Aetiology
The common causes of acute sinusitis are:
• Secondary bacterial infection (by Streptococcus
pneumoniae or Haemophilus influenzae), often
following an upper respiratory tract viral infection.
• Dental extraction or infection.
• Swimming and diving.
• Fractures involving sinuses.
Pathology
Hyperaemia and oedema of the mucosa occur. Blockage of
sinus ostia and mucus production increases. The cilia lining
the paranasal sinuses stop beating efficiently, leading to
stasis of secretions causing secondary infection.
Clinical features
Symptoms occur over several days:
• Purulent nasal discharge
• Malaise
• Sinus tenderness
• Disturbed sense of smell.
There may be fullness and pain over the cheeks, a
maxillary toothache or a frontal headache. Pain is
classically worse on leaning forward. Postnasal discharge
may lead to cough.
Investigations
Sinusitis is like allergic rhinitis—a clinical diagnosis is
based on an accurate history. The following investigations
may be useful in particularly severe or recurrent cases but
are not essential in the majority of cases:
• Blood tests—white cell count and inflammatory
markers (erythrocyte sedimentation rate/C-reactive
protein) may be raised but are often normal.
• Sinus culture.
• Radiology of paranasal sinuses (Fig. 13.5).
FIG. 13.5  Radiology of the paranasal sinuses. (A)
The most commonly used imaging modality in
sinusitis is X-ray, which may show an air–fluid level
in the affected sinus. (B) Lateral X-rays are useful
in children with recurrent sinusitis as they can
reveal enlarged adenoids which predispose. (C)
Computed tomography scans are useful for
assessing the extent of disease and identifying
unusual anatomy of the sinuses, which also
predisposes to sinusitis.
Management
Management is mainly symptomatic with:
• Analgesia
• Nasal decongestants such as carbocisteine.
Where the sinusitis is suspected to be bacterial in origin
(a persistent pyrexia and very purulent discharge), patients
should be managed with antibiotics. In patients who are
immunocompromised, there should be a very low threshold
for treating with antibiotics.
A referral to an ENT specialist is warranted in patients
with unresolving or recurring symptoms.
Chronic sinusitis
Chronic sinusitis is an inflammation of the sinuses which
has been present for more than 4 weeks. It usually occurs
after recurrent acute sinusitis and is common in patients
who are heavy smokers or who work in dusty environments.
Clinical features
Clinical features are similar to those of acute sinusitis but
are typically less severe.
Pathology
Prolonged infection leads to irreversible changes in the
sinus cavity, including:
• An increase in vascular permeability
• Oedema and hypertrophy of the mucosa
• Goblet cell hyperplasia
• Chronic cellular infiltrate
• Ulceration of the epithelium, resulting in granulated
tissue formation.
Investigations
Investigations 
are 
through 
sinus 
radiographs, 
high-
definition coronal section computed tomography (CT) and
diagnostic endoscopy.
Treatment
This condition is difficult to treat. Treatments are:
• Medical—broad-acting antibiotics and decongestant.
• Surgical—antral lavage, inferior meatal intranasal
antrostomy and functional endoscopic sinus surgery.
Clinical notes 
Kartagener syndrome
Rarely, recurrent sinusitis may be caused by Kartagener
syndrome, a congenital mucociliary disorder caused by
the absence of the ciliary protein dynein. It is
characterized by sinusitis, bronchiectasis, otitis media,
dextrocardia and infertility.
Disorders of the larynx
Laryngitis
Laryngitis is an inflammatory condition of the larynx. It is
extremely common and usually caused by viral infection.
Epidemiology
The true incidence of laryngitis is hard to quantify as
symptoms often go unreported, although the Royal College
of General Practitioners in the UK reported a peak average
incidence of laryngitis as 23 cases per 100,000 population
per week, at all ages, over the period from 1999 to 2005.
There is, as expected, a seasonal variation in laryngitis,
with peaks in viral laryngitis in autumn and spring
(rhinovirus) and in winter (influenza).
The incidence of bacterial laryngitis has reduced
significantly since the introduction of the H. influenzae type
B (Hib) vaccine.
Aetiology
Laryngitis is most commonly caused by a viral infection,
i.e., rhinovirus. Other infectious causes include:
• Bacterial (diphtheria, Haemophilus in unvaccinated
children)
• Tuberculosis
• Candida (particularly in immunosuppressed
patients).
Symptoms
• Dysphagia
• Hoarseness
• Odynophagia
• Cough.
Investigation and management
Laryngitis is a clinical diagnosis based on accurate history
and 
examination 
findings. 
Management 
is 
usually
supportive with analgesia, and viral infections are self-
limiting. Bacterial infections will require treatment with a
course of antibiotics. Recurrent laryngitis may warrant
referral to an ENT surgeon.
Chronic laryngitis
Chronic laryngitis is inflammation of the larynx and trachea
associated with excessive smoking, continued vocal abuse
and excessive alcohol.
The mucous glands are swollen and the epithelium
hypertrophied. 
Heavy 
smoking 
leads 
to 
squamous
metaplasia of the larynx. Biopsy is mandatory to rule out
malignancy. Management is directed at avoidance of
aetiological factors.
Laryngotracheobronchitis (croup)
versus acute epiglottitis
Laryngotracheobronchitis (croup) is an extremely common
condition in paediatrics, particularly during the winter
months, and is caused by a viral infection (Table 13.3). In
clinical practice, it is vitally important to make the
distinction between children presenting with croup and
those presenting with acute epiglottitis, which is a medical
emergency.
Table 13.3
Laryngotracheobronchitis (croup) and acute
epiglottitis
Croup
Epiglottitis
Aetiology
Viral
Bacterial
Organism
Parainfluenza,
respiratory
syncytial virus
Group B
Haemophilus
influenzae
Age range
6 months to 3 years
3–7 years
Onset
Gradual over days
Sudden over hours
Cough
Severe barking
Minimal
Temperature
Pyrexia < 38.5°C
Pyrexia > 38.5°C
Stridor
Harsh
Soft
Drooling
No
Yes
Voice
Hoarse
Reluctant to speak
Able to
drink
Yes
No
Active
Yes
No, completely still
Mortality
Low
High
The clinical features of these conditions are shown in
Table 13.3. The incidence of epiglottitis has dramatically
fallen, owing to the introduction of the Hib vaccine.
Pathology
In epiglottitis, there is necrosis of epithelium and formation
of an extensive fibrous membrane on the trachea and main
bronchi. Oedema of the subglottic area occurs, with
subsequent danger of laryngeal obstruction
In croup, there is an acute inflammatory oedema and
infiltration 
by 
neutrophil 
polymorphs. 
No 
mucosal
ulceration occurs.
Treatment
To treat laryngotracheobronchitis, keep the patient calm
and hydrated. Nurse in a warm room in an upright position.
Drug treatment, if required, includes steroids (oral
dexamethasone), 
oxygen 
and 
nebulized 
adrenaline
(epinephrine).
Case study
Lucy, a 2-year-old girl, came into the accident and
emergency unit with a cough, difficulty breathing and a
sore throat. Her mother said that she had had a cold for
the past week. Closer examination revealed that Lucy
had a hoarse voice and a cough that sounded like a bark.
There was some sternal recession and discomfort when
lying down. Lucy was diagnosed as having croup.
She had moderate-to-severe croup and was treated
with 100% oxygen, nebulized adrenaline (epinephrine)
and budesonide, as well as oral dexamethasone.
Acute epiglottitis is a medical emergency. Call for the
anaesthetist, 
ENT 
surgeon 
and, 
if 
appropriate, 
the
paediatric team. Never attempt to visualize the epiglottis.
Keep calm and reassure the patient. Never leave the
patient alone. As with other serious H. influenzae
infections, prophylactic treatment with rifampicin is offered
to the close contacts.
Reactive nodules
Reactive nodules are common, small inflammatory polyps,
usually measuring less than 10 mm in diameter. They are
also known as singer's nodules. They present in patients
aged 40–50 years and are more common in men. Reactive
nodules are caused by excessive untrained use of vocal
cords. Patients present with hoarseness of the voice.
Pathology
Keratosis develops at the junction of the anterior and
middle thirds of the vocal cord on each side. Oedematous
myxoid 
connective 
tissue 
is 
covered 
by 
squamous
epithelium. The reactive nodules may become painful
because of ulceration.
Tracheostomy and laryngectomy
A tracheostomy is a connection between the trachea and
the anterior aspect of the neck to allow patients to breath
without the use of the nose or mouth, with a tracheal tube
inserted to keep the connection open. It can be inserted for
a number of different reasons, including the use of long-
term mechanical ventilation (e.g., with a prolonged
intensive care stay) and head and neck surgery for cancers,
or it may be inserted in the acute setting for severe
angioedema or upper airway obstruction. As patients
breathe through the stoma, air bypasses the vocal cords
and so they cannot speak whilst the tracheostomy is open.
As there is still a connection, air can pass if the stoma is
blocked, meaning speaking valves can also be used to
temporarily block off the valve.
Care of the tracheostomy is important. As the patient
bypasses the filtering mechanisms of the nasal passages
and upper airways, they are more susceptible to chest
infections. Likewise, the stoma can easily block off with
thick secretions. The tracheostomy often requires suction
in infective episodes to prevent plugging off, often
supervised by critical care staff (Fig. 13.6).
FIG. 13.6  Tracheostomy and laryngectomy.
Laryngectomy 
is 
a 
surgical 
procedure 
performed
primarily for laryngeal cancers. It involves the removal of
the larynx, leaving a connection between the mouth and
oesophagus, plus a separate distinct connection between
trachea and upper neck. The stoma in laryngectomy
typically does not require a tracheostomy tube to keep it
open, although a humidification device may appear similar.
Laryngectomy patients cannot talk, nor receive airway
treatments through the mouth or nose, particularly
important in resuscitation. Similar care techniques apply to
manage the airway in terms of suction to clear secretions.
Differentiating between tracheostomy and laryngectomy
can be done on clinical examination if no history is
available. There is a significant psychosocial impact of
either procedure, which should also be considered when
managing these patients.
Chapter Summary
• The common cold may be caused by rhinovirus,
coronavirus, adenovirus, parainfluenza virus or
respiratory syncytial virus.
• Allergic rhinitis is an inflammatory condition of the
nasal mucosa instigated by an IgE-mediated immune
response to allergens such as pollens, dust mites,
pets or moulds.
• Distinguishing between laryngotracheobronchitis
(croup) and acute epiglottitis in paediatrics is vital to
identifying an acute medical emergency (the latter
may require intubation and is caused by H.
influenzae).
• Anaphylaxis is a medical emergency caused by a type
1 IgE-mediated immune response and is managed
with adrenaline, hydrocortisone and antihistamines in
the first instance.
• Tracheostomy is a connection between the trachea
and anterior neck wall with a patent connection
between mouth and trachea. A laryngectomy
connects the trachea and anterior neck wall without
any connection between mouth and trachea.
Further reading
Birmingham Research Unit of the Royal College
of General Practitioners. Communicable and
respiratory disease report for England and
Wales. 2006. Available online at:
http://www.rcgp.org.uk/.
Anaphylaxis UK resuscitation guidelines:
https://www.resus.org.uk/anaphylaxis/emerg
ency-treatment-of-anaphylactic-reactions/
14
Asthma
Definition and background
Asthma is a chronic inflammatory disorder of the airways
characterized by recurrent episodes of typical symptoms
(wheeze, chest tightness, breathlessness and cough) and
variable air flow obstruction, airway hyperresponsiveness
and airway inflammation. There is no gold standard
diagnostic test and therefore it is a clinical diagnosis.
Prevalence
Asthma is the most common lung condition in the UK.
Asthma UK data show that in 2015 in the UK 4.3 million
adults and 1.1 million children were being treated for
asthma. Data from the British Lung Foundation suggest
that the prevalence of asthma in the UK is plateauing, with
an increase of less than 3% in recent years. Deaths from
asthma in the UK make up 1.1% of all deaths from
respiratory disease.
Classification
Over 
recent 
years, 
asthma 
has 
been 
increasingly
recognized as a heterogeneous clinical syndrome rather
than a single disease entity. It may be classified
phenotypically according to clinical and physiological
characteristics or by endotype according to distinct
pathophysiology. The phenotypic model classifies asthma as
‘extrinsic’ (atopic childhood asthma) or ‘intrinsic’ (adult
onset, nonatopic; Table 14.1). Occupational asthma can be
considered as a separate group.
Table 14.1
Classification of asthma
Extrinsic
asthma
Intrinsic
asthma
Underlying
abnormality
Immune
reaction
(atopic)
Abnormal
autonomic
regulation of
airways
Onset
Childhood
Adulthood
Distribution
60%
40%
Allergens
Recognized
None identified
Family history
Present
Absent
Predisposition to form
IgE antibodies
Present
Absent
Association with
chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
None
Chronic
bronchitis
Natural progression
Improves
Worsens
Eosinophilia
Sputum and
blood
Sputum
Drug hypersensitivity
Absent
Present
Extrinsic asthma
This is classical asthma with onset in childhood or young
adolescence, commonly with a previous history of atopy
such as food allergy or eczema. It is triggered by inhalation
of allergens and typically responds to treatment.
Intrinsic asthma
This subtype tends to be of adult onset, is more progressive
and is less responsive to therapy. It is less likely to be
related to a previous history of atopy.
Precipitating factors
Recognized precipitating factors for asthma include:
• Allergens: house dust mite, flour, animal danders.
• Occupational factors: solder (colophony) fumes,
flour, isocyanates.
• Viral infections: parainfluenza, respiratory syncytial
virus, rhinovirus.
• Drugs: β-blockers, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory
drugs, aspirin.
• Other factors: cold air, exercise, emotion.
Occupational asthma
Occupational asthma is caused by specific sensitizers in the
workplace and can occur in individuals without previously
diagnosed asthma. Occupational asthma may be classified
as:
• Allergic—immunologically mediated with a latent
period between exposure and symptoms during
which the worker becomes sensitized to the causal
agent.
• Nonallergic—immediate response after exposure to
an irritant, e.g., to high concentrations of a toxic
gas.
Occupational asthma can be difficult to diagnose owing to
the latency period between exposure and symptoms. It is
important to ask questions in the history about worsening
symptoms at work or improved symptoms when on holiday,
as well as possible exposures at work. Currently, over 200
materials encountered at the workplace are implicated
(Table 14.2). Diagnosis is based on confirming the
diagnosis of asthma in the usual manner, confirming the
relationship between asthma and work, and identifying the
specific cause. Bronchial provocation tests may be used in
specialist centres to demonstrate bronchospasm to a
particular agent.
Table 14.2
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of asthma is very complex; however,
three main processes are responsible for the majority of
symptoms. 
These 
are 
bronchospasm, 
smooth-muscle
hypertrophy and mucus plugging (Fig. 14.1). Allergen-
induced airway inflammation results in:
• Smooth-muscle constriction
• Thickening of the airway wall (smooth-muscle
hypertrophy and oedema)
• Basement membrane thickening
• Mucus and exudate in the airway lumen.
FIG. 14.1  Mechanisms of airway narrowing in asthma.
Microscopically, the viscid mucus contains:
• Desquamated epithelial cells
• Whorls of shed epithelium (Curschmann whorls)
• Charcot–Leyden crystal (eosinophil cell membranes)
• Infiltration of inflammatory cells, particularly CD4+ T
lymphocytes.
Inflammatory mediators
Inflammatory 
mediators 
play 
a 
vital 
role 
in 
the
pathogenesis of asthma. Inflammatory stimuli activate mast
cells, epithelial cells, alveolar macrophages and dendritic
cells resident within the airways, causing the release of
mediators that are chemotactic for cells derived from the
circulation—secondary 
effector 
cells 
(eosinophils,
neutrophils and platelets). Mediators that are thought to be
involved in asthma include:
• Preformed mediators—present in cytoplasmic
granules ready for release. They are associated with
human lung mast cells and include histamine,
neutral proteases and chemotactic factors for
eosinophils. These are responsible for the early
response (see later).
• Newly generated mediators—manufactured
secondary to the initial triggering stimulus after
release of preformed mediators. Some of these
mediators are derived from the membrane
phospholipids and are associated with the
metabolism of arachidonic acid (e.g., prostaglandins
and leukotrienes). The production of inflammatory
cytokines and chemokines is important in the
activation and recruitment of inflammatory cells,
ultimately leading to a so-called late response (see
below).
Early and late responses
Two patterns of response can be considered; in practice,
most asthmatics show evidence of both responses, although
either may be absent.
Immediate (early) reaction
The release of preformed mediators (predominantly from
mast cells) causes vascular leakage and smooth-muscle
contraction within 10–15 minutes of challenge, with a
return to baseline within 1–2 hours. The mast cells are
activated 
by 
allergens 
that 
cross-link 
with 
the
immunoglobulin E (IgE) molecules that are bound to high-
affinity receptors on the mast cell membrane.
Late reaction
The 
influx 
of 
inflammatory 
cells 
(predominantly
eosinophils) 
and 
the 
release 
of 
their 
inflammatory
mediators cause airway narrowing after 3–4 hours, which is
maximal after 6–12 hours. This is much more difficult to
reverse than the immediate reaction and there is an
increase in the level of airway hyperreactivity.
The biphasic nature of asthma attacks is the basis behind
patients being admitted for observation for approximately
24 hours after a moderate or severe attack.
The asthmatic process is overviewed in Fig. 14.2: panel A
shows the cellular and mediator response to allergen,
whereas panel B shows the pathophysiological effects of
this process.
Mcp 
B cell 
Th cell 
Mast cell 
/ 
... 
IL-5 
Histamines 
PGD2 
Early 
•• 
. 
LTC4 
.. 
reaction 
Cytokines 
Ecp "---. 
Perioxidase 
MBP 
" 
Late 
ECP 
reaction 
. "' 
FIG. 14.2  (A) Pathogenesis of asthma. (B) The
pathophysiological effects of cellular processes in asthma.
AHR, Airway hyperresponsiveness; BM, basement
membrane; ECP, eosinophil cationic protein; IgE,
immunoglobulin E; IL-4, interleukin 4; IL-5, interleukin 5;
MBP, major basic protein; LTC4, leukotriene C4; NTS,
neurotransmitter substance; PGD2, prostaglandin D2.
Airway remodelling
This is a term used to describe the specific structural
changes that occur in long-standing asthma with severe
airway inflammation. The characteristic features include:
• Increased vascular permeability.
• Loss of surface epithelial cells and hypertrophy of
goblet cells.
• Hypertrophy of smooth muscle.
• Myofibroblast accumulation and increased collagen
deposition, hence causing basement membrane
thickening.
Airway remodelling may cause a fixed airway obstruction
which may not be reversible with antiinflammatory agents
or bronchodilators.
Clinical features
Symptoms and clinical history
The typical symptoms of asthma are breathlessness, chest
tightness, cough and wheeze. Symptoms are episodic with
a return to normal or near normal between. Classically,
symptoms show a diurnal variation, often being worse at
night or in the early morning. Nocturnal coughing is a
common presenting symptom, especially in children.
Symptoms are intermittent and can be associated with
specific triggers listed earlier in the chapter. It is important
to try and discern the exact timing of symptoms, as this can
be crucial not only in diagnosing the asthma but also in
identifying the underlying trigger. Asking about worsening
of symptoms at work (with reduction when on holiday or at
home) can be very useful in those with occupational
asthma.
Other features to look out for in the history include a
personal or family history of atopic illness, including
eczema and hay fever, nasal symptoms, food allergies and a
history of gastrooesophageal reflux disease.
Examination
Owing to the variability of airflow obstruction in asthma,
examination of a patient’s respiratory system may be
completely normal. During an exacerbation, expiratory
wheeze is classically heard. In severe and life-threatening
asthma, however, the chest may be silent as airflow in the
small airways is almost completely obstructed.
Investigations and diagnosis
There is no single diagnostic test for asthma. An
assessment of clinical probability of asthma based on
symptoms and signs should take place initially. If the
diagnosis is uncertain, further objective diagnostic tests
looking 
for 
variable 
airflow 
obstruction 
or 
airway
inflammation can then be used to support the diagnosis or
make it less likely. As asthma symptoms vary over time, it
is important to consider if a patient is symptomatic or
asymptomatic at the time of the test. Simple diagnostic
tests used in asthma include:
• Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) monitoring—
morning and evening measurements entered into a
PEFR diary. A characteristic morning dipping
pattern is seen in poorly controlled asthma and once
treatment starts the daily PEFR should improve (Fig.
14.3). In occupational asthma, a reduction in peak
flow can be seen during working hours, with return
to normal when the patient is off work.
FIG. 14.3  Example of a peak expiratory flow rate
diary showing characteristic diurnal variation of
peak flow and improvement following treatment
initiation.
• Spirometry +/− reversibility—forced expiratory
volume in 1 second (FEV1) is reduced in airway
obstruction caused by bronchospasm but may be
normal between episodes. Reversibility tests look for
variability of airflow obstruction with
bronchodilators. An improvement in FEV1 of > 15%
(and 200 mL) after bronchodilator administration
(e.g., salbutamol 400 micrograms by metered dose
inhaler with spacer) is suggestive of asthma. If there
is no improvement with bronchodilators and the
patient has a smoking history, consider alternative
diagnoses such as chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD). The main differences between
asthma and COPD are described in Table 14.3.
Table 14.3
Comparison between asthma and chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
Asthma
Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
Genetic
components
Polygenetic
Fewer genes involved,
e.g., α1-antitrypsin
Age of onset
Can occur at any age
but more common
during childhood
Mainly affects the adult
population
Inflammatory
cells involved
Eosinophils and mast
cells are the main
culprits
Mainly neutrophils
Symptoms
Variable—wheeze,
cough
Persistent—shortness
of breath on
exertion, cough
Investigations
Diurnal variation in
FEV1
Progressive decline in
FEV1 over time
Reversibility
Marked
Sometimes
Most effective
bronchodilato
r
β2-adrenoceptor
agonist, e.g.,
salbutamol
Anticholinergics, e.g.,
ipratropium
bromide
Steroid
treatment
Beneficial
Not very beneficial but
useful in acute
exacerbations
FEV1, Forced expiratory volume in 1 second.
• Chest radiography—there are no diagnostic features
of asthma on chest radiograph but is useful to rule
out other diagnoses, including COPD. There is no
benefit in serial chest X-rays.
A basic diagnostic algorithm is shown in Fig. 14.4. Where
there is diagnostic uncertainty or symptoms persist despite
treatment, referral to a specialist should be considered.
Further diagnostic tests may include:
• Blood tests—full blood count and total
immunoglobulin E (IgE) levels. A high eosinophil
count can be seen in asthma but if very high may
suggest alternate diagnoses such as eosinophilic
granulomatosis with polyangiitis, which can present
with asthma like symptoms. A high level of IgE is
associated with atopic conditions.
• Methacholine chloride challenge testing—this
measures bronchial hyperresponsiveness by
measuring FEV1 before and after sequential inhaled
dosing of methacholine chloride, an airway irritant.
The recorded PC20 result is the provocative
concentration of agent that caused a 20% fall in the
FEV1. The lower the PC20, the more likely the
diagnosis of asthma.
• Skin prick tests—allergen injections into the
epidermis of the forearm, which are used to show
atopy and identify potential triggers. Look for wheal
development in sensitive patients.
• Exhaled nitric oxide concentration—an increased
level of exhaled nitric oxide supports the presence of
airway inflammation.
• ENT examination—if nasal symptoms are present,
laryngoscopy to investigate for upper airway
obstruction or vocal cord dysfunction may be useful.
FIG. 14.4  A useful approach to asthma diagnosis
(simplified from British Thoracic Society guidelines).
Differential diagnosis of asthma
The differential diagnosis for asthma is wide and should
include COPD, as already discussed, especially where there
is a history of smoking. Other important differentials
include:
• Disorders of the upper airway—obstruction, tracheal
tumour, foreign body aspiration
• Congestive cardiac failure
• Chronic thromboembolic disease
• Vocal cord dysfunction
• Pulmonary hypertension
• Interstitial lung disease
• Gastroesophageal reflux disease
• Eosinophilic granulomatosis with polyangiitis—a
vasculitis affecting the small and medium-sized
vessels of the respiratory tract and causing asthma,
eosinophilia, sinusitis, neuropathy and pulmonary
infiltrates on chest X-ray.
Hints and tips 
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis occurs in 1%–
2% of asthmatics. Patients often present with a recent
deterioration in their asthma control with an episodic
cough productive of dark mucous. It is thought to develop
from an overactive inflammatory immunoglobulin (Ig) E
and IgG response to Aspergillus fumigatus in the airways
leading to bronchial wall damage and bronchiectasis.
Computed tomography of the chest shows central
proximal bronchiectasis and blood tests may show an
eosinophilia, positive IgE specific to A. fumigatus and
positive IgG precipitins to A. fumigatus. Treatment
includes management of their asthma, oral corticosteroid
courses and, in some cases, antifungal medications such
as itraconazole.
Treatment of stable asthma
The aim of asthma treatment is to control the disease
giving the patient no symptoms, no limitations on activity
and normal lung function, whilst minimizing drug side
effects.
Nonpharmacological treatment
Smoking cessation and avoidance of passive smoking
should be encouraged as smoking reduces the effect of
inhaled corticosteroids. In obese patients, weight reduction
may help. It is important to identify and avoid triggering
factors. However, this may be easier said than done. For
example, if the patient is suffering from occupational
asthma, this may involve giving up their job. Similarly, it is
difficult to avoid house dust mites as they are present on
most soft furnishings in a house. Removal of a pet may be
required if the clinical history is suggestive of a trigger.
Pharmacological treatment
Follow the British Thoracic Society guidelines with a
stepwise approach to drug treatment, as illustrated by Fig.
14.5. Each step up the treatment ladder is carried out if the
patient's symptoms are not sufficiently controlled. Patients
are now recommended to start a fixed dose of preventer
inhaled corticosteroid medication to take on a regular
basis, in addition to their short-acting reliever medication
to take as required. Patients on step 2 of the ladder can
also be considered for single maintenance and reliever
therapy (SMART), which comprises a long-acting β-agonist
and inhaled corticosteroid in a combination inhaler
(Symbicort or Fostair only). Asthmatics tend to use their
corticosteroid inhaler too late in an exacerbation and this
regime 
ensures 
exacerbations 
are 
prevented 
from
worsening. The key point to remember about the stepwise
management of asthma is to step down the treatment once
the patient has good symptom control. A patient should be
maintained on the lowest possible inhaled corticosteroid
dose to adequately control their asthma symptoms.
Reductions in corticosteroid dose should be considered
every 3 months, be taken slowly with a 25% reduction each
time and require careful patient monitoring throughout.
FIG. 14.5  British Thoracic Society guidelines for treatment
of asthma in adults. ICS, Inhaled corticosteroid; LABA, long-
acting β2-agonist, LAMA, long-acting muscarinic antagonist;
LTRA, leukotriene receptor antagonist. From QRG 153 British
Guideline on the Management of Asthma, Quick Reference
Guide, September 2016, SIGN, Healthcare Improvement
Scotland.
The pharmacology of inhaled therapy, corticosteroids and
oral theophylline used in asthma is discussed in Chapter 7.
Other medications used in asthma include:
1. Leukotriene receptor antagonists (e.g., montelukast)
—may be useful in atopic or exercise-induced asthma
as an add on therapy. Patients should trial for 1
month and stop if there is no benefit.
2. Monoclonal antibodies against IgE (omalizumab) or
interleukin 5 (IL-5) (mepolizumab) are given as
subcutaneous injections to patients with continued
asthma symptoms despite maximal inhaled therapy.
There are criteria for their use and, therefore,
currently these medications can only be prescribed
after review by a specialist asthma physician.
Patient education
Education with inhaler technique and drug compliance can
also contribute to the management of asthma. For those
who find inhalers difficult to use, a wide variety of spacers
are available, which are much simpler to use and allow
good delivery of inhaled therapies.
Red flag 
Asthma action plans
Patients should be provided with a personalized asthma
action plan that tells them what to do if their symptoms
worsen, e.g., how to up escalate their treatment and
when to seek medical attention. The personalized asthma
plan should be reviewed by an asthma specialist nurse
during each hospital admission and at community asthma
check-ups. Plans improve outcomes for patients, reducing
hospital admissions and frequency of exacerbations. An
example of an asthma action plan can be found on the
Asthma 
UK 
website
(https://www.asthma.org.uk/advice/manage-your-
asthma/action-plan/).
Acute asthma
Definition
An acute asthma attack occurs when a patient experiences
worsened asthma symptoms over a period of hours to days
that are not responsive to the patient's normal asthma
medications. It requires either an increase in the patient's
normal treatments or new, more complex treatment.
Prevalence
There are 185 people admitted to hospital with an acute
asthma attack every day in the UK, according to Asthma
UK.
Clinical features
Severe asthma is a life-threatening medical emergency and
critical care input should be sought early in patient
management. Features of moderate, severe and life-
threatening asthma are summarized in Table 14.4.
Table 14.4
HR, Heart rate; RR, respiratory rate.
Management
Acute asthma should be managed by following the British
Thoracic Society guidelines, summarized in Fig. 14.6.
Continuous 
monitoring 
by 
pulse 
oximetry,
electrocardiography and blood pressure measurement is
necessary. PEFR monitoring is a useful measure of airway
calibre and should be compared with a patient’s previous
best or predicted value. Arterial blood gas measurements
should be obtained if there are features of life-threatening
asthma or if oxygen saturations are < 92%. Chest X-ray is
not 
routinely 
required 
unless 
pneumothorax 
or
consolidation are suspected or features of life-threatening
asthma persist. If the patient is unresponsive to treatment
and features of severe asthma persist, referral to the
intensive therapy unit for consideration of possible
noninvasive or invasive
FIG. 14.6  Management of acute asthma.
Chapter Summary
• Asthma is a heterogeneous clinical syndrome that is
diagnosed following assessment of the clinical
probability of disease based on symptoms, signs and
investigation results.
• Asthma can be classified phenotypically as intrinsic or
extrinsic asthma.
• Investigations used to diagnose asthma focus on
finding evidence of variable airflow obstruction,
airway hyperresponsiveness and airway inflammation.
• Asthma should be managed via the stepwise approach
detailed in the British Thoracic Society guidelines.
• A severe acute asthma attack is a life-threatening
medical emergency requiring urgent medical
attention.
Further reading
British guideline on the management of asthma.
Quick Reference Guide. British Thoracic
Society/Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines
Network, September 2016.
Asthma. UK www.asthma.org.uk.
Diagnosis and Management of Asthma in Adults
A Review – JAMA July 2017 Jennifer L.
McCracken et al.
15
Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
Introduction
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a
progressive 
lung 
disease, 
characterized 
by 
airflow
obstruction with little or no reversibility. The Global
Initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) defines
COPD as ‘a common, preventable and treatable disease
that is characterized by persistent respiratory symptoms
and air flow limitation that is due to airway and/or alveolar
abnormalities usually caused by a significant exposure to
noxious particles or gases’.
Patients 
with 
smoking-related 
lung 
disease 
were
previously 
thought 
of 
as 
developing 
either 
chronic
bronchitis or emphysema. However, we now realize that
most patients actually develop varying combinations of
these two processes (Table 15.1). Thus the term COPD
represents a spectrum of disease in which several
pathological processes occur.
Table 15.1
Definitions of chronic bronchitis/emphysema
Definition
Chronic
bronchitis
Clinically defined: presence of cough and
sputum production for most days for 3
months of 2 consecutive years
Emphysema
Histologically defined: dilatation of the air
spaces distal to the terminal
bronchioles with destruction of the
alveoli
Epidemiology
COPD is a common lung condition and its prevalence is
estimated to be 2%–15% in industrialized countries. COPD
is a major cause of mortality and morbidity. The Global
Burden of Disease study predicted that by the year 2020
COPD will be the third most common cause of death and
fifth most common cause of disability.
Currently, COPD is more common in men, tends to
present in those over the age of 40 years and becomes
more common with age. However, prevalence is increasing
in women and by the next decade it is estimated that COPD
will affect both men and women equally.
Aetiology
Worldwide, the most commonly encountered risk factor for
developing COPD is tobacco smoke (including cigarettes,
pipes, 
cigars, 
shisha, 
other 
types 
of 
tobacco 
and
environmental 
exposure, 
i.e., 
passive 
smoking). 
The
relationship between smoking and COPD is well proven; it
is estimated that 80% of patients with COPD have a
significant smoking history.
Other environmental risk factors include:
• Indoor air pollution, i.e., biomass fuels used for
indoor cooking and heating—a significant risk factor
for women in developing countries.
• Occupational dusts and chemicals.
• Outdoor air pollution (minimal effect in COPD).
• Marijuana smoking.
A person’s risk of developing COPD is related to the total
burden of inhaled particles he or she encounters over a
lifetime.
Genetic risk factors
Despite a strong relationship between smoking and COPD,
not all smokers go on to develop COPD. In fact, studies
have demonstrated that only 15%–20% of smokers develop
COPD. This implies that there must be a genetic
susceptibility 
that 
predisposes 
some 
individuals 
to
developing COPD when exposed to environmental risk
factors such as tobacco smoke.
The best-described genetic risk factor is α1-antitrypsin
deficiency, which affects 2% of COPD patients. α1-
Antitrypsin is a serum acute-phase protein produced in the
liver; it acts as an antiprotease in the lung and inhibits
neutrophil 
elastase. 
Deficiency 
creates 
a 
protease–
antiprotease imbalance, resulting in unopposed neutrophil
elastase action and, consequently, alveolar destruction and
early-onset emphysema. α1-Antitrypsin deficiency should
be suspected in individuals who develop COPD under 40
years of age. Genetic inheritance of this deficiency is
autosomal dominant with equal distribution between sexes.
Pathophysiology
Cigarette 
smoke 
and 
exposure 
to 
other 
noxious
environmental particles trigger the pathological processes
that occur within the lungs of COPD patients. Tobacco
smoke has been shown to damage the lungs via three main
mechanisms (Fig. 15.1):
• Inflammatory cell activation: cigarette smoke
stimulates epithelial cells, macrophages and
neutrophils to release inflammatory mediators and
proteases (neutrophil elastase).
• Oxidative stress: oxidants in cigarette smoke act
directly on epithelial and goblet cells, causing
inflammation.
• Impaired mucociliary clearance, thus leading to
retained mucus secretions.
FIG. 15.1  Overall pathogenesis of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD).
The two main pathological processes in COPD are
alveolar 
destruction 
(emphysema) 
and 
mucus
hypersecretion 
(chronic 
bronchitis). 
As 
previously
discussed, there are many different phenotypes of COPD.
Whereas some patients may have a more emphysematous
or bronchitic phenotype, the majority of patients develop a
combination of these two pathological processes and have a
mixed phenotype.
Alveolar destruction (emphysema)
Cigarette smoke and other inhaled noxious particles cause
inflammatory cell activation within the lung, inducing cells
to 
release 
inflammatory 
mediators 
and 
proteases.
Importantly, in COPD, cigarette smoke induces the release
of neutrophil elastase from neutrophils. In healthy lung
tissue, antiproteases neutralise these proteases; however,
in COPD the volume of proteases produced overwhelms
antiproteases 
(protease–antiprotease 
imbalance).
Consequently, there is unopposed action of neutrophil
elastase 
within 
the 
lung, 
which 
destroys 
alveolar
attachments. As the distal airways are held open by the
alveolar septa, destruction of alveoli causes the airways to
collapse, resulting in airway obstruction (Fig. 15.2).
FIG. 15.2  The mechanism of underlying airway obstruction
in emphysema.
Destruction of the parenchyma increases compliance of
the lung and causes a mismatch in ventilation:perfusion.
Increased compliance, i.e., reduced elastic recoil of the
lungs, 
means 
the 
lungs 
do 
not 
deflate 
as 
easily,
contributing to air trapping. As more alveolar walls are
destroyed, compliance of the lungs increases and bullae
(dilated air space >  10 mm) form, which may rupture,
causing pneumothoraces.
Classification of emphysema is based on anatomical
distribution 
(Fig. 
15.3). 
The 
two 
main 
types 
are
centriacinar and panacinar.
A 
Terminal --a;;;~ 
B 
c 
bronchiole 
Dilated 
respiratory 
bronchioles 
Dilated 
alveolar -----1-..... 
duct 
..........,"--_
Respiratory 
bronchiole 
~~-- Alveolar duct 
Alveolar sacs 
Dilated 
.,._._.,.,~-- alveolar 
sacs 
FIG. 15.3  Main patterns of alveolar destruction. (A) Normal
distal lung acinus; (B) centriacinar emphysema; (C)
panacinar emphysema.
Centriacinar (centrilobular) emphysema
Septal destruction and dilatation are limited to the centre
of the acinus and around the terminal bronchiole, and
predominantly affect the upper lobes (Fig. 15.3B). This
pattern of emphysema is associated with smoking.
Panacinar (panlobular) emphysema
The whole of the acinus is involved distal to the terminal
bronchioles, and lower lobes are predominantly affected.
This is characteristic of α1-antitrypsin deficiency (Fig.
15.3C).
Mucus hypersecretion
Cigarette smoke causes hyperplasia and hypertrophy of
mucus-secreting glands found in the submucosa of the
large cartilaginous airways. Mucous gland hypertrophy is
expressed as gland:wall ratio, known as the Reid index
(normally <  0.4; >  0.5 indicates chronic bronchitis).
Hyperplasia of the intraepithelial goblet cells occurs at the
expense of ciliated cells in the lining epithelium. Regions of
epithelium may undergo squamous metaplasia.
Small airways become obstructed by intraluminal mucus
plugs, mucosal oedema, smooth-muscle hypertrophy and
peribronchial fibrosis. Secondary bacterial colonization of
retained products occurs (Fig. 15.4).
FIG. 15.4  Pathogenesis of mucus hypersecretion.
The effect of these changes is to cause obstruction,
increasing 
resistance 
to 
airflow. 
A 
mismatch 
in
ventilation:perfusion occurs, impairing gas exchange.
Clinical features
The clinical presentation of COPD is variable, but patients
predominantly complain of:
• Progressive shortness of breath
• Reduced exercise tolerance
• Persistent cough
• Chronic sputum production.
Weight loss and peripheral muscle weakness or wasting
may also occur.
Breathlessness is one of the primary symptoms of COPD
and it is useful to assess this objectively using a modified
version of the Medical Research Council (MRC) Dyspnoea
Scale (see Chapter 8 for more discussion; Table 15.2).
Other COPD specific severity scores exist and may be used
instead.
Table 15.2
Modified Medical Research Council (mMRC) Dyspnoea
Scale: A useful tool for objectively assessing
breathlessness
mMRC
Grade
Degree of breathlessness related to
activities
0
Breathlessness with strenuous exercise
1
Short of breath when hurrying on the flat or
walking up a slight hill
2
Walks slower than contemporaries on level
ground because of breathlessness, or has to
stop for breath when walking at own pace
3
Stops for breath after walking about 100
metres or after a few minutes on level
ground
4
Too breathless to leave the house, or
breathless when dressing or undressing
Typical signs found on examination are shown in Table
15.3 and differential diagnoses discussed in Box 15.1.
Table 15.3
Hints and tips 
Differential diagnosis
There is a significant crossover in the presentation of
chronic 
obstructive 
pulmonary 
disease 
and 
other
respiratory diagnoses, particularly asthma, which can
make a single diagnosis difficult. Other important
differential diagnoses include bronchiectasis, congestive
cardiac failure, tuberculosis, obliterative bronchiolitis
and diffuse panbronchiolitis.
Case study
Bob, a 71-year-old man, presented to his general
practitioner with a 12-month history of shortness of
breath and reduced exercise tolerance. He was noted to
have smoked 30 cigarettes a day for the last 25 years.
Examination revealed him to be cachectic and breathing
through pursed lips. A diagnosis of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease was made on spirometry.
Complications
Exacerbations
An acute worsening of the patient's condition is usually
caused by infection, which can be viral (e.g., influenza) or
bacterial (commonly Haemophilus influenzae). A mild
exacerbation may only require an increase in medication at
home. If the exacerbation is severe, the patient may
deteriorate rapidly and require hospitalization.
Respiratory failure
In severe exacerbations the patient may be unable to
maintain adequate oxygenation. This state is known as
acute respiratory failure and is discussed in more detail in
Chapter 12. As COPD progresses, the lungs are unable to
perform adequate gas exchange and a chronic respiratory
failure develops. Respiratory failure is the leading cause of
death in patients with COPD and is often hypercapnic (type
2 respiratory failure).
Cor pulmonale
Mortality increases in those patients with COPD who
develop 
cor 
pulmonale, 
or 
right 
ventricular 
failure
secondary to disorders affecting the lungs. In COPD, it is
pulmonary hypertension that causes the right ventricle to
hypertrophy 
and 
eventually 
fail. 
This 
is 
clinically
manifested as peripheral oedema, raised JVP, right
ventricular heave, tricuspid regurgitation and palpable
liver edge.
Lung cancer
Smoking and smoke inhalation, as well as potentially
causing COPD, are significant risk factors for the
development of bronchial carcinomas and other forms of
lung cancer. As a result, lung cancers are a major cause of
death in the COPD population and doctors need to be
vigilant to assess for symptoms or signs suggesting
underlying 
malignancy. 
See 
Chapter 
17 
for 
more
information.
Red flag 
Clubbing
Note that chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
alone is not a cause of clubbing of the nail beds. In a
COPD patient with clubbed nails, suspect underlying
malignancy until proven otherwise. Other causes of
clubbing with crossover for COPD symptoms include
bronchiectasis and pulmonary fibrosis.
Investigation
The gold standard for diagnosis of COPD is spirometry. A
postbronchodilator forced expiratory volume in 1 second
(FEV1)/forced vital capacity (FVC) ratio of < 0.7 confirms
the presence of persistent airflow limitation and thus of
COPD.
The severity of COPD can also be classified in terms of
effect on lung function (Table 15.4).
Table 15.4
Classification of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease
Classification of
COPD
FEV1 % compared with
predicted value
Mild/GOLD 1
FEV1 > 80
Moderate/GOLD 2
FEV1 50–80
Severe/GOLD 3
FEV1 30–49
Very severe/GOLD 4
FEV1 < 30
COPD, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in
1 second; GOLD, Global Initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease.
Other tests include:
• Pulse oximetry.
• Chest X-ray (classically, hyperinflated lung fields
with flattened hemidiaphragms; however, may be
normal).
• Full blood count (polycythaemia secondary to
chronic hypoxaemia is a late complication).
• Sputum culture (identify persistent organisms).
• α1-Antitrypsin level (all COPD patients should be
tested once; especially consider in younger
patients).
• Electrocardiograph/echocardiogram may be useful in
end-stage COPD with features of cor pulmonale.
These tests are helpful but not essential in making a
diagnosis of COPD.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease assessment
Once the diagnosis is confirmed and classification of
airflow severity limitation made, the impact of symptoms on
the 
individual 
must 
be 
considered. 
This 
combined
information is then used to stratify patient groups and
guide future management. The GOLD classification system
takes into account the spirometry findings, number of
exacerbations and the MRC Dyspnoea Scale score to
stratify patients using the refined ABCD assessment tool
(Fig. 15.5).
FIG. 15.5  The refined ABCD assessment tool from the
2017 Global Initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD)
guide. The mildest form of COPD would be GOLD 1 group A,
with the most severe being GOLD 4 group D. These
spirometry and symptom groupings allow clearer
management decisions to be made. (Reproduced with
permission from Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive
Lung Disease, Inc., 2017.) COPD, Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease; FEV1, forced expiratory volume in 1
second; FVC, forced vital capacity; mMRC, modified Medical
Research Council Dyspnoea Scale score.
Management
Management of COPD is holistic and incorporates both
pharmacological and conservative treatments. There is no
cure for COPD and no treatment available that can reverse
the damage caused to the lungs by exposure to tobacco
smoke or other noxious particles. The aim of treatment in
COPD is to control symptoms and reduce exacerbations of
disease.
Conservative measures
The single most important intervention in COPD is smoking
cessation. Numerous studies have demonstrated that this
has the single greatest impact on the natural history of
COPD. Counselling and support should always be provided
when discussing COPD management. Smoking cessation
has been shown to be aided by a variety of pharmacological
and nicotine replacement agents, discussed in Chapter 7.
At present, the effectiveness of e-cigarettes to aid smoking
cessation is unclear.
Other important conservative measures include:
• Physical activity
• Improved nutrition
• Regular vaccination—yearly influenza and 5-yearly
pneumococcus have been shown to reduce the
number of COPD exacerbations
• Counselling and education.
Pulmonary rehabilitation
A pulmonary rehabilitation programme is increasingly
essential in the management of COPD. It is one of the few
interventions in COPD (along with smoking cessation)
proven to reduce symptoms and improve both quality of life
and survival.
Pulmonary rehabilitation normally occurs in an outpatient
setting with a multidisciplinary team aiming to coordinate
optimum management. Courses usually last 6–12 weeks
and aim to improve patients’ exercise tolerance and
provide management strategies enabling patients to cope
with symptoms of breathlessness.
Pharmacological treatments
The use of pharmacological treatment should be guided by
the severity of disease, symptoms and frequency of
exacerbations, as outlined by the ABCD assessment tool.
Patients are divided into four distinct groups and therapy
escalation is divided up to provide tailored improvement in
symptom control. See Fig. 15.6 for a breakdown of
treatments.
FIG. 15.6  Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung
Disease guide to the ABCD management of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease, with preferred treatment
steps highlighted in green. (Reproduced with permission
from Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease,
Inc., 2017.) FEV1, Forced expiratory volume in 1 second; ICS,
inhaled corticosteroids; LABA, long-acting β2-agonist; LAMA,
long-acting muscarinic antagonist.
Inhaled bronchodilators
The mainstay of pharmacological treatment in patients with
COPD is inhaled bronchodilator therapy, used to control
symptoms of breathlessness. More details on the classes of
drugs described is given in Chapter 7. Initially, patients
start with a short-acting β2-agonist (SABA, i.e., salbutamol)
and/or a short-acting muscarinic antagonist (SAMA, i.e.,
ipratropium) inhaler, using only when symptomatic.
As the disease progresses or as symptoms become more
severe, long-acting inhalers (either long-acting β2-agonist
(LABA), 
i.e., 
salmeterol, 
or 
long-acting 
muscarinic
antagonist (LAMA), i.e., tiotropium) are added. These can
be used in combination or switched depending on patient
response to particular agents and symptom severity.
Inhaled corticosteroids (ICS) may also be added in at a
later stage, with combination inhalers and a variety of
different 
delivery 
methods 
available 
to 
suit 
patient
preference and ease effective drug delivery (e.g., Seretide
—a mixture of LABA and ICS).
As the disease progresses and becomes more severe
(class D), the majority of COPD patients are managed with
triple inhaler therapy: LAMA, LABA and ICS.
Very recently, triple therapy (LAMA, LABA, ICS) in one
single inhaler has been launched in Europe.
Two important points to remember when prescribing
inhaled bronchodilators for COPD patients are:
1. If introducing a long-acting anticholinergic
(tiotropium), then short-acting cholinergic inhalers
(ipratropium) need to be stopped (the drugs do not
work in combination).
2. Inhaled corticosteroids are only used in combination
with a long-acting β2-agonist (ICS/LABA) and never
alone. They have been shown to reduce the
frequency of exacerbations as well as the risk of
pneumonia.
Oral therapy
Oral medications tend to be reserved for refractory disease
not responding to other treatments. Oral agents used
include:
• PDE4 inhibitors (e.g., roflumilast).
• Long-term macrolide antibiotics (can reduce
exacerbations, must be balanced against risk of
antibiotic resistance).
• Theophylline (requires level monitoring, may be used
as an adjunct to treatment).
• Carbocisteine (mucolytic, particularly in patients
with chronic productive cough).
• Rescue pack antibiotics (enable patients to treat
exacerbations preemptively).
Note that long-term oral corticosteroid use is not
recommended in routine COPD management.
Long-term oxygen therapy
Management with home oxygen is an indicator of severe
end-stage COPD. In patients with evidence of hypoxaemia
(peripheral oxygen saturation <  92%) in stable COPD,
arterial blood gas measurement should be performed for
consideration 
of 
long-term 
oxygen 
therapy 
(LTOT).
National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence
(NICE) guidance indicates that patients with the following
features should be considered to receive oxygen:
• Patients who have a PaO2 less than 7.3 kPa when
stable.
• Patients with a PaO2 between 7.3 and 8 kPa, with
evidence of one or more of the following:
• Polycythaemia
• Peripheral oedema
• Pulmonary hypertension.
To 
benefit 
from 
LTOT, 
patients 
should 
breathe
supplemental oxygen for at least 15 hours per day. If
patients can adhere to this, a MRC study has demonstrated
that LTOT is associated with a 50% reduction in mortality
at 3 years. Note that smoking is a relative rather than
absolute 
contraindication 
to 
home 
oxygen 
therapy.
Smoking should be strongly discouraged and carries
significant risk of fire injury.
In patients who become hypercapnic or acidotic on LTOT,
regular noninvasive ventilation (NIV) must be considered—
this requires referral to a specialist centre.
Interventional treatments for chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease
In severe COPD not responsive to medical therapy, a
number of treatments exist to improve both symptoms and
survival in selected cases. Lung volume reduction surgery
is used in severe emphysematous disease to reduce the
amount of dead airspace trapping and improve gas
exchange, particularly in those with localized upper lobe
emphysema. In large bullous disease, bullectomy may be
performed, 
again 
to 
improve 
functional 
lung 
area
performing gas exchange. Bronchoscopic intervention,
either by endobronchial valve or lung coil insertion, also
aims to reduce the dead airspace in emphysematous lungs,
by collapsing targeted lung segments. Finally, lung
transplantation has been shown to improve quality of life
and functional capacity.
As the COPD population often has multiple comorbidities,
strict selection criteria are in place for the use of any
interventional therapies, which each carry significant risks
on implementation.
Palliative care and chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease
COPD is a progressive disease that can be highly
symptomatic. Whilst some patients have stable disease for
many years, for others the disease progression and failure
of treatment options mean that they will eventually die of
the condition. Early recognition of when the patient is in
the terminal phase or last 6 months of life is a key part of
good COPD management. Discussions with the patient and
relatives, 
including 
resuscitation 
orders, 
advanced
directives and preferences for the place of death, should be
performed where possible. Hospice and hospice-at-home
services can be utilized for ongoing community palliative
support.
Symptomatic treatments for breathlessness can include a
combination of using a fan to blow air onto the face, oxygen
therapy and opiates. Nutritional support, education and
talking therapies can also improve fatigue and symptom
management.
Management of acute exacerbations
of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease
An exacerbation is a sustained worsening of the patient's
symptoms from his or her usual stable state that is beyond
normal day-to-day variations, and is acute in onset.
Exacerbations are triggered by an event, most commonly
by respiratory tract infection with either viral or bacterial
culprits. Commonly reported symptoms are worsening
breathlessness, 
wheeze, 
cough, 
increased 
sputum
production and change in sputum colour. The symptoms
are nonspecific, and differential diagnoses of pneumonia,
congestive cardiac failure, pulmonary embolism or acute
coronary syndrome (ACS) must also be considered.
Assessment of severity
The severity of an exacerbation determines how and where
the patient is managed. Mild exacerbations can be treated
at home, whilst severe exacerbations can require ventilator
support and high-dependency unit/intensive therapy unit
admission if appropriate. The severity of an exacerbation
should be determined by the clinical assessment made,
including:
• Respiratory rate (> 30 breaths per minute suggests a
moderate to severe exacerbation)
• Use of accessory muscles
• Altered mental status (confusion or drowsiness)
• Evidence of hypoxaemia and response to oxygen
therapy if required (this should trigger arterial blood
gas assessment)
• Evidence of hypercarbia or respiratory acidosis
(confirmed with arterial blood gas analysis)
• Failure of community or initial medical management
of acute exacerbation.
If there is no evidence of concerning features or
respiratory failure, the exacerbation can be managed at
home if enough support is in place for this. Any evidence of
concern or respiratory failure should prompt further
assessment or hospitalization.
Investigation
• Observations and clinical assessment—ABCDE
assessment of any critically unwell patient to assess
for evidence of end organ dysfunction. Wheeze or
silent chest may be present and clues for alternative
pathology can be found. Oxygen saturations and
respiratory rate are key.
• Biochemical—evidence of a raised white cell count
and C-reactive protein indicates the presence of
infection (isolated neutrophilia can also be seen in
recent glucocorticoid use). Assessing urea and
electrolytes, liver function and clotting for evidence
of end organ dysfunction or electrolyte imbalances
may also be appropriate.
• Arterial blood gas assessment—perform if there are
any indicators of respiratory failure, and is
mandatory if the patient requires supplemental
oxygen. Provides indicators of severity, i.e., hypoxia,
hypercapnia and acidosis, as well as guiding
treatment options for either type 1 or type 2
respiratory failure. Serial measurements are often
required for monitoring purposes and to assess
response to treatment.
• Sputum culture—enables targeted antibiotic use.
Recommended in moderate or severe exacerbations
but should not routinely be performed in community
management. Common bacterial pathogens include
H. influenzae, Streptococcus pneumoniae and
Moraxella catarrhalis.
• Chest radiograph—assess for evidence of pneumonia
or other infective process, or alternative cause for
acute exacerbation. Always consider the ruptured
bullae causing a spontaneous pneumothorax in any
sudden deterioration of a COPD patient.
• Electrocardiogram—may be required if ACS is
suspected or to assess for evidence of arrhythmia.
Management of acute exacerbations:
Management is dictated by severity. If deemed to be mild
and otherwise safe, the patient may be managed in the
community with a combination of steroids, antibiotics and
increased inhaler use. If severe with respiratory failure
then ventilation may be required. The following treatment
options are described and often used in combination:
• Controlled oxygen to maintain oxygen saturations
between 88% and 92%; this is normally achieved
with a Venturi mask. Overoxygenation can result in
hypercapnoea and iatrogenic type 2 respiratory
failure, hence the importance of controlled oxygen
delivery.
• Nebulized short-acting bronchodilators (salbutamol
and ipratropium) may be used in combination in
those requiring hospitalization.
• A short course of oral steroids (usually 30 mg
prednisolone for 5–7 days) is given to reduce airway
inflammation. If patients have received multiple
courses of steroids, they will require a reducing-dose
regimen to avoid rebound exacerbations when the
steroids are stopped.
• Antibiotics, if exacerbation is thought to be infective
(e.g., 5–7 days of oral doxycycline).
• NIV should be the first mode of ventilation in
patients with acute respiratory failure in the
absence of contraindications. Indications for NIV
include respiratory acidosis (PaCO2 > 6 kPa and
arterial pH < 7.35), severe dyspnoea with signs of
respiratory muscle fatigue or persistent hypoxaemia
despite supplemental oxygen therapy. Bilevel
positive airway pressure is used to treat type 2
respiratory failure.
• Invasive ventilation—used if patients are unable to
tolerate or fail the trial of NIV, as well as in other
severe pathology such as postrespiratory or cardiac
arrest. Full discussion of the management of
respiratory failure is in Chapter 12.
Patients may stay in hospital for a number of days,
depending on their response to treatment. Once stabilized,
treatments should be stepped down gradually (such as
reducing oxygen and reducing the frequency of nebulizers)
and, if they remain stable, the patient can be deemed
suitable for discharge. Follow-up within 1 month of the
event is recommended following any acute exacerbation
and has been shown to reduce further exacerbations and
hospital admission. This may require alteration and
increase of stable COPD treatment and is often performed
by respiratory specialist nurses.
Chapter Summary
• Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) is a
disease process causing persistent respiratory
symptoms and airflow limitation owing to airway
and/or alveolar abnormalities, usually caused by a
significant exposure to noxious particles or gases.
• The majority of COPD is caused by cigarette smoking,
although other pollutant exposure can cause the
condition. There are genetic risk factors, the most
important being α1-antitrypsin deficiency.
• COPD symptoms include persistent cough, shortness
of breath and reduced exercise tolerance. Diagnosis
is made using spirometry and excluding other
underlying pathology.
• Management of COPD can be divided into
conservative, medical and surgical therapies, with
management stratified depending on degree of
airflow limitation, number of exacerbations and
impact on daily life. The most important management
step is smoking cessation.
• Acute exacerbations of COPD are managed depending
on severity, with steroid therapy, bronchodilators,
antibiotics, oxygen or ventilator support used.
Further reading
British Medical Journal learning module: COPD:
Diagnosis and management of exacerbations.
Available at www.learning.bmj.com.
British Thoracic Society guidelines for COPD.
Available at www.brit-thoracic.org.uk.
GOLD guideline for COPD. Available at
www.goldcopd.org.
Lopez A.D., Murray C.C. The global burden of
disease, 1990–2020. Nat Med. 1998;4:1241–
1243.
Medical Research Council Working Party. Long-
term domiciliary oxygen therapy in chronic
hypoxic cor pulmonale complicating chronic
bronchitis and emphysema. Lancet.
1981;1:681–686.
NICE guideline for COPD. Available at
www.nice.org.uk.
16
Disorders of the
interstitium
Interstitial lung disease
The interstitial lung diseases (ILDs) are a diverse group of
over 300 different lung diseases that all affect the lung
interstitium, i.e., the space between the alveolar epithelium
and capillary endothelium (see Chapter 2, Fig. 2.16). Their
pathology can be broadly classed as either granulomatous
(e.g., 
sarcoid), 
inflammatory 
(e.g., 
hypersensitivity
pneumonitis (HP)) or fibrotic (e.g., idiopathic pulmonary
fibrosis (IPF)).
Aetiology is variable but they all present in a similar
fashion, typically with exertional breathlessness and a
nonproductive cough. Although separately each disease is
rare, collectively they affect 1/2000 of the population.
Outcome varies between patients and disease, but fibrosis
represents the common, irreversible end stage of ILD.
Terminology in ILD is continually evolving and therefore
can seem confusing. The term ‘diffuse parenchymal lung
disease’ may be used interchangeably with ILD. Additional
synonyms are mentioned under each condition.
Aetiology
As mentioned previously, ILDs are a heterogeneous group
of disorders with many known causes. However, only
approximately one-third of cases of ILD currently have a
known cause—see Fig. 16.1.
FIG. 16.1  Disorders related to interstitial lung disease.
Green boxes represent disorders of unknown cause, orange
boxes represent those with known cause. AIP, Acute
interstitial pneumonia; COP, cryptogenic organizing
pneumonia; ILD, interstitial lung disease; IPF, idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis.
Firstly, we will go through the common clinical features
of a patient with ILD and their diagnostic work-up.
Secondly, we will look at some common specific diseases
associated with ILD in more detail—idiopathic interstitial
pneumonias (IIPs), HP and occupational lung disorders.
Further information on systemic diseases associated with
ILD, including sarcoidosis, connective tissue disorders and
vasculitis, can be found in Chapter 23.
Clinical features of interstitial lung
disease
Patients typically present with breathlessness on exertion,
sometimes with an associated dry cough. The symptoms
are usually of progressive and gradual onset; however,
some ILDs can present acutely or subacutely over days to
weeks. In addition to taking a detailed history of the
complaint and previous medical history, it is important to
ask about:
• Myalgia, joint pains, sicca symptoms, Raynaud
disease—is there an underlying connective tissue
disorder?
• Dysphagia and weight loss—dysphagia is common in
systemic sclerosis.
• Skin changes—rashes such as erythema nodosum
may be found in sarcoidosis while mechanic’s hands
and Gottron papules can be found in myositis.
• Medications—prescribed and over-the-counter
medications.
• Occupational history—any history of occupational
dust or asbestos exposure?
• Environmental exposures—antigens from birds, hay,
water humidifiers and hot tubs can all cause an HP.
• Smoking history—chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease is a key differential diagnosis.
Examination may reveal a patient who is hypoxic at rest
or, in earlier stages, only on exertion. Typically, fine end-
inspiratory crackles are heard on auscultation of the chest
—these may be bilateral and found preferentially in the
bases or apices of the lungs, depending on the underlying
condition. Examination should include careful inspection of
the patient for signs of systemic illnesses related to ILD, as
mentioned previously.
Investigations of interstitial lung
disease
Lung function tests demonstrate a restrictive pattern along
with a decreased transfer factor. Repeated testing can help
monitor the progression of the disease. Measuring oxygen
desaturation on exercise testing (such as during the 6-
minute walk test) can be useful for functional assessment.
Specialist blood tests may be requested to assess for any
underlying cause in addition to routine blood tests. These
could include:
• Erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein
and full blood count including eosinophil count.
• Serum calcium and angiotensin-converting enzyme
levels—raised in sarcoidosis.
• Rheumatoid factor and anticyclic citrullinated
peptide (anti-CCP) antibodies—high in rheumatoid
arthritis.
• Autoantibody screen—may suggest underlying
connective tissue disease.
• Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody—if underlying
vasculitis is suspected.
An electrocardiogram and echocardiogram should be
performed to exclude left ventricular failure as an
underlying cause of dyspnoea and to assess for signs of
right heart failure and pulmonary hypertension secondary
to ILD.
Chest X-ray (CXR) may initially show fine reticular
(linear), nodular or reticulonodular infiltration (Fig. 16.2).
Depending on the underlying disease pathology, this may
be widespread or localized. As the disease progresses,
fibrotic changes can be seen on the CXR. High-resolution
computed tomography (HRCT) is the gold standard
imaging in ILD. Changes such as a ‘ground glass’
appearance and fine reticulation may be seen earlier in the
process, whilst fibrotic distortion and a ‘honeycomb’
appearance may be evident later (Fig. 16.3). The pattern of
changes on HRCT depends on the underlying cause and it
is important that the images are reviewed by a specialist
chest radiologist.
FIG. 16.2  Chest X-ray of a patient with an idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis. Note the ‘meshwork’ reticulation
appearance in the lung fields. Here it is predominantly basal
and peripheral. (From Corne J, Pointon K, Chest X-Ray Made
Easy, 3rd ed, Churchill Livingstone, 2009 Elsevier.)
FIG. 16.3  A section of a high-resolution computed
tomography scan showing typical bilateral basal
‘honeycombing’. This is typically seen in idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis. (From Corne J, Pointon K: Chest X-ray
made easy, 3rd ed, 2009, Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier.)
The 
British 
Thoracic 
Society 
(BTS) 
recommends
integrating the results of imaging and lung function tests
and adopting a multidisciplinary approach. After seeing a
respiratory physician and having tests as described
previously, 
patients 
with 
suspected 
ILD 
should 
be
discussed with an ILD multidisciplinary team (MDT), with
whom a diagnosis and treatment plan can be made.
If there is diagnostic uncertainty, the MDT may
recommend a lung biopsy to aid diagnosis. Transbronchial
biopsy at bronchoscopy is possible if the disease has a
central distribution. If the disease is well localized and
peripheral, percutaneous image-guided biopsy may be
possible. Otherwise, patients require surgical biopsy using
a video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery method (VATS
biopsy) or open lung biopsy. Surgical lung biopsy requires
a general anaesthetic and is therefore not without risk to
the patient. Full discussion with the patient of the risks of
biopsy versus possible benefits should be had prior to the
procedure.
Treatment of interstitial lung disease
Treatment for ILD depends on the underlying cause. If the
cause is known, underlying triggers or stimuli should be
removed or avoided where possible. Current therapy for
ILD 
of 
unknown 
cause 
includes 
antifibrotic 
and
antiinflammatory drugs, which will be discussed in later
sections.
When patients develop advanced ILD, home oxygen
therapy may be required. A multidisciplinary approach is
recommended by the BTS, and subjective and objective
benefits may be achieved through pulmonary rehabilitation.
Lung transplantation should be considered in appropriate
patients. 
Towards 
the 
end 
of 
life, 
palliative 
care
involvement is important for patients and their family.
Complications of interstitial lung
disease
An acute deterioration in ILD symptoms often requires
admission to hospital for investigation and treatment. An
acute deterioration may be caused by:
• Infection—bacterial or viral pneumonia
• Cardiac failure
• Pulmonary embolism.
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias
This is a group of diffuse parenchymal lung disorders that
involve the pulmonary interstitium. The most common
disorder in the group is IPF, which is discussed in more
detail later. Rare IIPs include:
• Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP)—
previously bronchiolitis obliterans organizing
pneumonia
• Nonspecific interstitial pneumonia
• Acute interstitial pneumonia
• Respiratory bronchiolitis associated ILD
• Desquamative interstitial pneumonia
• Lymphoid interstitial pneumonia.
Each disorder is a distinct disease with different patterns
of involvement seen on HRCT, different histology and
different prognosis. The underlying aetiology for this group
of 
disorders 
is 
as 
yet 
unknown; 
however, 
genetic
predisposing factors and multiple environmental factors
have been linked as triggers for disease.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis
Definition
Previously known as cryptogenic fibrosing alveolitis, IPF is
a progressive chronic pulmonary fibrosis of unknown
aetiology. It is the most common IIP. Predicted incidence
rates vary but are estimated in the United Kingdom at 5
per 100,000 people per year and appear to be increasing.
There is a male predominance and the median age of onset
is mid-60s. The familial form of IPF is rare and has an
identical clinical picture.
Pathology
IPF is characterized by scar tissue in the lungs that
decreases lung compliance, i.e., the lungs become stiffer.
The pathogenesis of pulmonary fibrosis is complex and not
completely understood. The main features are:
• A lesion affecting the alveolar–capillary basement
membrane.
• Cellular infiltration and thickening with collagen of
the interstitium of the alveolar wall.
• Fibroblasts proliferate, leading to further collagen
deposition.
Clinical features
IPF typically presents with progressive, gradual-onset (e.g.,
9-months) exertional breathlessness and a dry cough.
Examination reveals fine bilateral basal late inspiratory
crackles on auscultation. Clubbing is present in 50% of
cases. As the disease progresses, the patient may develop
cyanosis, respiratory failure and signs of cor pulmonale.
Investigations
The patient is often hypoxic with reduced oxygen
saturations, especially on exertion. Arterial blood gas
sampling may demonstrate type I respiratory failure. Lung
function tests show a restrictive pattern with reduced gas
transfer.
HRCT in IPF has a classical ‘usual interstitial pneumonia’
(UIP) pattern. This is classified as:
• Fibrosis and reticulation with a subpleural,
peripheral and basal predominance
• ‘Honeycombing’
• Architectural distortion with traction change
• Minimal ground glass change.
Diagnosis of IPF can usually be made on clinical and
radiological grounds without the need for a biopsy. If
biopsy does take place, histology shows a UIP pattern with
areas of fibrosis at different stages within the biopsy
sample. Normal lung will be interspersed with areas of
acute 
fibroblastic 
infiltrates, 
mature 
fibrosis 
and
honeycombing, 
leading 
to 
distortion 
of 
the 
lung
architecture (established fibrosis).
Hints and tips 
Terminology—usual interstitial pneumonia
Usual interstitial pneumonia (UIP) is a radiological and
histological pattern, not a separate disease entity.
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis is the clinical syndrome
most associated with UIP, however the UIP pattern is
also found in interstitial lung disease secondary to
connective 
tissue 
disease 
(particularly 
rheumatoid
arthritis), asbestos exposure and chronic hypersensitivity
pneumonitis. UIP is associated with a worse prognosis
than other histological patterns.
Treatment
Treatment options for IPF are supportive, medical or lung
transplant. Supportive treatments include:
• Oxygen therapy—this should be considered if
breathless and pO2 < 7.3 kPa or < 8 kPa with
evidence of pulmonary hypertension.
• Pulmonary rehabilitation.
• Palliative care support—opioids may be required for
symptomatic treatment of severe breathlessness.
Treatment 
with 
antifibrotic 
medications 
such 
as
pirfenidone and nintedanib can be considered by the ILD
MDT and after meeting a specialist respiratory physician.
Both drugs are licensed in the United Kingdom by the
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (NICE)
for patients whose forced vital capacity is between 50%
and 80% predicted, for a 12-month trial period. The drugs
have significant gastrointestinal side effects and are not
always tolerated well by patients.
Current evidence suggests there is no benefit to using
steroids within the chronic or acute setting in patients with
IPF; however, they were historically used.
Lung transplantation is the only surgical option for IPF
currently and patients should be referred early where
appropriate; however, this option is still rare in the United
Kingdom. Prognosis of patients with IPF remains poor, with
an average life expectancy of 3 years following diagnosis.
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia
In contrast to IPF, COP is an IIP with a much better
prognosis. It is characterized by plugging of the alveolar
spaces with fibrin containing granulation tissue. The
aetiology can be unknown (‘cryptogenic’), but COP may
occur secondary to infection, medication, connective tissue
disorders or malignancy.
It presents with a subacute (e.g., 3-month) history of
cough and exertional breathlessness, often associated with
systemic features such as fever, malaise and myalgia. It is
not associated with clubbing and chest auscultation may be
normal or reveal crackles. Inflammatory markers are
raised. Imaging of the chest shows patchy consolidation
with a basal, subpleural and peribronchial predominance
that may spontaneously migrate to other areas of the lung.
As the consolidation is often next to the bronchi
(peribronchial), transbronchial biopsy at bronchoscopy can
provide histological diagnosis.
Treatment is with high dose steroids for 3 months prior
to slowly weaning, for a total course of 6–12 months.
Prognosis is generally good; however, relapse is common
during steroid wean.
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Definition
HP (previously known as extrinsic allergic alveolitis) is an
immunological reaction within the lung parenchyma caused
by the inhalation of an organic antigen to which the patient
has previously been sensitized.
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis is not completely understood but is
thought to be driven by either T cell-mediated immunity
and 
granuloma 
formation 
(type 
IV 
hypersensitivity
reaction), 
immune 
complex 
formation 
(type 
III
hypersensitivity reaction) or a combination of the two
processes. Histological specimens show an inflammatory
infiltrate within the interstitium, poorly differentiated
noncaseating granuloma formation and, in later disease
stages, established fibrosis. More than 200 antigens have
been identified, ranging from plant and animal proteins,
chemicals and microbes that cause a range of diseases.
Table 16.1 shows examples of diseases, their antigens and
the source.
Table 16.1
Antigens causing hypersensitivity pneumonitis and
their sources
Disease
Source
Causative antigens
Farmer’s lung
Mouldy hay,
grain
Thermophilic
actinomycetes
Aspergillus
species
Malt worker’s
lung
Mouldy barley
Aspergillus
fumigatus
Bird fancier’s
lung
Bird feathers,
droppings
Bird proteins
Bat lung
Bat droppings
Bat serum protein
Hot tub lung
Hot tub mist
M. avium complex
Mushroom
worker’s lung
Mushrooms
Mushroom spores
Cheese washer’s
lung
Mouldy cheese
Aspergillus clavatus
Penicillium casei
Clinical features
HP presents in three recognized patterns:
1. Acute—follows a short exposure to an antigen at a
high concentration.
2. Chronic—follows a long exposure to an antigen at a
lower concentration.
3. Subacute—between acute and chronic.
Acute HP presents within 4–6 hours of heavy exposure to
the causative antigen. Patients have symptoms of cough
and breathlessness, and systemic symptoms such as fever.
Chronic HP presents as an insidious onset of cough,
breathlessness and weight loss over months to years. The
subacute disease may present over weeks to months, with
infrequent acute attacks.
Investigations
In acute HP, blood tests may show a neutrophilia but,
importantly, the eosinophil count is normal. Serum
antibody (IgG) precipitin may be tested against suspected
antigens—for example, avian precipitins in a patient
owning pigeons presenting with HP. The imaging findings
in acute and chronic HP are summarized in Table 16.2. An
example of ground glass opacity on HRCT can be seen in
Fig. 16.4; this is a common sign in HP but not specific, as it
can also be found in many other conditions including IIPs,
infections 
(Pneumocystis 
Pneumonia 
[PCP];
cytomeglaovirus [CMV]) and pulmonary oedema. Lung
function tests typically show a restrictive pattern with
reduced gas transfer.
Table 16.2
Imaging finding in hypersensitivity pneumonitis
Chest X-ray
High-resolution
computed
tomography
Acute
May be normal
Bilateral small
nodules or
infiltrates
Homogenous ground
glass and alveolar
opacities
bilaterally
Subacute
HP
May be normal
Bilateral small
nodules or
infiltrates
Ground glass and
nodular opacities
in a centrilobular
distribution
Mosaic attenuation
Chronic
HP
Predominantly upper
and midzone
reticulation/fibrosi
s
Ground glass and
nodular opacities
in a centrilobular
distribution
Mosaic attenuation
Pulmonary fibrosis
and honeycombing
—typically upper
lobe predominance
HP, Hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
FIG. 16.4  Ground glass opacity on high-resolution
computed tomography shown by arrows 1 and 2. (From
Corne J, Pointon, K: Chest X-ray made easy, 3rd ed, 2009,
Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier.)
Treatment
Treatment of HP includes removal of the causative antigen.
With acute HP, symptoms may resolve spontaneously
within a few days of removal from exposure. Patients with
chronic HP may also improve; however, underlying fibrosis
is irreversible.
Steroids are used in all forms of HP to speed recovery to
normal pulmonary function; however, evidence for their
long-term benefit is lacking. Prognosis of HP is variable—
acute HP may not progress to chronic disease with antigen
avoidance, if possible.
Occupational lung diseases
Pneumoconioses
Definition
The 
pneumoconioses 
are 
a 
group 
of 
nonmalignant
disorders caused by inhalation of mineral or biological
dusts. The incidence in the United Kingdom is decreasing
as working conditions improve.
Pathogenesis
Small dust particles (< 5 microns in diameter) are inhaled
and settle on the epithelial lining of the alveoli where they
cause an inflammatory reaction. Diseases caused by coal
dust and asbestos exposure are discussed below and
further examples of pneumoconioses caused by mineral
dusts are shown in Table 16.3.
Table 16.3
Causative mineral dusts and their associated
pneumoconioses
Disease
Mineral
dust
Exposure
Silicosis
Silica
Sandblasting and stone
cutting
Hard rock mining
Acute berylliosis
Chronic
berylliosis
Beryllium
Mining
Electrical equipment
manufacture
Siderosis
Iron oxide
Welding
Coal worker's pneumoconiosis
There are two conditions caused by exposure to coal dust:
1. Simple pneumoconiosis
2. Progressive massive fibrosis
The incidence of coal worker's pneumoconiosis is related
to total dust exposure with the highest risk in those with
the largest exposure.
In recent years, thousands of patients have lodged claims
for compensation for work-related exposure to coal dust.
The Coal Workers Pneumoconiosis Scheme has been set up
specifically for this purpose. Although not all claims are
successful, 
many 
patients 
are 
able 
to 
get 
some
compensation for the disease that they have subsequently
developed.
Hints and tips 
Death related to occupational lung diseases
When writing a death certificate, it is important to note if
the cause of death is related to the patient's employment
history. In the United Kingdom, the coroner must be
notified if the death may have been caused by an
industrial disease or poisoning.
Simple pneumoconiosis
Simple 
pneumoconiosis 
is 
the 
commonest 
type 
of
pneumoconiosis, reflecting coal dust deposition within the
lung. It is asymptomatic, and diagnosis is made on the basis
of small round opacities in the upper zone on CXR. Those
with severe disease may go on to develop progressive
massive fibrosis.
Progressive massive fibrosis
In progressive massive fibrosis, large, round fibrotic
nodules measuring more than 10 mm in diameter are seen,
usually in the upper lobes. Scarring is present. Nodules
may show central liquefaction and become infected by
tuberculosis. The associated emphysema is always severe.
Symptoms 
include 
dyspnoea, 
cough 
and 
sputum
production (which may be black as cavitating lesions
rupture). Lung function tests show a mixed restrictive and
obstructive pattern.
The disease may progress once exposure has ceased
(unlike simple coal worker's pneumoconiosis) and there is
no specific treatment.
Caplan syndrome
Caplan syndrome is the association of coal worker's
pneumoconiosis and seropositive rheumatoid arthritis.
Rounded lesions, measuring 0.5–5.0  cm in diameter, are
seen on CXR and may cavitate, but are normally
asymptomatic.
Asbestos-related lung diseases
Asbestos is a group of naturally occurring compounds
composed of a mixture of silicates of iron, nickel,
magnesium, aluminium and cadmium mined from the
ground. In the United Kingdom, asbestos was used in
multiple industries up until the 1970s and many people
were exposed through their occupation or at home through
remodelling of contaminated buildings. Occupations at risk
of exposure include:
• Asbestos mining and transport
• Construction and demolition industry
• Friction materials such as brake lining
• Insulation, e.g., boiler fitting and lagging.
Several types of asbestos exist: serpentine fibres (white)
and amphibole fibres. The serpentine fibres are considered
less toxic than amphibole fibres. The most important type
of amphibole asbestos is crocidolite (blue asbestos), a
straight fibre 50 μm long and 1–2 μm wide that cannot be
cleared by the immune system. Fibres remain in the lung
indefinitely and become coated in iron (haemosiderin) to
form the classic drumstick-shaped asbestos bodies.
In the United Kingdom, peak exposure to asbestos was in
the early 1970s; however, there is a long latency period of
20–40 years between exposure and disease development.
The use of asbestos in the United Kingdom and the United
States has been restricted since the 1970s; however, use
continues to increase in developing countries.
Asbestos causes four distinct patterns of lung disease:
1. Benign asbestos-related pleural disease—pleural
plaques, effusion and thickening
2. Asbestosis—discussed later
3. Mesothelioma (see Chapter 20)
4. Lung cancer.
Asbestosis
Asbestosis is a chronic interstitial fibrosis resulting from
asbestos inhalation. The risk of developing asbestosis is
increased with higher exposure to asbestos, and with
concurrent smoking. Clinical symptoms are a gradual onset
of dyspnoea and a dry cough; signs include clubbing and
bibasal late inspiratory crackles on auscultation. HRCT
appearances show parenchymal bands, traction change and
honeycombing. Associated asbestos-related pleural disease
including plaques and thickening may also be seen on
imaging. Biopsy is rarely required for diagnosis; however, if
histology is performed, it classically shows asbestos bodies
(Fig. 16.5).
FIG. 16.5  Asbestos body. (From Stevens A, Lowe J, Scott I:
Respiratory system. In: Core pathology, 3rd edition, 2009,
Elsevier.)
There is no specific treatment for asbestosis; it is usually
supportive, with oxygen therapy as required and treatment
of complications including cor pulmonale.
Compensation
Compensation for asbestos-related diseases is available
both through the government and from the civil courts
directly from the previous employer. There must be a clear
history of asbestos exposure, and time restrictions exist
from the time of diagnosis to making a claim. It is therefore
important that patients see a specialist respiratory nurse at
diagnosis who can provide them with the information and
contacts required to make a claim.
Chapter Summary
• Interstitial lung diseases (ILDs) are a heterogeneous
group of over 300 lung diseases that all affect the
lung interstitium. Their pathology can be broadly
classed as granulomatous, inflammatory or fibrotic.
• Lung function tests in ILD typically demonstrate a
restrictive pattern with a decreased transfer factor.
• Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a progressive
chronic pulmonary fibrosis of unknown aetiology. It
presents with progressive, gradual-onset exertional
breathlessness and a dry cough. Examination reveals
fine bilateral basal late inspiratory crackles on
auscultation and clubbing may be present.
• The appearance of IPF on high-resolution computed
tomography is of a ‘usual interstitial pneumonia’
pattern. This appears as reticulation with a
subpleural, peripheral and basal predominance,
honeycombing, architectural distortion with traction
change and minimal or absent ground glass change.
• Hypersensitivity pneumonitis is an immunological
reaction within the lung parenchyma caused by the
inhalation of an organic antigen. It can present as an
acute, subacute or chronic disease.
• The pneumoconioses are a group of nonmalignant
disorders caused by inhalation of mineral or
biological dusts. Asbestosis and coal worker’s lung
are two important examples.
Useful links
European Lung White Book – Interstitial Lung
Disease.
NICE IPF in adults: Diagnosis and Management
(June 2013).
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/fundin
g/coal_health/coal_health.aspx.
17
Lung cancer
Bronchial carcinoma
Bronchial carcinoma accounts for 95% of all primary
tumours of the lung and is the commonest malignant
tumour in the developed world. It is the leading cause of
cancer death worldwide. Bronchogenic carcinoma was
traditionally seen to affect men more than women, but its
incidence is rising in females and it is now the second
commonest cancer in both sexes (behind prostate cancer in
men and breast cancer in women). This trend is thought to
be partly linked to the increased proportion of female
smokers, despite an overall reduction in smoking as a habit
in developed countries, with a current male to female ratio
for new lung cancer diagnoses being 11:10 in the United
Kingdom. The incidence of bronchial carcinoma is strongly
linked to age, with the highest rates in the over-75 years
population; less than 1% occur in people under 35 years old
in the United Kingdom.
Aetiology
Cigarette smoking is by far the largest independent risk
factor for lung cancer, accounting for over 85% of cases.
• It is related to the amount smoked, duration of habit
and cigarette tar content.
• Lung cancer death risk is 15 times higher in smokers
compared with nonsmokers.
• The rise in incidence of lung cancer correlates
closely with the increase in smoking over the 20th
century.
• The risk in those who give up smoking decreases
with time.
• Smoking cessation improves life expectancy
compared with continuing smokers. This includes
long-term smokers and smokers who quit after lung
cancer diagnosis.
• Passive smoking also increases lung cancer risk.
• Other forms of smoking including shisha use and
cigars are also linked to increased cancer risk. There
is not enough current evidence to assess a link
between e-cigarettes and lung cancer.
Environmental and occupational factors also play a
significant role. Independent of smoking, there is a higher
incidence of lung cancer in urban as opposed to rural
areas.
Risk factors include:
• Radon released from granite rock.
• Asbestos exposure (increases risk of bronchial
carcinoma as well as mesothelioma).
• Air pollution (e.g., beryllium emissions).
• Occupational exposure to nickel, arsenic, chromium,
aromatic hydrocarbons and many others.
Host factors also play a role, with a positive family history
and underlying lung disease showing association with
increased lung cancer rates.
Histological types
Bronchial carcinomas have traditionally been subdivided
into small-cell (20%) and non-small cell (80%) carcinomas,
based on histological appearance. This distinction predicts
tumour behaviour and provides information on prognosis
and treatment options. ‘Non-small cell’ is a broad term, and
can be subdivided further into squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC) (35% of all bronchial carcinomas), adenocarcinoma
(30%) and large-cell anaplastic carcinoma (10%–15%).
The different types of tumour are summarized in Table
17.1. Tumours may occur as discrete, but up to 20% show
mixed histological patterns. Owing to significant advances
in immunohistochemistry and genetic testing, these broad
categories of bronchogenic carcinoma can be further
subcategorized based on specific gene mutations. This
allows for more personalized treatment and targeted
therapy in even advanced disease, and has revolutionized
lung cancer management in the last decade.
Table 17.1
Small-cell carcinoma
Small-cell carcinomas arise from neuroendocrine cells and
are the most aggressive form of bronchogenic tumour.
Their incidence is directly related to cigarette consumption.
Most originate in the proximal large bronchi, and tend to
invade locally with blood-borne and lymphatic metastases.
Histologically, these tumours have hyperdense nuclei.
Occasionally, almost no cytoplasm is present and the cells
are compressed into an ovoid form giving rise to the
alternative name of oat-cell carcinoma. On radiography, the
small-cell carcinoma tends to lie close to the hilum and
does not cavitate —it may present with lobar collapse.
As small-cell carcinoma is a neuroendocrine tumour,
neurosecretory granules are often present within the cell. A
variety of polypeptide hormones can be released from these
granules, 
such 
as 
adrenocorticotrophic 
hormone,
antidiuretic hormone and calcitonin, which can lead to
paraneoplastic syndromes. However, the most common
presenting complaint is coughing. As spread is rapid,
metastatic lesions may be the presenting sign.
Owing to the aggressive nature of small-cell carcinoma
up to 70% of patients have disseminated or extensive
disease at presentation. As a result, prognosis is often very
poor, with a mean survival time for untreated patients with
small-cell carcinoma of 7 weeks after diagnosis. Death is
generally caused by metastatic disease. Overall 5-year
survival rates currently sit at 6% in the United Kingdom.
Non-small cell lung carcinoma
Squamous cell carcinoma
SCC arises from squamous epithelium in the large bronchi,
characterized by keratinization. It is currently still the
commonest form of lung cancer in Europe (whilst
adenocarcinoma is now the most common in the United
States). There is a strong association between cigarette
smoking and SCC.
Most SCCs arise proximally in large bronchi (although
they can occur peripherally). The major mass of the tumour
may occur outside the bronchial cartilage and encircle the
bronchial 
lumen, 
producing 
obstructive 
phenomena.
Presentation may be through postobstructive infection.
These tumours are almost always hilar and are prone to
massive necrosis and cavitation, with upper-lobe lesions
more likely to cavitate. Of SCCs, 13% show cavitation on
chest radiographs. If squamous carcinoma occurs in the
apical portion of the lung, it may produce Pancoast
syndrome (see later).
SCCs are associated with paraneoplastic syndromes: the
cancer 
commonly 
produces 
a 
substance 
similar 
to
parathyroid 
hormone 
(parathyroid 
hormone-related
peptide), 
which 
leads 
to 
hypercalcaemia 
and 
bone
destruction (Table 17.2).
Table 17.2
ACTH, Adrenocorticotrophic hormone; ADH, antidiuretic hormone (vasopressin);
PTH, parathyroid hormone; SIADH, syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic
hormone.
SCC is the least likely type to metastasize and, untreated,
it has the longest patient survival of any of the
bronchogenic carcinomas.
Adenocarcinoma
Bronchial adenocarcinomas are neoplastic tumours derived
from glandular epithelium such as mucus goblet cells, type
II pneumocytes and Clara cells. They are less clearly linked
with smoking (the most common cell type in nonsmokers)
and 
are 
more 
common 
in 
women 
than 
in 
men.
Adenocarcinoma is the most common cancer subtype in
patients under 45 years. Incidence is rising in the United
Kingdom and it is thought that it will soon be the single
most common lung cancer subtype as smoking decreases as
a habit.
Adenocarcinomas can arise from lung scar tissue and are
associated 
with 
fibrotic 
lung 
disease. 
Bronchogenic
tumours associated with occupational factors are mainly
adenocarcinomas.
As the tumour is commonly at the lung periphery (visible
on chest radiograph or computed tomography (CT)
imaging), obstructive symptoms are rare, so the tumour
may be clinically silent. Symptoms include coughing,
haemoptysis, chest pain and weight loss.
Diagnosis is usually via imaging, demonstrating a solitary
peripheral nodule confirmed with external biopsy, although
sputum 
cytology 
may 
detect 
malignant 
cells.
Adenocarcinomas tend to metastasize relatively late and in
certain cases resection is possible. However, owing to the
silent nature of adenocarcinomas, metastases may be seen
by the time of diagnosis—typically occurring in the pleura,
lymph nodes, bone, brain and adrenal glands.
Further subdivisions of bronchial adenocarcinoma have
been made based on genetic subtyping. This reflects great
advancement in the multidisciplinary management of
adenocarcinoma. For example, the epidermal growth factor
receptor (EGFR) mutation has been shown to be a
predictive marker for response to targeted therapy (EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitors) in advanced adenocarcinomas,
and so testing for the EGFR mutation is now routine.
Large-cell anaplastic tumour
Large-cell 
anaplastic 
tumours 
are 
often 
poorly
differentiated 
and 
are 
diagnosed 
by 
a 
process 
of
elimination, officially only by resected specimen, the
appearance of which does not fit with other carcinoma
subtypes. No clear-cut pattern of clinical or radiological
presentation distinguishes them from other malignant lung
tumours. These tumours are variable in location, but are
usually centrally located. The point of origin of the
carcinoma influences the symptomatic presentation of the
disease: central lesions present earlier than peripheral
lesions as they cause obstruction.
As with most poorly differentiated tumours, large-cell
carcinomas 
tend 
to 
demonstrate 
more 
aggressive
behaviour and metastasize relatively early.
The tumour causes coughing, sputum production and
haemoptysis. When a tumour occurs in a major airway,
obstructive pneumonia can occur.
On electron microscopy, these tumours turn out to be
poorly differentiated variants of SCC and adenocarcinoma;
they are extremely destructive lesions that metastasize
early.
Other bronchial tumours
Other bronchial tumours exist which are often considered
benign or were not previously considered clinically relevant
to the management of bronchial carcinoma. The 2015
World Health Organization guidance on lung tumours
creates different subcategories to encompass tumour
subtypes 
outside 
of 
the 
four 
categories 
described
previously, as well as intensively subcategorizing existing
tumours—for example, both small-cell carcinoma and
carcinoid tumours are subdivided into a ‘neuroendocrine
tumour’ category. These subcategories better incorporate
the mixed histological patterns currently seen.
Carcinoid tumours are rare, slow-growing and often
benign neuroendocrine tumours which can occur in any
tissue derived from the embryonic gut. Whilst the majority
arise in the gastrointestinal system, they may also grow in
a multitude of organs, including the lung, and make up a
small subset (<  5%) of bronchial tumours. They are often
asymptomatic although can become metabolically active
owing to hormone secretion or eventual mass effect and,
rarely, metastatic spread. Carcinoid syndrome is a result of
the release of active mediators, including prostaglandins,
somatostatin and other neuropeptide hormones, and
typically presents as facial flushing, as well as diarrhoea,
palpitations, 
wheezing 
and 
altered 
mental 
state.
Management of carcinoid tumours is typically surgical
unless widespread metastases are present. Octreotide, a
form of somatostatin analogue, is often used to manage
symptoms of carcinoid syndrome by decreasing the release
of serotonin by the tumour. Targeted therapy via octreotide
hormonal manipulation has been proposed to provide a new
form of cancer treatment, and is another current area of
research.
Clinical features
Whilst there are no specific signs of bronchogenic
carcinoma, a variety of different features can point you
towards the diagnosis. Details specific to the histological
types have already been introduced above. A good clinician
will always look for red flag symptoms and have a high
index of suspicion in high risk groups (Box 17.1). Diagnosis
always needs to be excluded in cigarette smokers who
present with recurrent respiratory symptoms:
• Persistent cough—commonest presentation; may be
productive if obstruction leads to recurrent
infection.
• Haemoptysis—occurs at some stage in disease in
50%, owing to tumour bleeding into an airway or
bronchial ulceration.
• Dyspnoea—rarely at presentation but occurs as
disease progresses, as central tumours obstruct
large airways.
• Chest pain—often sharp pleuritic pain caused by
peripheral tumours invading the pleura (which is
well innervated). May be a dull central ache as a
result of large volume mediastinal node disease.
• Wheezing—monophonic, owing to partial airway
obstruction.
• Hoarse voice—owing to either mediastinal node
compression or direct tumour invasion of the left
recurrent laryngeal nerve.
• Unexplained weight loss.
• Night sweats.
• Finger clubbing—in 10%–30% of patients, finger
clubbing is present on examination.
• Signs of metastatic disease—patients may present
for the first time late in their disease. Classic signs
of metastatic disease are described below.
Red flag 
Symptoms
Any of these symptoms should immediately alert you to
consider lung cancer:
• Persistent cough for > 2 weeks
• Haemoptysis
• Pleuritic chest pain
• Weight loss
• Appetite loss
• Shortness of breath.
Complications
Local complications
Symptoms of local complications may be caused by:
• Bronchial obstruction: the lumen of the bronchus
becomes occluded; distal collapse and retention of
secretions subsequently occur. This clinically causes
dyspnoea, secondary infection and lung abscesses.
• Central necrosis: carcinomas can outgrow their
blood supply, leading to central necrosis. The main
complication is then the development of a lung
abscess.
• Pleural effusion: as a result of tumour spread to the
pleural space. Can lead to progressive
breathlessness and pleuritic pains, and may require
symptomatic drainage.
• Paralysis of the hemidiaphragm: caused by direct
invasion of the phrenic nerve. Can produce sudden
onset of breathlessness and gives a classic chest
radiograph appearance.
Pancoast syndrome
Pancoast syndrome can be caused by all types of
bronchogenic carcinoma, although two-thirds originate
from squamous cells. As the tumour grows outward from
the pulmonary parenchymal apex, it encroaches on
anatomical structures, including:
• Chest wall
• Subpleural lymphatics
• Sympathetic chain
• Brachial plexus.
Pancoast tumours can affect the sympathetic chain,
resulting in loss of sympathetic tone and an ipsilateral
Horner 
syndrome 
(ptosis, 
meiosis, 
enopthalmos,
conjunctival injection and reduced sweating on ipsilateral
side of the head and neck). Intractable shoulder pain
occurs when the upper rib is involved. The subclavian
artery and vein may become compressed. Destruction of
the inferior trunk of the brachial plexus leads to pain in
ulnar nerve distribution and may lead to small-muscle
wasting of the hand.
Superior vena cava obstruction
The obstruction of the superior vena cava by external
pressure, direct tumour invasion or blood clot is considered
an oncological emergency. Whilst it can occur through any
upper mediastinal mass, bronchial carcinoma is the most
common cause (with lymphoma being the next most
common). The onset may be gradual or acute, depending
on the speed of vessel occlusion, resulting in worsening
venous 
congestion. 
Symptoms 
include 
headaches,
breathlessness, dysphagia, stridor, and swollen oedematous
face and upper limbs, as well as venous congestion of the
neck. Symptoms may be aggravated with postures that
increase venous pressure such as bending over or lying
down. Complete airway obstruction may occur if untreated,
owing to oedema. Whilst the diagnosis may be made
clinically, investigation via chest X-ray (CXR) (widened
mediastinum) and CT chest (more detail) is usually
required. The treatment aim is to shrink the mass and
resolve the obstruction. This is achieved with immediate
high dose steroids, and consideration for emergency
mediastinal radiotherapy. In tumours highly responsive to
chemotherapy (such as small-cell lung cancer), this may be
the preferred initial treatment. Surgical resection or
vascular stents may also be considered in certain cases.
Metastatic complications
Bronchial carcinoma typically spreads to mediastinal,
cervical or even axillary lymph nodes, which may become
palpable. Distant metastases occur in the liver, bone, brain,
adrenal glands and skin:
• Liver—may present with nausea, weight loss or right
upper quadrant pains (tumour growth resulting in
liver capsular pains). Can be palpated as an
enlarged irregular liver edge.
• Bone—most commonly presenting as a gnawing bone
pain, bony metastases can also present with
pathological fractures. Rarely, these may present as
spinal cord compression, an oncological emergency
resulting in neurological symptoms and eventual
paralysis below the level of compression. Any
clinical suspicion requires urgent investigation with
magnetic resonance imaging of the spine and
treatment with high dose steroids and either
radiotherapy or decompressive surgery.
• Brain—metastases may present in a variety of
different ways, from headache and confusion to focal
neurological lesions to seizures to raised intracranial
pressure and mass effect. Whilst rarely operable,
symptoms of brain metastases may be treated with
steroid therapy to reduce cerebral oedema and mass
effect.
• Adrenal—these are usually asymptomatic and rarely
produce adrenal insufficiency.
• Skin—although uncommon, may present as
cutaneous or subcutaneous nodules. Usually solitary
and fast growing, they tend to be mobile, painless
and firm. Can be investigated with punch biopsy.
Paraneoplastic syndromes
Paraneoplastic syndromes are clinical presentations of
malignancy that cannot be explained by direct invasion of
the tumour. They are caused by production of polypeptides
that mimic various hormones by the tumour cells. Although
possible with all bronchial carcinomas, paraneoplastic
syndromes are most commonly associated with small-cell
lung cancer. They may result in electrolyte abnormalities,
physical 
deformity 
or 
other 
symptoms 
seemingly
unexplained by the initial presentation. The commonest of
the 
paraneoplastic 
syndromes 
is 
the 
syndrome 
of
inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion, a syndrome
produced by a variety of conditions, including neurological,
infective and iatrogenic as well as malignant disease.
Excessive antidiuretic hormone results in increased water
resorption in the collecting ducts of the kidney, leading to
low total body sodium (dilutional hyponatraemia), low
serum osmolality and a high urine osmolality in an
otherwise euvolaemic patient. This creates symptoms of
headache and nausea, eventually leading to confusion,
drowsiness and even coma, caused by cerebral oedema.
Treatment is through fluid restriction and, occasionally,
cautious salt replacement.
Other paraneoplastic syndromes are outlined in Table
17.2.
Investigations
The key to any tumour investigation is to find where the
primary tumour is and the extent of the disease (imaging),
and to find out the underlying tissue diagnosis (usually
performed through biopsy, histology and cytological
analysis). This allows for prediction of tumour progression
and establishes parameters for treatment.
Chest radiography
An initial erect chest radiograph (posteroanterior image) is
a vital initial screening tool in anyone presenting with
symptoms suggestive of lung cancer. Seventy percent of
bronchial 
carcinomas 
arise 
centrally, 
and 
chest
radiography demonstrates over 90% of carcinomas. The
mass needs to be 1–2 cm in size to be recognized reliably.
Lobar collapse, raised hemidiaphragm and pleural effusions
may be present. A routine lateral image is not required,
and further assessment of any mass is performed by more
detailed imaging such as CT to confirm the diagnosis.
Computed tomography scan
This is the diagnostic method of choice for suspected lung
cancer, as well as giving information on tumour staging
and spread. It gives good visualization of the mediastinum
and is good for identifying small lung lesions. Whilst
imaging of the chest is essential for lung cancer diagnosis,
inclusion of the neck, upper abdomen and adrenals are
essential for staging (via the tumour, node, metastasis
(TNM) system, see Table 17.3), and may include the head if
cerebral metastases are clinically suspected. The CT scan
also acts as a mode of triage that defines the next
appropriate investigative step: a central mass may be
accessible via bronchoscopy for biopsy, whilst a peripheral
lesion may be more amenable to radiologically guided
percutaneous biopsy.
Table 17.3
Positron emission computed tomography
Whilst not an initial diagnostic test, the positron emission
computed 
tomography 
(PET-CT) 
scan 
is 
a 
useful
complementary scan for assessing lymph node spread and
metastatic disease, and is useful in the accurate staging
and treatment planning for bronchogenic carcinoma. It
works by using a radiolucent tracer marker as a measure
for glucose uptake, indicating areas of high cell turnover.
These metabolically active areas light up on the scan as
hotspot areas suggesting metastatic spread if positive, and
are particularly useful in assessing mediastinal disease and
nodes suitable for biopsy, as well as assessing distant
metastatic disease. PET-CT scanning should now be
available for all those being considered for radical
(curative) treatment.
Bronchoscopy
Bronchoscopy is a safe and effective diagnostic and staging
investigation. 
It 
confirms 
central 
lesions, 
assesses
operability and allows accurate cell type to be determined
through biopsy. Mediastinal lymph nodes can be sampled
by a technique called transbronchial needle aspiration. This
is increasingly performed using endobronchial ultrasound
(EBUS) to guide mediastinal lymph node biopsy. Mucus
secretions plus sputum can be examined for the presence
of malignant cells, either endoscopically through a process
called bronchoalveolar lavage (see Chapter 10) or directly
via sputum sampling, although these techniques are far
less sensitive and are not routinely relied upon unless no
other techniques are possible.
Mediastinoscopy
Mediastinoscopy 
is 
the 
current 
gold 
standard 
for
preoperative nodal assessment in mediastinal disease and
involves direct visualization. However, with advances in
PET and EBUS techniques, the role of mediastinoscopy is
diminishing. At present, however, it is still a key part of
preoperative work-up for potentially surgically resectable
disease.
Transthoracic fine-needle aspiration biopsy
Whilst bronchoscopy is useful in assessing central lesions,
peripheral lesions are approached externally through
radiological 
guidance. 
In 
transthoracic 
fine-needle
aspiration biopsy, the needle is guided by ultrasound or CT.
Direct aspiration of peripheral lung lesions takes place
through 
the 
chest 
wall; 
25% 
of 
patients 
suffer
pneumothorax caused by the procedure, which may require
admission for monitoring or drainage (see Chapter 20).
Implantation metastases do not occur.
Assessing fitness for treatment
It is vital to assess whether a patient is suitable to undergo
radical treatment. This includes assessment of their
existing comorbidities and current level of baseline fitness.
Grading systems are available to aid in this assessment
such 
as 
the 
American 
Society 
of 
Anesthesiologists
performance status classification and the Medical Research
Council Dyspnoea Scale. These are discussed in more detail
in Chapter 8.
Any patient considered a candidate for treatment should
undergo full lung function testing with transfer capacity
assessment. Other underlying disease may also warrant
further 
investigation—for 
example, 
significant
cardiovascular disease may require echocardiography or
further cardiologist review.
Lung cancer staging
Staging of lung cancer using the methods described
previously is a vital part of assessment, as it affects both
prognosis and treatment options. Small-cell and non-small
cell cancers are both staged using the tumour–node–
metastasis (TNM) system (Table 17.3), as recommended by
the International Association for the Study of Lung Cancer.
However, small-cell cancers are often additionally staged
as 
either 
limited 
or 
extensive 
using 
the 
Veterans
Administration Lung Cancer Study Group system, owing to
the aggressive nature of the disease. Limited-stage disease
is confined to an area that can feasibly be treated by one
radiation area—meaning the cancer is confined to one lung
with the inclusion of nearby lymph nodes. It automatically
excludes cancers with pleural and pericardial effusions. All
other 
small-cell 
lung 
cancers 
not 
confined 
to 
the
hemithorax are extensive-stage in this scheme.
Multidisciplinary team assessment
All patients thought to have lung cancer should be referred
to a member of a lung cancer multidisciplinary team
(MDT). Often the initial referral is through a rapid access
lung clinic to aid faster diagnosis and reduce patient
anxiety (these are part of the 2-week wait pathway in the
United Kingdom). Individual cases are then discussed by a
group of experts from different fields at an MDT meeting.
These meetings include a respiratory physician, an
oncologist, a thoracic surgeon, a histologist, a radiologist, a
clinical nurse specialist and a palliative care specialist. The
team reviews the type of cancer, the staging and
underlying comorbidities to decide on the best course of
action available. Each team member provides a different
area of expertise to the patient’s care, and multidisciplinary
care is the gold standard in all cancer management.
Treatment
Treatment of lung cancer is complex and ever evolving.
Whilst there are a variety of treatment options available,
the majority of patients are diagnosed at an advanced
stage, meaning curative treatment is often not possible. We
aim 
to 
outline 
broad 
treatment 
principles, 
with
recommendations for further reading outlined later.
Communication and lifestyle advice
Treatment begins with informing the patient of the
diagnosis. How this is done will affect the patient for the
rest of their life and should not be taken lightly. As patient-
centred care is key to good medical practice, honest and
open discussions on available treatment options, prognosis
and MDT recommendations can be had with the patient.
Anyone undergoing treatment should be aware of the risks
involved and the likely outcomes—some treatment is for
curative intent whilst others are to prolong life expectancy
or improve quality of life.
Lifestyle factors should be taken into account. Patients
should be advised to stop smoking and should be aware of
why this is important. Smoking cessation therapies and
counselling should be made available to all patients who
require it.
Communication 
Breaking bad news
Having a structured approach will help you to present
bad news in a manner that is both factual and
considerate. 
This 
framework 
may 
help 
you 
when
breaking bad news.
S–P–I–K–E–S
S—Setting
Prepare and rehearse what you will say, pick an
appropriate and quiet setting, involve relatives, and
manage time constraints to avoid interruption.
P—Perception
Ask the patient what they already know and understand
about 
what 
is 
happening. 
You 
can 
then 
correct
misinformation and tailor your input to what the patient
already knows. This will also reveal any denial or
unrealistic expectations of treatment.
I—Invitation
Establish 
whether 
the 
patient 
wants 
the 
full
information available. Some patients would rather not
know their full prognosis, as part of their coping
mechanism.
K—Knowledge
Give a warning shot before giving full information. Use
simple and understandable language. Give information in
small chunks and check the patient’s understanding.
E—Empathy
Take time to pause and understand the patient’s
emotional response to the bad news. An empathic
response can provide support.
S—Strategy and summary
Giving a clear treatment plan or next steps will avoid
patient uncertainty and reduce anxiety. Summarizing key
information will help with retention of information.
Always allow time for questions and prompt the patient,
who may not feel comfortable enough to ask.
For more information see Baile et al.: SPIKES—A Six-
Step Protocol for Delivering Bad News: Application to the
Patient with Cancer, The Oncologist 2000, Society for
Translational Oncology.
Surgery
Surgery is used in early stage disease in non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) and is considered the best option for
curative intent. However only 5%–10% of NSCLCs are
suitable for surgical resection at presentation. Likewise,
surgery is now also offered for very early stage small-cell
lung cancer in otherwise healthy patients, although these
cases are even rarer than in NSCLC. The goal of surgery is
complete tumour resection. Surgical procedures include
lobectomy (either open or thoracoscopic) as the treatment
of choice, with extensive surgeries such as pneumonectomy
reserved for more extensive disease. The patient needs to
be fit enough for the surgery and be prepared for
postoperative reduction in lung function depending on the
extent of the surgery planned. Patient fitness is assessed
via patient performance status (see Chapter 8).
Where nodal disease is associated with NSCLC, surgery
is offered with postoperative chemotherapy if the patient’s
performance status is good enough to tolerate treatment.
Radiation therapy
This is the treatment of choice if the tumour is inoperable
or the patient is not fit for surgery, and radiotherapy can be
administered with curative intent in NSCLC. Again,
baseline assessment and adequate lung function need to be
considered. In early stage NSCLC, high dose radiotherapy
or continuous hyperfractionated accelerated regimens can
provide outcomes almost comparable to surgery. Even if
the patient’s lung function is poor, radiation therapy can
still be of benefit as long as the area irradiated is small.
Whilst radiotherapy has less of a role in small-cell lung
cancer, it can be useful in certain instances to prolong life
rather than to cure disease. Again, treatment can be
combined with chemotherapy to produce better response
rates and extend median survival in NSCLC in certain
instances.
Radiotherapy can also be used in the palliation of
symptoms of lung cancer. This includes management of
bone pain from metastatic disease and the management of
local invasion of the thoracic wall, bronchial occlusion or
invasion with subsequent haemoptysis, superior vena cava
obstruction or spinal cord compression.
Radiotherapy 
is 
not 
without 
its 
risks. 
Radiation
pneumonitis occurs in up to 15% of cases, resulting in
acute 
infiltration 
within 
3 
months 
of 
radiotherapy.
Radiation fibrosis occurs later and is much more common,
although is rarely clinically significant.
Chemotherapy and immunotherapy
Medical therapies can be offered as an adjuvant to other
treatment modalities for curative intent or to prolong
survival and improve quality of life. Agents used depend on
the underlying histological type, with newer biologic agents
providing survival benefits compared with traditional
chemotherapy in responsive patients.
Small-cell lung cancer in limited-stage disease responds
well to combination chemoradiotherapy, although this is
not with curative intent. Platinum-based agents such as
cisplatin or carboplatin plus a combination agent often
show significant response. Even in extensive disease,
median survival can be increased from 6 to 12 months with
combination chemotherapy. If first-line chemotherapy fails,
second-line chemotherapy can provide further palliation in
patients with a good performance status.
SCC rarely demonstrates active mutations for targeted
agents and so chemotherapy is often used as first line. A
third-generation agent such as gemcitabine plus cisplatin is
the standard first-line treatment, although a variety of
agents may be used.
In adenocarcinoma, targeted biological agents are used
on the EGFR if the mutation is present, with the EGFR
tyrosine kinase inhibitor afatinib providing survival and
quality 
of 
life 
benefits 
compared 
with 
first-line
chemotherapy. Immunotherapy using immune checkpoint
inhibitors such as with PD-L1 inhibitors have also shown to
be highly successful in NSCLC treatment. These act to
upregulate the host immune system to destroy cancer cells.
Other genetic mutations are tested for and other biological
agents, with significant advances to treatment being made.
Chemotherapy options include a third-generation drug in
combination with a platinum agent, with maintenance
chemotherapy prolonging survival rates significantly.
Side-effects and intolerances of chemotherapy should not
be 
underestimated. 
Nausea 
and 
vomiting 
are 
the
commonest effects but can be debilitating, inducing life-
threatening 
renal 
impairment, 
and 
require 
hospital
admission. Other effects include immunosuppression, and
patients can be susceptible to neutropenic sepsis following
treatment. Specific chemotherapy agents will have specific
side-effect profiles and should be considered in all
treatment plans and reviews.
Palliative care
As most disease is diagnosed at an advanced stage and
multiple comorbidities are associated with the smoking
population, much lung cancer treatment is with palliative
intent. This encompasses both anticancer treatment and
symptom management. The role of palliative radiotherapy
and chemotherapy treatments are discussed previously.
Endoscopic therapy and transbronchial stenting are used to
provide symptomatic relief in patients with terminal
disease. Daily corticosteroids may improve appetite. Opioid
analgesia is given to control pain and laxatives should be
prescribed 
to 
counteract 
the 
opioid 
side-effects.
Candidiasis is a common, treatable problem. Specific
problems of breathlessness may also occur and can be
treated with opiates and oxygen therapy. Both patients and
relatives require counselling. Involvement of Macmillan
nurses and palliative care and community teams is
paramount for effective management of end-stage disease.
Prognosis
Overall prognosis for lung cancer is poor. Survival rates are
very variable and depend on tumour type and stage at
diagnosis. For all lung cancer types in the United Kingdom,
the 5-year survival rate is 10%. Small-cell lung cancer
carries the worst prognosis, with the mean survival time for
those with extensive disease being 8–13 months if treated.
Metastatic malignancy to the lung
Metastases to the lung are a common clinical and
radiological finding. They are often found on CXR in
patients with known malignancy, but can be the first
presentation. Metastases are more likely to be multiple
than solitary. Most haematogenous metastases are sharply
circumscribed with smooth edges, and the appearance of
multiple 
smoothly 
circumscribed 
nodules 
is 
highly
suggestive of metastatic disease. Cavitation is unusual in
metastatic lesions.
Solitary pulmonary metastases do occur as sarcomas of
soft tissue or bone, and carcinoma of the breast, colon and
kidney. Multinodular lung metastases may be of varying
sizes (Table 17.4):
• Very large dimensions—cannonball pattern.
• Many small nodules—snowstorm pattern.
Table 17.4
Carcinoma of the breast, stomach, pancreas and prostate
can involve mediastinal lymph nodes. This can lead to
spread along the lymphatics of both lungs and lymphatic
congestion, resulting in a condition known as lymphangitis
carcinomatosis, which causes severe breathlessness. On
CXR, bilateral lymphadenopathy is seen with associated
widespread basal shadowing spreading across both lung
fields owing to the lymphatic congestion. Management is to
treat the underlying malignancy.
Lung nodules
As CT scans are increasingly used for a variety of medical
assessments, the incidental detection of asymptomatic
small lung nodules has been increasing. The majority of
these nodules are benign, but some may be early signs of
malignant disease. Recent guidance has been developed on
the monitoring of such nodules based on their original size
and appearance as well as patient risk factors, and should
be performed with interval CT scanning. For example, a
new solitary 7-mm nodule seen on chest CT scan should be
followed up with a further CT scan in 3 months to assess
for evidence of growth.
Mesothelioma
See Chapter 20.
Chapter Summary
• Bronchial carcinoma is a common malignancy, linked
to smoking and age. It is divided into small-cell lung
cancer (20%) and non-small cell lung cancer (80%).
• Typical presenting symptoms include persistent
cough, haemoptysis, weight loss or shortness of
breath. The key initial investigation in anyone with
high risk features is chest radiography.
• Paraneoplastic syndromes are rare manifestations or
complications of malignancy caused by ectopic
hormone secretion. Management includes correcting
the underlying disturbance and, ultimately, treating
the malignancy.
• Diagnosis of lung cancer is performed with a mixture
of computed tomography (CT) imaging and
histological sampling, usually from endobronchial
biopsy or radiologically guided lung biopsy.
• Management of lung cancer is with a multidisciplinary
team approach. Communication, education, surgery,
radiotherapy, chemotherapy, immunotherapy and
targeted therapy may all play a role in active
management. Palliative treatment is often key to
managing patients with bronchial carcinoma with
advanced-stage disease.
Further reading
Baile, et al. SPIKES—A Six-Step Protocol for
Delivering Bad News: Application to the
Patient with Cancer. The Oncologist, Society
for Translational Oncology; 2000.
Callister, et al. BTS Guidelines for the
Investigation and Management of Pulmonary
Nodules. In: Thorax. British Thoracic Society;
2015 BMJ.
Goldstraw, et al. The IASLC Lung Cancer
Staging Project: proposals for the revision of
the TNM stage groupings in the forthcoming
(7th) edition of the TNM classification of
malignant tumours. J Thorac Oncol. 2007.
International Union Against Cancer (UICC),
TNM, 2012. Available online at:
http://www.uicc.org/resources/tnm.
Tobias J., Hochhauser D. Cancer and its
management. 6th edition Wiley–Blackwell;
2010.
Lim, et al. Guidelines for the radical
management for patients with lung cancer.
In: Thorax. British Thoracic Society; 2010
BMJ.
Micke P., Faldum A., Metz T., et al. Staging
small cell lung cancer: Veterans
Administration Lung Study Group versus
International Association for the Study of
Lung Cancer – what limits limited disease?.
Lung Cancer. 2002;37:271–276.
Travis, et al. The 2015 World Health
Organization Classification of Lung Tumours.
2015 International Association for the Study
of Lung Cancer, Journal of Thoracic Oncology.
18
Respiratory infections
Pneumonia
Pneumonia is infection within the lung parenchyma. It is a
common condition, with an annual incidence in the
community of 5–11 per 1000 adult population. Mortality of
those admitted to hospital with pneumonia is between 5%
and 12%, and between 1.2% and 10% require admission to
intensive care.
Useful definitions
Lower respiratory tract infection (LRTI)—an acute
illness (<  21 days duration) with cough as the main
symptom, and with at least one other lower respiratory
tract 
symptom 
(e.g., 
fever, 
sputum 
production,
breathlessness, wheeze or chest pain) and no alternative
explanation for the symptoms. This definition encompasses
pneumonia, acute bronchitis and infective exacerbation of
airways disease.
Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP)—pneumonia
acquired outside hospital. Patients present with symptoms
and signs of LRTI and have a chest X-ray (CXR)
demonstrating new parenchymal infiltrates.
Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP)—pneumonia that
develops > 48 hours after hospital admission.
Ventilator-associated pneumonia—pneumonia in a
mechanically ventilated patient that develops >  48 hours
postintubation.
Aspiration pneumonia—pneumonia following aspiration
of bacteria normally present in the upper airways or
gastrointestinal tract. Note this differs from aspiration of
substances that are toxic to the lower respiratory tract
(e.g., vomit) that cause a chemical pneumonitis in the
absence of bacterial infection.
Pathophysiology
The infecting pathogen reaches the alveolar epithelium via
inhalation, direct spread or microaspiration. It triggers
both the lung’s innate and adaptive immune defences and
an acute exudate is formed within the alveoli. Recognition
of the pathogen through toll-like receptors leads to release
of proinflammatory cytokines that attract neutrophils.
Alveolar macrophages phagocytose the bacteria and
remove acute inflammatory cells, eventually leading to
resolution of the host response.
Pneumonia can be classified by site. Lobar pneumonia
refers 
to 
involvement 
of 
a 
pulmonary 
lobe 
whilst
bronchopneumonia is more diffuse, involving lung lobules
and their associated bronchi and bronchioles.
Aetiology
The aetiology and risk factors for CAP and HAP are
summarized in Table 18.1. Streptococcus pneumoniae is
the commonest organism identified in CAP, found in 50% of
cases with a microbiological diagnosis. It is most common
in the winter months. Pathogens causing pneumonia are
described as typical or ‘atypical’. Atypical pathogens do not
respond to penicillin and include bacteria such as
Legionella, 
Mycoplasma 
pneumoniae, 
Chlamydophila
psittaci 
and 
Coxiella 
burnetii. 
Immunocompromised
patients are at risk of infection with organisms usually not
pathogenic in immunocompetent individuals, including
viruses such as cytomegalovirus (CMV) and varicella zoster
virus (VZV), fungi, including Aspergillus, and Mycobacteria.
Table 18.1
Risk factors and common causative organisms in
community-acquired and hospital-acquired
pneumonia
Risk factors
Common causative
organisms
CAP
Extremes of age
Aspiration
Alcoholism
Diabetes
Cigarette smoking
COPD
Nursing home residents
Bacterial:
Streptococcus
pneumoniae
Haemophilus
influenza
Legionella
pneumophilia
Staphylococcus
aureus
Viral:
Influenza A
HAP
Age > 70 years
Chronic lung disease
Diabetes
Reduced conscious level
Chest/abdominal
surgery
Poor dental hygiene
Immunosuppressant
medications
Bacterial:
Gram-negative
enteric bacilli
Pseudomonas
aeruginosa
Anaerobic bacteria
Staphylococcus
aureus
MRSA
CAP, Community-acquired pneumonia; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease; HAP, hospital-acquired pneumonia; MRSA, methicillin-resistant
Staphylococcus aureus.
Clinical features
Patients with pneumonia commonly present with:
• Cough
• Sputum production
• Shortness of breath
• Chest pain
• Fever
• Confusion
• Nonspecific features—especially in elderly patients.
On examination the patient may be pyrexial, tachycardic
and tachypnoeic. Focal signs of chest examination include
reduced lung expansion, a dull percussion note and
increased tactile fremitus over the affected area, with
bronchial breathing and coarse crackles on auscultation.
Although the causative organism cannot be accurately
predicted from clinical features alone, some features are
particularly associated with certain bacteria. These are
summarized in Table 18.2.
Table 18.2
Clinical features associated with causative organism
Organism
Type
Clinical features
Legionella spp.
Small gram-
negative
bacillus
Severe infection
Younger patients
Multisystem disease
(abnormal liver
enzymes, raised
creatinine kinase
(CK), diarrhoea,
vomiting,
hyponatraemia)
Travel related,
typically
Mediterranean
Epidemics occur in
water-containing
systems
Mycoplasma
pneumonia
Obligate
intracellul
ar
organism
Epidemics 4-yearly in
the UK
Associated
autoimmune
phenomena—
erythema multiforme,
haemolysis, hepatitis,
cold agglutinins.
Staphylococcus
aureus
Gram
positive
cocci
Common with influenza
Chlamydophila
psittaci
Gram-
negative
bacterium
Zoonotic infection from
birds/animals,
commonly parrots
Organism
Type
Clinical features
Severe pneumonia
Associated fevers,
joint pain and nose
bleeds
Coxiella
burnetii
Gram-
negative
obligate
intracellul
ar
Zoonosis—exposure to
sheep and goats
‘Q fever’—fever,
myalgia, headache,
hepatitis
Investigations
Patients admitted to hospital with suspected pneumonia
should have:
• CXR—within 4 hours to confirm diagnosis and guide
antimicrobial treatment.
• Tests of full blood count and C-reactive protein—
markers of infection.
• Renal function assessment, including testing of urea
—allows severity scoring and assessment for renal
dysfunction in severe pneumonia.
• Liver function tests—these can be deranged in
severe pneumonia or associated with Legionella.
• Measurement of arterial blood gas levels if hypoxic,
to assess for respiratory failure.
• Electrocardiogram if chest pain present or
tachycardic to assess for arrhythmias.
• Blood cultures— for all moderate to severe
pneumonia or if there is clinical evidence of sepsis.
• Sputum microscopy, culture and sensitivity.
• Pleural fluid sampling if effusion present.
• Pneumococcal urinary antigen testing—if moderate
or severe pneumonia.
• Legionella urinary antigen testing—if moderate or
severe pneumonia or where clinically suspected
(e.g., recent Mediterranean travel).
• Mycoplasma, Coxiella or C. psittaci serology if
clinically suspected
Management
Each patient should have a CURB 65 severity score
assessment. One point is scored for each of the following
criteria that apply:
• Confusion—new mental confusion (Abbreviated
mental test score [AMTS] < 8)
• Urea > 7 mmol/L
• Respiratory rate ≥ 30 breaths per minute
• Blood pressure—systolic < 90 mmHg and/or diastolic
≤ 60 mmHg
• 65: Age ≥ 65 years.
Antibiotic treatment should be guided by clinical
features, severity score and local treatment guidelines.
Treatment includes:
• Supplementary oxygen—aim for oxygen saturation
levels of ≥ 94% (unless known chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease where controlled oxygen therapy
targeting oxygen saturations at 88%–92% may be
appropriate)
• Fluids—assess fluid status and encourage per os or
supplement with intravenous fluids
• Analgesia
• Nutrition—consider supplements
• Physiotherapy—airway clearance techniques.
Poor prognostic factors include coexisting disease, acute
respiratory 
failure, 
hypoalbuminaemia, 
bilateral 
or
multilobar involvement on CXR and positive blood cultures
(i.e., bacteraemic patients). Usual antibiotic treatment and
prognosis is summarized in Table 18.3.
Table 18.3
Community-acquired pneumonia antibiotic treatment
by severity
CURB 65
Score
Antibiotic treatment
Mortality
(%)
0–1 = Low
severity
Amoxicillin 500 mg TDS PO
Consider home treatment
3
2 = Moderate
severity
Amoxicillin 500 mg TDS PO
plus clarithromycin 500mg
BD PO
3–5
3–5 = High
severity
Co-amoxiclav 1.2 g TDS IV
plus clarithromycin 500mg
BD IV
> 15
BD, Twice daily; IV, intravenously; PO, per os; TDS, three times daily.
Complications
Immediate complications of CAP include sepsis, respiratory
failure and multiorgan dysfunction. Critical care should be
considered 
in 
patients 
with 
severe 
pneumonia 
and
admission to intensive care may be required. Later
complications 
can 
include 
parapneumonic 
effusion,
empyema and lung abscess formation.
Follow-up
Patients with CXR infiltrates suggestive of pneumonia
should have follow-up imaging 6 weeks after the initial CXR
to ensure resolution of the change. Ongoing infiltrate on
CXR may prompt further investigation such as computed
tomography scan to assess for an underlying cancer.
Tuberculosis
Definition and epidemiology
Tuberculosis (TB) arises as a result of infection with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB). In 2015, TB remained
the ninth-leading cause of death worldwide; however,
incidence is decreasing by 1.5% annually. Of an estimated
10.4 million cases of TB worldwide in 2015, 11% occurred
in people living with HIV and 60% of all TB cases occurred
in six countries: India, Indonesia, China, Nigeria, Pakistan
and South Africa. There were 480,000 new cases of
multidrug resistant TB identified in 2015.
In the United Kingdom, the incidence of TB has declined
since a peak in 2011, with an incidence of 10.5 per 100,000
people in 2015,. of which, 73% were from the non-UK-born
population. Patients with at least one social risk factor,
including homelessness, drug or alcohol abuse and
imprisonment, make up 11.8% of cases.
Risk factors for developing TB include:
• Close contact (relative) with TB
• HIV
• Social factors—drug and alcohol abuse,
homelessness, imprisonment
• Medical factors—immunosuppression, end-stage
renal failure, drugs including tumour necrosis factor
α antagonists (e.g., infliximab).
Pathology
Transmission and dissemination
Transmission of the disease occurs via airborne droplets
containing the bacterium being released through coughing
or sneezing by an infected individual. The droplet nuclei
are then inhaled by an uninfected person and can lodge in
the distal airways. Fig. 18.1 shows the pathogenesis of TB
and the different outcomes following initial exposure.
FIG. 18.1  The pathogenesis of tuberculosis following
primary infection.
Primary tuberculosis
The process of primary infection following inhalation is:
1. Initial inflammatory reaction—the innate immune
system is triggered by activation of alveolar
macrophages by MTB.
2. Lymphatic spread of MTB to the hilar lymph nodes.
3. Caseating granulomas form at site of infection
through the activated T-lymphocytes and
macrophages and stop further MTB replication.
The focus of primary infection is termed the Ghon
complex. The combination of tuberculous lymphadenitis
and the Ghon complex is termed the primary complex. In
90% of cases, MTB replication is contained and the primary
foci will organize and form a fibrocalcific nodule in the lung
with no clinical symptoms. Active disease develops if the
immune response of the host is unable to contain MTB
replication. Approximately 10% of patients progress to
primary progressive TB at this point.
‘Postprimary’ tuberculosis
Postprimary TB occurs following reactivation of a primary
infection. In adults, this occurs if MTB lying dormant in the
Ghon focus reactivate. The estimated lifetime risk of
clinical disease in a child newly infected with MTB is 10%.
Any form of immunocompromise may allow reactivation.
Miliary tuberculosis
In miliary TB, an acute diffuse dissemination of tubercle
bacilli occurs through the bloodstream. Numerous small
granulomas form in many organs, with the highest numbers
found in the lungs. These form a characteristic pattern on
CXR (Fig. 18.3).
Miliary TB may be a consequence of either primary or
secondary TB and is fatal without treatment.
Clinical features
Primary 
TB 
is 
usually 
asymptomatic. 
Patients 
with
secondary or progressive TB classically present with:
• Productive cough
• Haemoptysis
• Breathlessness
• Systemic features—fever, night sweats, weight loss.
Extrapulmonary tuberculosis
TB can affect any organ via haematogenous spread,
including gut, skin, kidney, genital tract and bone.
Extrapulmonary TB is seen in roughly 20% of patients with
TB. The most common manifestations include:
• Skin—erythema nodosum (Fig. 18.2A)
FIG. 18.2  Extrapulmonary features of tuberculosis.
(A) Erythema nodosum. (B) Magnetic resonance
imaging of the spine demonstrating Pott disease.
(C) Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain
showing a tuberculoma. (From Mana J, Marcoval J:
Erythema nodosum, Clin Dermatol 25:288-294, 2007.)
• Spine—tuberculoma causing vertebral collapse (Pott
disease) (Fig. 18.2B)
• Brain—TB can cause chronic meningitis or a space-
occupying lesion (Fig. 18.2C)
• Adrenal glands —adrenal TB is now rare in the
United Kingdom but remains an important
worldwide cause of adrenal failure.
Investigations
CXR features of TB include:
• Upper lobe infiltrates with cavitation.
• Hilar lymphadenopathy (Fig. 18.3A).
FIG. 18.3  Chest X-ray (CXR) features suggestive of
tuberculosis (TB). (A) CXR showing hilar
lymphadenopathy. (B) Chronic bilateral upper lobe
scarring from previous TB. (C) CXR showing miliary
TB. (From Corne J, Pointon K. Chest X-ray made easy, 3rd ed,
2009, Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier.)
• Pleural effusion.
• Fibrous scar tissue and calcification—old TB
infection, predominantly upper lobes (Fig. 18.3B).
• Miliary TB (disseminated small nodules throughout
the lung field) (Fig. 18.4C).
FIG. 18.4  Structure of the influenza A virus. HA,
Haemagglutinin; NA, neuraminidase; NP,
nucleocapsid protein; PBI, PB2, PA
Three deep sputum samples, one preferably an early
morning sample, should be sent to the microbiology
laboratory before starting treatment. If sputum cannot be
produced spontaneously, the use of induced sputum or
bronchoalveolar lavage specimens via bronchoscopy may
be required.
Sputum is initially stained with a Ziehl–Neelsen stain,
examined under microscopy to look for acid-fast bacilli and
then sent for culture.
Hints and tips 
• ‘Smear-positive’ tuberculosis (TB) = acid-fast bacilli
(AFB) seen on sputum smear (Ziehl–Neelsen stain).
These patients are very infectious and account for a
high proportion of transmission (approximately 80%).
They require isolation precautions in a negative
pressure side room if a hospital inpatient.
• ‘Culture positive’ TB = AFB not seen on smear but TB
grown on culture. Patients are much less infectious.
Sputum culture is the gold standard for TB diagnosis;
however, this takes 6 weeks or more. Nucleic acid
amplification techniques such as the Xpert MTB/RIF assay
can detect MTB serotype and identify rifampicin resistance
within hours. They are recommended by the World Health
Organization (WHO) for use in regions with high TB
incidence or coinfection with HIV.
Diagnosis of extrapulmonary TB requires biopsy for
tissue diagnosis, e.g., lymph node or pleural biopsy.
Patients diagnosed with TB should be tested for HIV and,
where appropriate, the HIV specialist team should be
involved in diagnosis and further treatment.
Management
If a patient is smear-positive, treatment is usually started
immediately. If smear-negative but with a high clinical
suspicion of TB, treatment is usually started. Patients are
treated for 6 months:
• Initial phase—2 months of quadruple therapy,
frequently rifampicin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide plus
ethambutol (mnemonic: RIPE)
• Continuation phase—4 months of dual therapy,
frequently isoniazid and rifampicin.
As therapeutic noncompliance is a major reason for
treatment failure, patients should be followed up regularly
by a TB team including a TB nurse specialist. Directly
observed short course therapy can be used to improve
compliance by offering an incentive, e.g., a free meal, for
attending a daily clinic where medications are taken under
supervision.
Latent tuberculosis
Latent TB is defined by the presence of a small number of
MTB that are controlled by the patient’s immune system. A
person with latent TB is asymptomatic and not infectious. It
is diagnosed differently from active TB as it follows a
positive 
tuberculin 
skin 
test 
(Mantoux) 
or 
positive
interferon gamma release assay. Both of these tests
examine a person’s immune response to proteins within
MTB (Table 18.4).
Table 18.4
IFNγ, Interferon γ; IGRA, interferon gamma release assay; MTB, Mycobacterium
tuberculosis; TB, tuberculosis.
Contact tracing
TB is a notifiable disease in the United Kingdom and any
close contacts of the patient with pulmonary TB will be
traced in order to assess their risk of having contracted TB.
Persons in close contact are defined as those living within
the same household or sharing kitchen facilities. If the
index patient is smear-positive at diagnosis, casual contacts
such as work colleagues may be screened too.
Prevention
The Bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG) vaccine is a live
attenuated 
vaccine 
made 
from 
modified 
live
Mycobacterium bovis. From the 1950s to 2005 it was
offered to all 10–14-year-olds in UK schools. Since 2005, it
is offered only to children <  16 years considered to be in
high-risk groups or adults within certain settings. BCG is
offered to:
• All 0–12-month-olds where annual incidence is
≥ 40/100,000.
• Infants with a parent or grandparent born in a
country with an annual incidence of ≥ 40/100,000.
• Adult healthcare workers and prison officers.
Influenza
Definition and epidemiology
Influenza is an acute viral infection that usually affecting
the respiratory tract. Influenza occurs in annual seasonal
epidemics during the winter months in the temperate
climates of the Northern and Southern hemispheres. The
WHO predicts that in developed countries seasonal
influenza affects 10%–20% of the population annually.
Worldwide, seasonal flu epidemics are estimated to result
in between 250,000 and 500,000 deaths.
Hints and tips 
In 1918–1919, a new H1N1 influenza emerged—termed
‘Spanish flu’. In 2 years, over 40 million people died in
the Spanish flu pandemic.
In 2009, a new H1N1 emerged in Mexico—termed
‘swine flu’. It caused mild or asymptomatic disease in the
majority of cases but severe illness and death in a small
proportion.
Hints and tips: definitions
Epidemic
An epidemic is the occurrence of more cases of a disease
than would be expected in a community or region during
a given time period.
Pandemic
A pandemic is the worldwide spread of a new disease.
This occurs when a new influenza virus emerges to which
most people do not have immunity.
Pathology
Influenza viruses belong to the Orthomyxoviridae family
and are single-stranded RNA viruses. There are three types
of influenza virus:
1. Influenza A—common, potentially the most severe
2. Influenza B—common, less severe
3. Influenza C—uncommon, mild illness.
Type A influenza viruses are further subtyped according
to the haemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA)
activity of their viral envelope glycoproteins (Fig. 18.4).
Currently, influenza A (H1N1) and A (H3N2) subtypes are
circulating in the human population.
Influenza viruses are antigenically unstable, i.e., they are
constantly changing and are therefore able to cause
seasonal epidemics and, potentially, pandemics. Antigenic
drift occurs owing to small genetic changes in the virus
over 
time 
as 
it 
replicates. 
Once 
enough 
changes
accumulate, the virus can infect an individual who has
previously been infected, as the antibodies created against
the old virus no longer recognize the new virus.
Antigenic shift occurs following a major change in the
influenza A virus, leading to formation of a new HA antigen.
As with many other organisms, there is a large animal
reservoir of influenza virus (mainly in domestic animals
such as birds, cattle and pigs). Different strains of influenza
affect animals to those that affect humans. If an animal
subtype of influenza A combines with a human subtype of
influenza A, a process called reassortment, then a new
hybrid strain is formed (Fig. 18.5). Most people will not
have immunity to this novel virus and therefore, in rare
cases, a pandemic can occur if the virus is able to transmit
easily between humans.
FIG. 18.5  Stages of a pandemic.
Clinical features
Seasonal influenza spreads rapidly. Transmission of the
virus is by respiratory droplets from coughing or sneezing.
The virus can survive on a hard surface for up to 24 hours.
Once an individual is infected, the incubation period in
adults is typically 2–3 days before symptoms are displayed.
Symptoms of influenza range from a mild self-limiting
illness to severe illness requiring hospitalization and in
some cases are fatal. Symptoms include:
• High fever
• Dry cough
• Upper respiratory tract symptoms e.g., coryza
• Myalgia and arthralgia
• Headache.
Patients at high risk of complicated infection include
children under 5 years, the elderly, pregnant women and
those with chronic medical conditions.
Common complications include primary viral pneumonia,
secondary bacterial pneumonia (Streptococcus pneumoniae
and Staphylococcus aureus are common pathogens), otitis
media, sinusitis, neurological complications, including
encephalitis and cardiovascular complications, including
myocarditis.
Investigation and management
Influenza is often a clinical diagnosis not requiring formal
investigation. In severe cases or during outbreaks, virology
may be performed via nose and throat swabs in addition to
the normal septic screen tests.
Management is usually symptomatic, with paracetamol
and bed rest. In severe cases, supportive care and
treatment of complications (such as secondary bacterial
pneumonia) require hospital inpatient admission. Antiviral
treatment may be indicated in immunocompromised
patients, elderly patients or during a known pandemic. It is
important to consult local microbiology guidelines at the
time for treatment recommendations. Common antiviral
medications available are:
1. Neuraminidase inhibitors (oseltamivir and
zanamivir)
2. Adamantanes (amantadine and rimantadine).
Prevention
Vaccination is the most effective way to prevent influenza
and severe illness and is especially important for people at
higher risk of serious influenza complications, and for
people who live with or care for high-risk individuals. An
influenza vaccine is produced annually. The most common
type for adults is a trivalent inactivated vaccine protecting
against two subtypes of influenza A (H1N1 and H3N2) and
one subtype of influenza B. A live attenuated vaccine in the
form of a nasal spray is used in babies and children.
Vaccine effectiveness varies annually but in the UK
2016/17 season it was predicted at 39.8% by Public Health
England. It was more effective in younger people. Rates of
vaccine uptake in primary care in the UK 2016/17 season
were 70%.
The WHO recommends annual vaccination for:
• Nursing home residents
• Individuals over 65 years of age
• Patients with chronic medical conditions
• Other groups, i.e., pregnant women, healthcare
workers, children aged 6 months to 2 years.
Fungal respiratory infections
Aspergillus and the lung
Aspergillus is a type of environmental fungus found in the
air and soil worldwide, especially in the autumn and winter
in the Northern hemisphere. Aspergillus fumigatus is the
most common type.
Hints and tips 
Aspergillus causes different types of lung disease through
two main pathological processes:
1. An allergy-type process where damage occurs owing
to overactivation of the host’s immune response
mechanisms, e.g., allergic bronchopulmonary
aspergillosis—see Asthma chapter for further
information).
2. An infective process where damage occurs caused
by fungal protease release, e.g., invasive
aspergillosis and aspergilloma.
Fungal infection in the
immunocompetent patient
Aspergilloma
An aspergilloma is a ball of fungal hyphae that forms within
a preexisting lung cavity (Fig. 18.6). Common reasons for
cavity formation in the lung include postinfectious cavities
(TB—typically apical, pneumonia), cancer and sarcoidosis.
Aspergillomas 
are 
often 
asymptomatic 
but 
when
symptomatic they commonly present with haemoptysis.
Chest imaging may show a cavity with a fungal ball within.
Initial treatment is management of the haemoptysis with
resuscitation, transfusion, tranexamic acid and, in some
cases, arterial embolization if significant haemoptysis is
present. If systemic features such as fever and malaise are
present, 
a 
trial 
of 
antifungal 
medication 
such 
as
voriconazole may be considered. Surgical resection is
considered if there is an ongoing haemoptysis risk.
FIG. 18.6  Computed tomography chest scan showing an
aspergilloma within a lung cavity. (From Sagan D, Goździuk
K, Korobowicz E. Predictive and prognostic value of
preoperative symptoms in the surgical treatment of
pulmonary aspergilloma, J Surg Res 163:e35–43, 2010.)
Fungal infection in the
immunocompromised patient
Invasive aspergillosis
This occurs when Aspergillus hyphae invade the lung
tissue. It occurs in patients who are immunocompromised,
particularly as a cause of neutropenic sepsis following
chemotherapy. Symptoms include cough, fever, chest pain
and haemoptysis, and the diagnosis should be considered in
immunocompromised patients who are not responding to
broad-spectrum antibiotics. Treatment is with intravenous
antifungals such as voriconazole or amphotericin B. It
carries a high mortality.
Pneumocystis pneumonia
Pneumocystis jirovecii (formerly Pneumocystis carinii and
still referred to as ‘PCP’ occasionally) is a common
environmental fungus. Risk factors for infection include
HIV infection with a CD4 cell count < 200 × 106/L, steroid
use and recent chemotherapy. Patients present with
symptoms of breathlessness on exertion and a dry cough.
Hypoxia and desaturation on exertion are common findings.
Treatment includes high dose cotrimoxazole (Septrin) and
supplemental oxygen. High dose steroids are given too if
respiratory failure is present. A patient should always be
offered an HIV test and the HIV team should be involved in
diagnosis and treatment.
Chapter Summary
• Pneumonia is a common condition defined as an acute
infection of the lung parenchyma. Common risk
factors include increasing age, diabetes, alcohol
excess and chronic aspiration.
• The commonest causative organism in community-
acquired pneumonia is Streptococcus pneumoniae.
Atypical pathogens include Legionella, Mycoplasma
pneumoniae and Staphylococcus aureus.
• Tuberculosis (TB) arises as a result of infection with
Mycobacterium tuberculosis. In 2015, TB remained
the ninth-leading cause of death worldwide.
• TB typically presents with symptoms of
breathlessness, cough and haemoptysis, and systemic
features such as night sweats and weight loss. Risk
factors include close contact with an infected
individual, untreated human immunodeficiency virus
infection and immunosuppression.
• Treatment of TB is with quadruple antimicrobial
therapy, commonly rifampicin, isoniazid,
pyrazinamide and ethambutol for the initial 2 months
followed by 4 further months of dual therapy with
rifampicin and isoniazid only.
• Influenza is an acute viral infection affecting the
respiratory tract that occurs in annual seasonal
epidemics during the winter months. Influenza
viruses are unstable and therefore constantly change
through antigenic drift and shift.
Further reading
British Thoracic Society Guidelines for the
Management of Community Acquired
Pneumonia in Adults: 2009 Update.
Tuberculosis in England – 2016 Report, Public
Health England.
Global Tuberculosis Report 2016 – World
Health Organization.
Tuberculosis National Health Institute for
Health and Care Excellence guideline
13/1/16.
World Health Organization – Influenza factsheet
(http://www.who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/
fs211/en/).
Public Health England Influenza Vaccine
Effectiveness report 2016/17.
Fungal Infection Trust
(www.fungalinfectiontrust.org).
19
Bronchiectasis and cystic
fibrosis
Bronchiectasis
Definition
Bronchiectasis is defined as abnormal dilatation of the
bronchi and bronchioles caused by repeated cycles of
airway infection and inflammation. The incidence of
bronchiectasis in the United Kingdom is unknown.
Pathogenesis
The initial insult is usually infective, leading to airway
damage. This allows persistent bacterial colonization of the
bronchi and bronchioles, and a chronic inflammatory
response develops. The resultant mucosal oedema damages
the mucociliary clearance mechanisms, leading to mucus
plugging of the terminal bronchioles and distal volume loss.
As a consequence, bacterial clearance is further prevented
and therefore a ‘vicious cycle’ develops of recurrent
infection and thick respiratory secretions (Fig. 19.1).
FIG. 19.1  Pathogenesis of bronchiectasis—the ‘vicious
cycle’.
Aetiology
The causes of bronchiectasis are multiple and varied—they
are summarized in Fig. 19.2. Broadly, bronchiectasis
develops following a single infective insult resulting in
distorted anatomy or secondary to a defect in the immune
system. It can be focal and isolated to a single lobe
(common if postobstructive) or diffuse throughout the
lungs. Approximately 50% of cases of bronchiectasis are
currently classed as idiopathic. Bronchiectasis can either
be acquired (e.g., following a severe pulmonary infection)
or have a genetic cause, most commonly cystic fibrosis
(CF), which is discussed in detail later in this chapter. Rare
causes include:
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA)
—an overactive IgG and IgE immune response to the
fungus Aspergillus fumigatus, leading to
inflammatory damage and bronchiectasis. It is
usually associated with a long history of asthma and
occurs in 1%–2% of asthmatics. It causes central
bronchiectasis.
Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD)—an autosomal-
recessive genetic defect causing a defect in the cilia
making them unable to beat. In the lung this leads to
loss of mucociliary clearance and bronchiectasis. It
is associated with situs inversus in 30% of those
diagnosed with bronchiectasis, chronic sinusitis,
recurrent otitis media and male infertility.
Kartagener syndrome—the triad of PCD,
dextrocardia and situs inversus, found in 50% of
cases.
Young syndrome—the triad of bronchiectasis,
sinusitis and azoospermia. It is characterized by
excessively thick mucus with normal ciliary function.
The cause is unclear. As presentation is similar,
always check for CF.
FIG. 19.2  Causes of bronchiectasis. ABPA, Allergic
bronchopulmonary aspergillosis; TB, tuberculosis.
Clinical features
Persistent cough productive of sputum is the most common
symptom. This can be chronic, or intermittent and
associated 
with 
symptoms 
of 
respiratory 
infection.
Expectorated sputum may be mucopurulent and copious.
Associated respiratory symptoms such as dyspnoea, chest
pain and haemoptysis can occur. With the progression of
the disease, cor pulmonale and respiratory failure develop.
Physical examination
Patients with bronchiectasis may appear breathless at rest
and be cyanosed. Patients with severe disease may require
supplementary oxygen. The patient may be malnourished
from 
chronic 
respiratory 
disease 
or 
associated
malabsorption. They may have sputum pots, inhalers or
nebulizers at their bedside. Examination of the hands may
reveal clubbing. Classically, coarse inspiratory crepitations
that alter with coughing are heard on chest auscultation
over areas of diseased lung. Scattered wheeze may be
present due to obstruction of the airways by secretions. A
patient may have signs of right heart failure secondary to
respiratory disease such as peripheral oedema, and a
raised JVP. Patients may also have signs of the underlying
cause of the disease such as:
• Insulin injection sites from CF-related diabetes
• Symmetrical polyarthropathy consistent with
rheumatoid arthritis
• Dextrocardia related to Kartagener syndrome
• Abdominal surgery scars related to inflammatory
bowel disease.
Investigations
Investigations for bronchiectasis should be targeted at
identifying 
the 
underlying 
cause. 
They 
should 
be
considered in the following patients:
Children
• Chronic productive cough, especially if culture-
positive for an associated organism (e.g.,
Staphylococcus aureus, Haemophilus influenzae or
Pseudomonas aeruginosa).
• Symptoms of asthma not responsive to standard
treatment.
• Severe or recurrent pneumonia.
• Respiratory symptoms in those at high risk of
aspiration.
• Unexplained haemoptysis.
Adults
• Persistent productive cough, especially if onset at a
young age or associated with haemoptysis.
• Patients with recurrent exacerbations of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) or who are
nonsmokers.
Essential investigations
The following are basic investigations in the working
diagnosis of bronchiectasis:
• Radiology—chest radiograph may be normal or show
bronchial wall thickening and consolidation. High-
resolution computed tomography is the investigation
of choice.
• Sputum microbiology—sputum microscopy, culture
and sensitivity including for atypical pathogens,
acid-fast bacilli and fungi. Major pathogens include
S. aureus, P. aeruginosa and H. influenzae.
• Lung function—spirometry may show airflow
obstruction.
• Blood tests—Immunoglobulin (Ig) A, M and G levels
may demonstrate a specific deficiency. Aspergillus-
specific IgE, Aspergillus precipitin (IgG) levels and
total IgE levels should be sent if ABPA is considered.
• Functional antibodies to tetanus, H. influenza and
pneumococcus if immunosuppression suspected.
Hints and tips 
Computed tomography scan in bronchiectasis
Computed tomography (CT) is a useful diagnostic tool in
bronchiectasis and can help diagnose the underlying
cause. Three signs to look for on CT that indicate
bronchiectasis are:
1. ‘Tram track sign’—the thickened bronchiolar walls
do not taper as normal and become parallel, giving
an appearance similar to tram tracks.
2. ‘Signet ring sign’—each bronchus and its adjacent
pulmonary artery should normally have an almost
equivalent diameter when seen on cross-section on
a CT. In bronchiectasis the bronchus is dilated and
therefore gives an appearance of a signet ring with
its adjacent artery (Fig. 19.3).
FIG. 19.3  High-resolution computed tomography
scan of a patient with bronchiectasis. Note the
thickened airway wall and the dilated airway and
adjacent vessel demonstrating the ‘signet ring’
sign. (From Corne J, Pointon K. Chest X-ray made easy, 3rd
edition, Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier, 2009.)
3. ‘Bunch of grapes sign’—the cross-sectional
appearance of adjacent bronchi in cystic
bronchiectasis.
Additional investigations
The following are further investigations that should be
considered if clinically relevant:
• Tests for CF in patients younger than 40 years old or
where clinical suspicion is high (see CF section for
further details).
• Bronchoscopy—only used to exclude foreign body if
unilobular disease or to obtain microbiological
specimens in unusual presentations.
• Immunological studies—if immunodeficiency is
suggested. This should take place in conjunction
with an immunologist and includes neutrophil and
lymphocyte functional studies.
• Ciliary function testing—nasal brushings/biopsy at a
tertiary centre.
Treatment
Aims of treatment include:
1. Identify and treat the underlying cause of
bronchiectasis
2. Maintain or improve lung function
3. Reduce exacerbation frequency.
Physiotherapy:
This is key to maintaining good airway clearance and
lung function and reducing exacerbations. Patients should
meet with a physiotherapist to learn active cycle breathing
techniques—a process in which respiratory secretions are
cleared by using a combination of small and deep breaths
that move secretions up the bronchial tree. This can be in
combination with postural drainage and aided by the use of
adjuncts including oscillating positive expiratory pressure
devices (e.g., an Acapella device). Pulmonary rehabilitation
courses may also be helpful for bronchiectasis patients,
especially patients who also have COPD.
Drugs:
• Mucolytics such as carbocisteine are commonly used
in practice to aid sputum expectoration; however,
the evidence base for their use is limited. Nebulized
normal saline is helpful for some patients.
• β2-Agonist inhalers may be of benefit if a patient has
airflow obstruction.
• Short courses of antibiotics (10–14 days) are used to
treat acute infective exacerbations and should be
prescribed with reference to organisms previously
grown on sputum culture. Amoxicillin is commonly
used as first-line therapy if no previous colonizing
organism has been identified. Local antibiotic
guidelines should be consulted.
• Long-term antibiotics are considered in patients with
three or more exacerbations a year. These can be
nebulized antibiotics or oral macrolides (e.g.,
azithromycin).
Cystic fibrosis
Definition and pathophysiology
CF is a multisystem disorder caused by a genetic defect in
the genes encoding the CF transmembrane conductance
regulator (CFTR). The CFTR is a transmembrane regulator
protein involved in chloride transport across epithelial cells
via a complex channel. Loss of function causes excessively
viscous mucus secretions and subsequent multiorgan
dysfunction.
Prevalence and aetiology
CF is the commonest genetically transmitted disease in
whites. It is an autosomal recessive condition occurring in
1/2000 live births. Multiple genetic mutations have been
identified as causing six distinct classes of CFTR defect.
The commonest mutation is a specific gene deletion in the
codon for phenylalanine at position 508 in the amino acid
sequence (ΔF508). In part, the different genetic mutations
contribute to the range of phenotypic presentation of CF
from severe to milder presentations.
Diagnosis and clinical features
Diagnosis is usually made during the neonatal and
childhood period; however, milder phenotypes are being
increasingly recognized in adulthood. In the United
Kingdom, all neonates are screened with the heel prick test
for 
immunoreactive 
trypsinogen, 
prompting 
further
investigation if positive. Childhood symptoms include
failure to thrive, meconium ileus, cough and recurrent
chest infections. Diagnostic tests include:
1. Sweat chloride test—a result of > 60 mmol/L is
suggestive of CF.
2. CFTR genetic mutation testing.
As CF is a multisystem disorder, multiple organs are
affected, as summarized in Fig. 19.4.
FIG 19.4  Multiple organs are affected by cystic fibrosis
(CF).
Treatment
Patients with CF are managed using a multidisciplinary
approach at specialist CF centres with access to respiratory
physicians, 
physiotherapists, 
dieticians, 
pharmacists,
psychologists, gastroenterologists and endocrinologists.
Within CF clinics, infection control is key and patients are
segregated to avoid close contact leading to transfer of
colonized bacteria.
Physiotherapy—patients 
usually 
require 
twice-daily
physiotherapy and postural drainage to aid secretion
management. Active cycle of breathing techniques and
adjuncts including high frequency chest wall oscillation
devices (e.g., the Vest) can be used. General fitness and
exercise are also encouraged.
Hints and tips 
Burden of treatment in cystic fibrosis
Patients with cystic fibrosis (CF) require multiple
different treatments daily throughout their life and this
can be time consuming and severely impact on a patient’s
quality of life. Patients need support to help them comply
with their treatment. On a daily basis each patient may
require:
• Two hours of physiotherapy
• Fifty tablets including pancreatic enzymes, vitamin
supplements and antibiotics
• Nebulized therapy up to four times a day
• Intravenous antibiotics for exacerbations
• Subcutaneous insulin for CF-related diabetes.
Nutritional support—patients with CF have increased
nutritional demands, owing to their respiratory disease and
to CF-related malabsorption and diabetes. They therefore
require involvement of a specialist dietician who can help
plan a diet to meet their needs, including supplements and
enzyme replacement.
Mucolytics—nebulized deoxyribonuclease (DNAse) and
nebulized hypertonic saline can both decrease the viscosity
of respiratory secretions. DNAse has been shown to
improve lung function in studies.
Antiinflammatory 
medications—long-term 
macrolide
antibiotics (e.g., azithromycin) are useful in some patients,
owing to their antiinflammatory properties.
Antibiotics—used in acute exacerbations as documented
later. Patients colonized with P. aeruginosa have more
severe disease and a poorer prognosis; therefore, once
colonized, 
eradication 
therapy 
with 
antipseudomonal
antibiotics is attempted. If eradication is unsuccessful,
long-term 
nebulized 
antibiotics 
may 
be 
used 
(e.g.,
colomycin).
CFTR potentiators—there is good evidence that patients
with a specific mutation (G551D) benefit from ivacaftor, a
drug that keeps the CFTR channel open, therefore
decreasing secretion viscosity and improving lung function.
Work is ongoing to develop other drugs to target other
defects, but as yet none are licensed.
Acute exacerbation
Signs of a pulmonary exacerbation can be symptoms of
worsening 
cough, 
change 
in 
sputum 
production 
or
worsened dyspnoea; however, the presentation may be
more insidious with just weight loss and tiredness. A fall in
forced expiratory volume (FEV1) > 10% may be indicative
of an exacerbation. Treatment of an acute exacerbation
includes:
1. Antibiotics (see Box 19.3: Organisms in cystic
fibrosis)
2. Nutritional support
3. Regular physiotherapy with sputum clearance
techniques
4. Respiratory support—oxygen and, if severe,
ventilator support.
When prescribing antibiotics, reference should be made
to previous culture results, local guidelines and the
patient’s allergy status. Patients with CF commonly need
longer courses (typically 14 days) with higher doses.
Intravenous antibiotics may be needed if severe or if oral
options fail. Treatment with intravenous antibiotics at home
may be an option and requires venous access devices such
as a peripherally inserted central catheter line.
Red flag 
Organisms in cystic fibrosis
As a cystic fibrosis patient gets older, the organisms that
colonize the respiratory tract change. Some, for example,
Pseudomonas or certain resistant bacteria, are associated
with a worse prognosis. Key organisms in time order
include:
1. Staphylococcus aureus
2. Haemophilus influenza type b (Hib)
3. Pseudomonas aeruginosa
4. Burkholderia cepacia.
Surgical management—lung transplant
There are currently five lung transplant centres in England,
carrying out approximately 200 lung transplants a year.
There are three main types—single lung, double lung and
heart and lung transplant. CF is a common indication for
transplant but others include COPD, pulmonary fibrosis and
pulmonary hypertension. Currently the demand for organs
continues to outstrip the supply.
In CF, referral to a transplant centre should be
considered in the following situations:
1. FEV1 < 30% (or rapid decline)
2. Exacerbation requiring high dependency unit or
intensive therapy unit
3. Pneumothorax in advanced disease
4. Haemoptysis requiring embolization
5. Progressive increase in medical therapy required.
In addition to the risks of the operation itself, the main
risks following lung transplant are rejection (both acute
and chronic) and side-effects from immunosuppression.
Lifelong 
immunosuppression 
is 
required 
to 
prevent
rejection of the transplanted lung. The side-effects of
immunosuppression include an increased risk of cancer,
particularly skin and haematological cancer, nephrotoxicity
leading to renal failure and infection, both bacterial and
viral including cytomegalovirus.
Survival following lung transplant differs depending on
the centre; however, it is currently approximately 80% at 1
year, 50% at 5 years and 35% at 10 years, although long-
term survival continues to improve.
Chapter Summary
• Bronchiectasis is defined as abnormal dilatation of the
bronchi and bronchioles caused by repeated cycles of
airway infection and inflammation.
• Bronchiectasis presents as a chronic productive
cough with recurrent infections and is caused by
multiple underlying disorders.
• Treatment of bronchiectasis includes physiotherapy,
mucolytics to aid airway clearance and antibiotics to
treat infection.
• Cystic fibrosis is a genetic multisystem disorder
characterized by excessively viscous mucus
secretions.
• Treatment of cystic fibrosis requires a
multidisciplinary approach with input from
physicians, dieticians, physiotherapists and
psychologists at a specialist centre.
Prognosis of cystic fibrosis
Prognosis is improving: currently, mean survival is around
40 years and babies diagnosed with CF today have a
predicted lifespan of 50 years. Death is mainly from
respiratory complications.
Further reading
British Thoracic Society guideline for non-CF
Bronchiectasis (2010).
Cystic Fibrosis Trust website
(www.cysticfibrosis.org.uk).
20
Pleural disease
Pleural effusion
Introduction
A pleural effusion is the presence of fluid between the
visceral and parietal pleura. Effusions can be categorized
as transudate or exudate, depending on the protein
concentration (Table 20.1). Transudate pleural effusions
(<  25 g/L of protein) occur as a result of increased
hydrostatic pressure or decreased osmotic pressure in the
microvascular circulation, caused by hypoproteinaemia.
Exudate pleural effusions (> 35 g/L of protein) occur when
local factors influencing pleural fluid formation and
reabsorption are altered, through injury or inflammation.
Effusions of 25–35 g/L protein must be analysed using
Light's criteria (see next section). Common causes of each
type of effusion are shown in Table 20.1.
Table 20.1
Light's criteria
These state that the effusion is an exudate if one or more
of the following criteria are met:
• Fluid/serum protein ratio of > 0.5
• Fluid serum lactate dehydrogenase ratio > 0.6
• Fluid lactate dehydrogenase greater than two-thirds
the upper limit of normal serum.
Clinical features
Pleural effusions are typically asymptomatic until > 500 mL
of fluid is present. Breathlessness, dry cough and pleuritic
pain 
suggesting 
pleural 
inflammation 
are 
common
symptoms. 
Constitutional 
symptoms 
related 
to 
the
underlying cause (e.g., weight loss, night sweats and
fevers) may be present.
Signs on examination of the affected side include
decreased expansion, a stony dull percussion note, reduced
or absent breath sounds and reduced vocal resonance over
the area of effusion. Bronchial breathing is often present
above an effusion and a pleural rub may be heard with
pleural inflammation.
Diagnosis and investigations
Key questions when trying to identify the cause of an
effusion include:
1. Is it unilateral or bilateral?
2. Is it a transudate or exudate?
The first steps in making a diagnosis should be to take a
careful history, to perform an examination and to perform a
chest radiograph. In the presence of a strong clinical
suspicion of a transudate and bilateral pleural effusions, for
example, in a patient with suspected left ventricular failure,
pleural fluid aspiration should not be performed. Initial
treatment of the underlying illness followed by clinical
reassessment should take place.
The diagnostic process for a unilateral effusion is
summarized in Fig. 20.1. Classically, pleural effusion
appears on a chest X-ray (CXR) as a basal opacity
obscuring the hemidiaphragm, with a concave meniscus at
its upper border (Fig. 20.2). Fluid can be seen on a
posteroanterior CXR at volumes of > 200 mL.
[ History, clinical examination and CXR J 
Does the clinical picture 
suggest a transudate? 
e.g. LVF, 
hypoalbuminaemia, 
Yes 
Treat the 
dialysis 
~ 
cause 
No 
Refer to chest physician J _ 
Pleural aspiration (with ultrasound guidance) 
Send for: cytology, protein, LDH, pH 
Gram stain, culture and sensitivity 
No 
l 
Yes 
Is it a transudate? 
J 
No 
~ 
Has the fluid analysis and clinical 
features given a diagnosis? 
No 
' 
[ Request contrast-enhanced CT thorax ] 
i 
i 
Consider LA 
Consider radiological 
thoracoscopy or 
guided pleural biopsy 
surgical VATS 
± chest tube drainage 
if symptomatic 
I 
I 
( 
Cause found? J 
Re-consider treatable conditions such as 
PE, TB, chronic heart failure and lymphoma 
Watchful waiting often appropriate 
Yes 
Yes 
Yes 
s 
i---. Resolved 
~ 
No 
·( Treat the cause ) 
· f Treat appropriately ] 
~ r Treat appropriately ] 
FIG. 20.1  British Thoracic Society algorithm for
investigation and treatment of pleural effusion.
CT, Computed tomography; CXR, chest X-ray; LA, left atrium;
LDH, lactate dehydrogenase; LVF, left ventricular failure; PE,
pulmonary embolism; TB, tuberculosis; VATS, video-assisted
thorascopic surgery. (From Hooper C, Lee YC, Maskell N, BTS
Pleural Guideline Group: Investigation of a unilateral pleural
effusion in adults: British Thoracic Society pleural disease
guideline 2010. Thorax 65:ii4–ii17, 2010.)
FIG. 20.2  Chest X-ray image of small left-sided pleural
effusion. (From Corne J, Pointon, K: Chest X-ray made easy,
3rd edition, Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier, 2009.)
Ultrasound imaging can assist with the differentiation
between pleural fluid and solid mass and the identification
of septations within the effusion, and in guiding pleural
aspiration. Diagnostic pleural aspiration is performed
under ultrasound guidance using a 21-gauge needle and
50  mL syringe. The aspiration site should be just above a
rib to avoid the neurovascular bundle that runs just below
each rib. Pleural fluid should be examined for gross
appearance (Table 20.2) and for pH, protein, glucose and
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels; microscopy, culture
and sensitivity (MC&S) and cytology testing should also be
performed. Paired serum LDH and protein should be
tested. Cytology is positive in 60% of malignant effusions.
Table 20.2
Pleural fluid appearances and possible diagnoses
Fluid
appearance
Suspected disease
Straw-coloured
serous fluid
Commonest appearance
Blood-stained
Malignant effusion
Pulmonary embolism with infarction
Haemothorax (check haemocrit level
—if > 50% of the patient’s blood is
haemocrit then diagnostic)
Frank pus or
purulent
fluid
Empyema
Milky fluid
Chylothorax
‘Anchovy
sauce’-like
Ruptured amoebic abscess
A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest with
pleural 
enhancement 
should 
be 
arranged 
in 
all
undiagnosed exudate pleural effusions and in cases of
complex pleural infection that are not resolving with
antibiotics and drainage. If malignancy is suspected but
aspiration has not confirmed diagnosis, thoracoscopy under
local anaesthetic to obtain pleural biopsies, proceeding to
pleurodesis if appropriate, may be considered (see Chapter
10 for further information). Imaging-guided percutaneous
pleural biopsy is an alternative if pleural nodularity is seen
on CT.
Treatment
Treatment is dependent on the underlying disease.
Treatment of transudates should focus on the underlying
cause and they do not routinely require drainage.
Malignant effusion
If asymptomatic, the effusion should be observed, and
treated only if symptoms arise. Effusions can arise from
many types of malignancy; however, they are most
commonly secondary to lung cancer, breast cancer or
lymphoma. Therapeutic aspiration of 500–1500  mL can
help with symptom relief in patients with a very poor life
expectancy. Insertion of a small bore (10–14 French) chest
drain and controlled drainage is preferable to repeated
therapeutic 
aspiration. 
Pleurodesis 
with 
graded 
talc
introduced into the pleural cavity via the chest drain causes
sterile inflammation and adhesion of the visceral and
parietal 
pleura 
and 
prevents 
fluid 
reaccumulation.
Alternatively, ambulatory indwelling pleural catheters can
be used in recurrent symptomatic effusions.
Empyema
This is defined as pus within the pleural space. Formation
of empyema is a progressive process with three recognized
stages, starting with a simple parapneumonic effusion that
progresses to a complicated fibrinopurulent stage and a
final organizing stage with formation of a pleural peel.
Clinical features are similar to the presentation of
pneumonia (fever, sputum, breathlessness). Anaerobic
empyema may present insidiously with only weight loss and
decreased 
appetite, 
especially 
in 
elderly 
patients.
Treatment is with antibiotics that penetrate the pleural
space, commonly penicillin and β-lactamase inhibitors.
Refer to local microbiological guidelines for guidance here.
Supportive 
treatment 
with 
nutrition 
is 
important.
Indications for chest drain insertion are:
1. Aspiration of frank pus/turbid fluid
2. Organisms cultured from the pleural fluid or on
Gram stain
3. Pleural fluid pH < 7.2.
Red flag 
Think empyema
Empyema often presents as a pneumonia which is poorly
responsive to appropriate antibiotics—watch for a failure
of the C-reactive protein level to drop by >  50% in 72
hours or ongoing fevers. Consider empyema in these
patients and investigate.
If infection persists despite adequate antibiotic treatment
and drainage, surgical treatment may be required and
referral to the thoracic surgeons is indicated.
Haemothorax
Haemothorax refers to blood in the pleural cavity. It is
common in both penetrating and nonpenetrating injuries of
the chest and may cause hypovolaemic shock and reduced
vital capacity through compression.
Blood may originate from the lungs, internal mammary
artery, mediastinal great vessels, heart or abdominal
structures via the diaphragm.
Haemothoraces can be classified as either massive
(estimated blood volume >  1.5 L) or small (<  1.5 L).
Massive 
haemothoraces 
usually 
require 
thoracotomy,
whereas smaller ones can be treated expectantly with chest
drains and medical management.
Chylothorax
A chylothorax is an accumulation of lymph in the pleural
space. Commonest causes are rupture or obstruction of the
thoracic duct caused by surgical trauma or neoplasm, e.g.,
lymphoma. A latent period of 2–10 days occurs between
injury and onset. The pleural fluid is high in lipid content
and is characteristically milky in appearance. If suspected,
pleural fluid should be tested for cholesterol crystals,
chylomicrons, and triglyceride and cholesterol levels, to
help differentiate from a pseudochylothorax. Levels of
triglyceride and chylomicrons will be high in true
chylothorax, whilst levels of cholesterol are high in
pseudochylothorax.
Chest drain insertion
Chest drains can be used for the drainage of air, pus or
liquid (effusion or blood) from the pleural space.
Indications
• Pneumothorax:
◦ Ventilated patients
◦ Tension pneumothorax (after initial needle
relief)
◦ Persistent or recurrent pneumothorax
◦ Large secondary spontaneous pneumothorax
• Malignant pleural effusions for pleurodesis
• Empyema
• Traumatic haemopneumothorax
• Postsurgical procedures, especially cardiothoracic.
Chest drain insertion should be performed by a
competent practitioner under ultrasound guidance in a
sterile environment. Two methods of insertion are used—
the ‘Seldinger’ technique involving insertion of the drain
over a guide wire and the ‘surgical’ technique involving
blunt dissection down to the pleural cavity. Where possible,
drains should be inserted in the ‘triangle of safety’ as
shown in Fig. 20.3. Drains are available in several different
sizes based on their diameter and sized by the French
gauge system, from small ‘6 French’ drains to large ‘24
French’ drains. The size of drain used depends on the
reason for insertion, for example, larger 18 French drains
are used for empyema to prevent thick pus blocking the
drain. Once inserted, the drain should be connected to a
chest drain bottle with an underwater seal to prevent air
entry into the pleural cavity. Unless during an emergency,
chest drains should not be inserted out of hours. Full
guidelines for insertion are available in the British Thoracic
Society (BTS) guidelines 2010.
FIG. 20.3  The safe triangle for chest drain insertion.
(Redrawn from Laws D, Neville E, Duffy J, et al. BTS
guidelines for the insertion of a chest drain. Thorax 58:ii53–
ii59, 2003.)
Basic chest drain management
Fluid should not be drained too quickly and the drain
should be clamped if draining > 1.5 L in an hour. This is to
prevent 
the 
development 
of 
reexpansion 
pulmonary
oedema, symptoms of which include chest pain and
breathlessness. CXR should be obtained after insertion to
check the drain position. The drain should be reviewed
daily for:
1. Insertion site—check for surgical emphysema and
evidence of drain site infection.
2. Drain fluid output—a drain output chart should be
kept with cumulative fluid output.
3. Evidence of ‘swinging’—fluid movement with
respiration as intrapleural pressures change. This
suggests the drain is correctly positioned and patent.
Ask the patient to take a big breath in and out whilst
observing the drain.
4. Evidence of ‘bubbling’—suggestive of persistent air
leak from the lung into the pleural cavity. Ask the
patient to cough to check for air leak. A bubbling
chest drain should never be clamped as this
may lead to tension pneumothorax.
If the drain is no longer swinging or bubbling, a repeat
CXR to evaluate the effusion or pneumothorax should be
considered. Normal saline ‘flushes’ into the pleural cavity
can be used to check drain patency and are frequently
prescribed to be performed regularly to avoid drain
blockage in empyema. In pneumothorax the drain can be
removed once the air leak has stopped and the lung can be
seen fully reinflated on CXR. In pleural effusion or
empyema, the drain can be removed once fluid drainage is
complete.
Pneumothorax
Definition
Pneumothorax is air within the pleural space, between the
lungs and the chest wall. It is classified as ‘spontaneous’,
traumatic or iatrogenic (commonly following lung biopsy).
Primary spontaneous pneumothorax (PSP) occurs in
people 
with 
apparently 
healthy 
lungs. 
Secondary
spontaneous pneumothorax (SSP) occurs in patients with
underlying lung disease. SSP is associated with a higher
morbidity and mortality than PSP and its management is
often more complex.
Aetiology
Primary spontaneous pneumothorax
Anatomical abnormalities such as subpleural blebs and
apical bullae have been found in people with PSP and are
thought to predispose to an air leak. Small airway
inflammation is also present and may contribute to increase
airway resistance causing ‘emphysema-like changes’.
Patients are typically tall, thin young males (age range
20–40 years). Male:female ratio is 5:1. Smoking is a
significant risk factor for developing PSP. It is associated
with a 12% risk in healthy smoking men compared with
0.1% in nonsmoking men. PSP is more common in patients
with Marfan syndrome and homocystinuria. Rarely, PSP is
familial: Birt–Hogg–Dube syndrome is an autosomal-
dominant mutation in the folliculin gene that predisposes to
spontaneous 
pneumothorax 
following 
pulmonary 
cyst
rupture.
Recurrence risk within 4 years is approximately 50% and
is highest in smokers, with increasing age and with tall
height.
Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax
This is most commonly caused by chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) but can be caused by any
underlying lung disease. When first described, tuberculosis
(TB) was the most common cause. SSP may be the first
presentation of an undiagnosed lung disease. Rare causes
to 
consider 
include 
catamenial 
pneumothorax
(pneumothorax 
occurring 
at 
the 
same 
time 
as
menstruation), Pneumocystis Pneumonia (PCP) infection,
especially in patients diagnosed with HIV infection,
Langerhans 
cell 
histiocytosis 
and
lymphangioleiomyomatosis.
Clinical features
Common symptoms include:
• Sudden-onset unilateral pleuritic chest pain
• Dyspnoea
• Rapid deterioration in existing lung condition (e.g.,
COPD).
Many patients present with only minimal symptoms,
especially patients with PSP who may not present for
several days. In general, symptoms are more severe for
those with SSP than PSP. Correlation between symptom
burden and pneumothorax size is not reliable in SSP. If
cardiorespiratory 
distress 
is 
present, 
tension
pneumothorax must be considered and dealt with as a
medical 
emergency 
(see 
Tension 
pneumothorax
section).
Examination may reveal the following signs on the side of
the pneumothorax:
• Reduced chest expansion
• Hyperresonance to percussion
• Diminished breath sounds.
Investigations
Chest X-ray
A standard erect CXR in inspiration is recommended for
diagnosis. Characteristically, displacement of the pleural
line with absent lung markings peripherally can be seen
(Fig. 20.4). CXR tends to underestimate the size of
pneumothorax.
FIG. 20.4  Left-sided pneumothorax. (From Corne J, Pointon
K. Chest X-ray made easy, 3rd edition, Churchill Livingstone,
Elsevier, 2009.)
Red flag 
Beware the bullae
Bullous lung disease can give similar appearances—if
there is diagnostic uncertainty further imaging is
recommended as management is very different!
Chest computed tomography
This is regarded as the gold standard for detection of small
pneumothoraces and size estimation. It has the added
advantage 
of 
identifying 
additional 
lung 
pathology;
however, because of cost and availability constraints, it is
not the first line investigation.
USS
This has recently emerged as a tool in diagnosing
pneumothoraces in critically ill or trauma patients where
erect CXR is not available. The sonographer looks for the
loss of ‘lung sliding’ and the presence of the ‘stratosphere
sign’.
Management
The aim of treatment is to relieve symptoms and resolve
the pneumothorax by allowing the pleural air leak to close.
Management of spontaneous pneumothoraces depends
upon whether the pneumothorax is:
• Primary or secondary
• Asymptomatic or symptomatic.
Initial treatment options include observation, high-flow
oxygen, needle aspiration and small bore (<  14 French)
intercostal chest drain insertion with connection to an
underwater drain. As well as correcting hypoxaemia, high-
flow oxygen increases the rate of pneumothorax resolution.
The BTS guidelines provide a useful treatment algorithm
for pneumothorax (see Fig. 20.5).
FIG. 20.5  BTS pleural disease guideline 2010—
Management of spontaneous pneumothorax.
CXR, Chest X-ray; OPD, outpatient department. (With
permission from MacDuff A, Arnold A, Harvey J, BTS Pleural
Disease Guideline Group: Management of spontaneous
pneumothorax: British Thoracic Society pleural disease
guideline 2010; Thorax 65:ii18–ii31, 2010.)
In PSP, therapeutic aspiration is recommended if the
patient is symptomatic or the interpleural distance is
> 2 cm at the level of the hilum when measured on CXR. If
successful, the patient may be discharged with outpatient
follow-up; however, if the pneumothorax does not decrease
in size with aspiration, a chest drain is likely required.
SSP carries a mortality of 10% and therefore more
aggressive treatment is recommended. Insertion of a chest
drain is recommended if the patient is breathless or the
interpleural distance is > 2 cm.
Bilateral pneumothoraces and tension pneumothoraces
always require chest drain insertion.
Persistent air leak
This is defined as the persistent bubbling of air through a
correctly placed chest drain after 48 hours. Low pressure
suction (− 10 to − 20 cm H2O) can be applied to encourage
apposition of the pleura and closure of the air leak. This
risks reexpansion pulmonary oedema (RPO) that manifests
as cough and chest tightness. RPO is more common in PSP
and with early suction (< 48 hours post drain insertion).
Surgical management
In cases with persistent air leak at 3–5 days post drain
insertion or where the lung fails to reexpand, as viewed on
CXR, a thoracic surgery opinion should be sought. Surgical
management options include:
• Video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS) with
pleurectomy and pleural abrasion.
• Open thoracotomy and pleurectomy.
Recurrence rates are slightly higher with VATS than open
thoracotomy; however, recovery is much quicker following
VATS.
Chemical pleurodesis
For patients with recurrent or difficult pneumothoraces
who are not fit for surgical management, chemical
pleurodesis to prevent recurrence can be considered. A
sclerosing agent such as tetracycline or sterile graded talc
is instilled via the intercostal drain to cause aseptic pleural
inflammation and adhesion of the visceral and parietal
pleura. Recurrence rates remain significant so surgical
methods are preferred, if possible.
Hints and tips 
Air travel and diving
Air travel: Avoid for at least a week after full resolution of
the 
pneumothorax, 
as 
confirmed 
by 
chest 
X-ray.
However, the British Thoracic Society advises that the
risk of recurrence remains increased for a year following
the pneumothorax and therefore patients may want to
minimize air travel in this time.
Diving: Advise patients with pneumothoraces never to
dive again unless a very secure definitive prevention
strategy has been performed.
Tension pneumothorax
Tension pneumothorax is a medical emergency that
can lead to cardiac arrest. It can arise from a variety of
clinical situations in both ventilated and nonventilated
patients but most often occurs following trauma or in
patients with known pneumothoraces.
Pathogenesis
It occurs when a one-way valve system is formed at the site
of the pleural membrane tear. Air is able to move into the
pleural cavity during inspiration but not out during
expiration. As a result, intrapleural pressure exceeds
atmospheric pressure. This impairs venous return to the
heart 
and 
reduces 
cardiac 
output. 
This 
leads 
to
haemodynamic compromise.
Clinical features
• Agitation and respiratory distress
• Tracheal deviation away from the pneumothorax side
• Decreased breath sounds and hyperresonance on the
affected side
• Raised jugular venous pressure, hypotension and
tachycardia
• Cardiac arrest—commonly pulseless electrical
activity arrest.
Investigation
These are rarely useful in tension pneumothorax as there is
usually insufficient time to obtain a CXR. Do not wait for a
CXR if diagnosis is clinically certain or the patient is
significantly compromised, as you risk cardiac arrest.
Traditionally, a CXR showing a tension should never be
obtained.
Management
Immediate management should be the insertion of a large-
bore cannula (the biggest you can find) into the second
intercostal space midclavicular line, on the side of the
pneumothorax—see Fig.20.6 for the anatomical landmarks.
An audible ‘hiss’ can be heard on successful insertion that
corresponds to the air escaping the intrapleural space.
Once the immediate pressure has been relieved and the
patient stabilized, a chest drain should be inserted.
FIG 20.6  Diagram showing anatomical landmarks for
needle decompression in a tension pneumothorax.
Neoplasms of the pleura: malignant
mesothelioma
Malignant mesothelioma is a tumour of mesothelial
surfaces, most commonly affecting the pleura. The
incidence of mesothelioma is 3.2/100,000 in adult males in
the United Kingdom, and has been increasing since
recordings began in the 1960s and is projected to reach its
peak in the next 5 years. It is associated with occupational
exposure to asbestos in 85% of cases, especially fibres less
than 0.25 μm in diameter (e.g., crocidolite and amosite).
The median latent period between exposure and disease is
40 years. Mesothelioma has heterogenous histology,
however the three main subtypes are:
1. Epithelioid (associated with a better prognosis)
2. Sarcomatoid
3. Biphasic.
The tumour begins as nodules in the pleura and goes on
to obliterate the pleural cavity.
Clinical features
Initial 
symptoms 
are 
commonly 
chest 
pain 
and
breathlessness 
related 
to 
pleural 
effusion. 
Systemic
features such as weight loss may be present. It rarely
presents 
with 
symptomatic 
metastases. 
A 
detailed
occupational exposure is key with particular references to
occupations with known asbestos exposure including
asbestos 
manufacture, 
ship 
building 
and 
building
maintenance. Consider mesothelioma in all patients with
pleural effusion or pleural thickening.
Investigations
Features of the chest radiograph are:
• Pleural effusions
• Unilateral pleural thickening
• Nodular pleural appearance.
If pleural effusion is present, investigations should
proceed 
as 
detailed 
previously. 
Pleural 
biopsy 
via
thoracoscopy or an imaging-guided pleural biopsy can
provide tissue diagnosis.
Treatment and prognosis
Currently treatment involves a multidisciplinary approach
to symptom control and palliation through chemotherapy
and radiotherapy. No curative treatment is currently
available. For patients with a good performance status at
diagnosis (PS 0–2), systemic chemotherapy with two
agents, commonly cisplatin and pemetrexed, can extend life
by 2–3 months. Palliative radiotherapy to the chest wall can
be considered to alleviate pain. Specialist nurses should be
involved in patient care from diagnosis and early referral to
palliative care services for symptom control is important.
Prognosis is very poor, with a median survival of 8–14
months.
Compensation and mesothelioma
It is important when making a diagnosis of mesothelioma to
supply 
the 
patient 
with 
medicolegal 
advice 
about
compensation, and the physician making the diagnosis and
specialist nurses are often best placed to do this. Patients
are entitled to claim compensation via two avenues:
1. Industrial Injuries Disablement Benefit via the
government Department for Work and Pensions.
2. A civil law claim via the courts for compensation
from the employer or their insurance company. Any
claim must be brought within 3 years of diagnosis.
Hints and tips 
Asbestos-related lung disease
In addition to mesothelioma, asbestos can cause other
lung diseases:
1. Benign—pleural plaques, benign effusion, diffuse
pleural thickening
2. Asbestosis—interstitial fibrosis related to asbestos
inhalation
3. Lung cancer.
Chapter summary
• Pleural effusions can be categorized as transudates or
exudates based on their protein and lactate
dehydrogenase content. Knowing these helps to
diagnose the cause of the effusion and guide
management.
• Empyema is defined as pus within the pleural space,
and is suggested by a pH < 7.2 on pleural aspiration.
It requires prompt drainage.
• Whilst admitted to the ward, patients with chest
drains inserted should be reviewed daily for drain
position, fluid output and evidence of ‘swinging’ or
‘bubbling’.
• Management of a pneumothorax depends on whether
it is traumatic or spontaneous, the presence or
absence of underlying lung disease, the size of the
pneumothorax and the patient’s symptoms.
• A tension pneumothorax is a medical emergency that
needs to be treated with urgent needle
decompression using a large-bore cannula inserted
into the second intercostal space midclavicular line.
• Mesothelioma is a cancer affecting the pleura that
presents with chest pain. It is related to previous
asbestos exposure and has a very poor prognosis.
Further reading
Laws D., Neville E., Duffy J. BTS guidelines for
the insertion of a chest drain. Thorax.
2003;58: ii53–ii59.
British Thoracic Society Pleural Disease
Guideline 2010.
British Thoracic Society Statement on
Malignant Mesothelioma in the UK. 2007.
Malignant Pleural Mesothelioma: ESMO
practice guidelines. 2015.
21
Thromboembolic disease
and pulmonary
hypertension
Pulmonary embolism
Definition
A pulmonary embolus (PE) arises when an embolus derived
from a venous thrombus is transported in the bloodstream
and obstructs the pulmonary vascular tree.
Epidemiology
PE is a common condition amongst the general population.
The incidence of venous thromboembolism (VTE), defined
as PE and deep vein thrombosis (DVT) combined, is 100–
200 per 100,000 inhabitants. The incidence of acute PE is
difficult to define due to its range of presentations from an
asymptomatic incidental finding to sudden death.
Aetiology
PE most commonly arises from thrombi originating in the
deep 
venous 
system 
of 
the 
lower 
limb. 
Venous
ultrasonography demonstrates the presence of DVT in
30%–50% of patients with acute PE, and DVT has been
found by venography in 70% of those with proven PE.
There are multiple predisposing factors for VTE and these
are summarized in Table 21.1. They can be split into
patient-related risk factors, usually permanent, and setting-
related risk factors that are usually temporary. PE is
considered ‘provoked’ if temporary risk factors are present
within the preceding 3 months. These are important to
identify as their presence can affect anticoagulation
duration. In acute PE, 30% of cases have no identifiable
risk factors.
Table 21.1
HRT, hormone replacement therapy; OCP, oral contraceptive pill; VTE, venous
thromboembolism.
Clinical features
The presentation of acute PE is greatly variable, from
asymptomatic 
to 
sudden 
death. 
Common 
symptoms
include:
• Sudden-onset pleuritic chest pain
• Dyspnoea
• Haemoptysis
• Syncope or presyncope.
Clinical features can include signs of a lower limb DVT—a
swollen or tender calf.
Hypotension and features of shock are rare but indicate
haemodynamic instability from acute PE and should be
identified and treated as a medical emergency (see later for
more details).
Investigations
• Chest X-ray (CXR) is not sensitive or specific in the
diagnosis of PE but is a valuable tool for excluding
other causes of symptoms, e.g., pneumothorax.
Hints and tips 
Chest X-ray signs of pulmonary embolus
Chest X-ray in pulmonary embolus is frequently normal. When
present, chest X-ray abnormalities include an enlarged pulmonary
artery and a peripheral wedge-shaped airspace opacity that often
implies lung infarction.
• Arterial blood gas sampling—to assess for a relative
hypoxia. The A-a gradient can be a useful tool here
(see Ch. 12,).
• Electrocardiogram (ECG)—the most common
abnormality is a sinus tachycardia. In severe cases
the ECG may show signs of right ventricular strain
(T-wave inversion V1–4 and the inferior leads and
right bundle branch block). Classically, the ECG
shows S1-Q3-T3; however, this is rare in practice.
Atrial tachycardias, particularly atrial fibrillation,
can be associated with PE.
• A D-dimer test should only be performed where there
is a low probability of a PE. The index of suspicion
for a PE can be determined clinically using the Wells
score (Table 21.2). D-dimer is a fibrin degradation
product that is present in the blood following
fibrinolysis. It can be elevated in other situations,
including infection, renal failure and postsurgery. A
negative test result makes the presence of an acute
PE very unlikely in low probability individuals but
does not exclude PE in higher risk patients.
Table 21.2
bpm, Beats per minute; DVT, deep vein thrombosis; PE, pulmonary
embolism.
• A computed tomography pulmonary angiogram
(CTPA) allows direct imaging of the clot, and thus
accurate assessment of clot size, number and
location. It is now the preferred method of
diagnostic imaging.
• Radioisotope ventilation:perfusion (V/Q) scans
demonstrate ventilated areas of lung and filling
defects on the corresponding perfusion scans. They
are useful in patients who are unable to have
contrast (e.g., in renal failure or contrast allergy) or
where avoiding radiation is important, such as in
pregnant women. See Box 21.2 for further
information. They are not helpful if the CXR is
abnormal.
Red flag 
Venous thromboembolism in pregnancy and
the puerperium
Diagnosis
Initial investigations should include an electrocardiogram and chest
X-ray (CXR). D-dimer will be raised owing to pregnancy and
therefore should not be performed as a diagnostic test. Ultrasound
Doppler of the lower limbs should be performed if deep vein
thrombosis is suspected and, if a clot is found, treatment is initiated
with no further investigation needed. If the initial CXR is abnormal
and there is a clinical suspicion of pulmonary embolus, then
computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) should be
performed. If the CXR is normal, either CTPA or low-dose perfusion
(Q) scan can be performed—reference should be made to local
guidelines. CTPA and low-dose perfusion scans both confer a small
radiation dose risk to the fetus. Pregnant women should give
consent for this prior to proceeding. Advantages of CTPA include
its ease of availability and its ability to diagnose alternative
pathology; however, it confers a high radiation dose to the mother’s
breast tissue and therefore increases lifetime breast cancer risk.
Management
Low-molecular-weight heparin is safe during pregnancy as it does
not cross the placenta. The maternal booking body weight should
be used to calculate the therapeutic dose in the treatment of a
nonmassive pulmonary embolus (PE). Warfarin is teratogenic,
therefore should not be used. Systemic thrombolysis can be
administered in massive PE; however, in high-risk patients, surgical
embolectomy and lower-dose catheter-directed thrombolysis should
be considered, if available.
• Echocardiography may be useful in the acute setting
to examine for acute right ventricular failure and
may help guide thrombolysis decisions if a patient is
too unwell for CTPA.
A 
diagnostic 
algorithm 
for 
suspected 
PE 
in 
a
haemodynamically stable patient is shown in Fig. 21.1.
FIG. 21.1  Diagnostic algorithm for suspected pulmonary
embolism. CT, Computed tomography; PE, pulmonary
embolism. (European Society of Cardiology guidelines) (From
Konstantinides SV, Torbicki A, Agnelli G et al. 2014 ESC
guidelines on the diagnosis and management of acute
pulmonary embolism, Eur Heart J 35:3033-3069, 3069a-
3069k, 2014.)
Management
Management of acute PE starts with the assessment of
whether the patient is in cardiogenic shock secondary to
the PE.
Hypotensive/shocked patients
This is defined as a systolic blood pressure of < 90 mmHg
or a drop of >  40  mmHg persisting after 15 minutes of
appropriate fluid resuscitation and in the absence of an
alternative cause (e.g., sepsis). If shock is present,
thrombolysis with a ‘clot-busting’ drug recombinant tissue-
type plasminogen activator (e.g., alteplase) may be
indicated providing there are no contraindications, which
include 
intracranial 
haemorrhage, 
suspected 
aortic
dissection or ischaemic stroke within 3 months.
Stable patients
If 
the 
patient 
is 
stable, 
treatment 
is 
based 
on
anticoagulation and supportive management (oxygen and
analgesia). 
Initially, 
low-molecular-weight 
heparin 
or
unfractionated 
heparin 
(UFH) 
should 
be 
given
subcutaneously or by intravenous infusion. UFH is used in
patients with a high risk of bleeding or in severe renal
failure. If diagnostic scanning is likely to be delayed for
over 4 hours, anticoagulation should be started while
awaiting confirmation of diagnosis. Once confirmed, the
patient can be initiated on a vitamin K antagonist
(warfarin) or a direct oral anticoagulant, and treatment
should continue for at least 3 months; see Table 21.3 for
further 
details 
on 
anticoagulation 
in 
VTE. 
A 
full
examination, including a breast examination in women and
a urine dipstick, should be performed to assess for occult
malignancy 
as 
a 
predisposing 
risk 
factor. 
Further
investigations can be guided by examination findings.
Anticoagulation treatment may be extended to lifelong if
the patient has had multiple embolic events or no clear
precipitating reversible cause was identified. Patients are
often seen in a VTE clinic to review this at 3 months.
Table 21.3
IV, intravenous; UFH, unfractionated heparin; VTE, venous thromboembolism
Risk stratification
The pulmonary embolism severity index score can be used
following acute PE to predict prognosis by looking at risk
factors, including age >  80 years, previous medical
conditions and clinical factors at presentation. A score of
one or more points conveys a 30-day mortality risk of
10.9%.
Prevention
Hospital inpatients are at high risk of developing VTE. All
hospital inpatients must have VTE forms completed on
admission to assess their risk. Methods to decrease risk
include:
• Early mobilization of patients after operations
• Use of tight elastic stockings (TED stockings)
• Prophylactic anticoagulation for hospital inpatients
at risk.
Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary
hypertension
Chronic thromboembolic disease develops in 0.5%–4% of
patients following acute PE with an increased risk in those
with large, unprovoked or recurrent clots. If suspected,
patients should undergo echocardiogram to look for
evidence of pulmonary hypertension, and a repeat CTPA to
assess for chronic clot formation. Lifelong anticoagulation
should be continued in this case. If a surgical candidate,
patients can undergo pulmonary endarterectomy to remove
the chronic thrombus with the aim of improving symptoms
(Fig. 21.2).
FIG. 21.2  Chronic thrombus removed at pulmonary
endarterectomy. (From Chronic thromboembolic pulmonary
hypertension: Treatment, Medscape Pulmonary Medicine,
2007, Medscape.)
Pulmonary hypertension
Definition and pathophysiology
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) is defined as a mean
pulmonary artery pressure of >  25  mmHg at rest, as
assessed by right heart catheterization. The normal range
for pulmonary artery pressure is 14 ± 3 mmHg. There are
multiple different mechanisms of disease leading to
elevated pulmonary artery pressure. They are broadly
divided into five groups (Table 21.4).
Table 21.4
COPD, Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; ILD, interstitial lung disease; PAH,
pulmonary artery hypertension; PH, pulmonary hypertension.
In pulmonary artery hypertension (PAH) (group 1), an
imbalance of vasoactive mediators leads to a progressive
narrowing of the pulmonary arterial bed and, consequently,
raised 
pulmonary 
artery 
pressures. 
In 
chronic
thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension (CTEPH) (group
4), the pressure increases owing to mechanical obstruction
by the thrombus within the pulmonary arterial system.
Chronic hypoxia caused by lung disease (group 3) leads to
vascular destruction and vasoconstriction and, eventually,
raised pulmonary artery pressures. Thus the disease
processes 
are 
heterogenous; 
however, 
the 
end
physiological result is the same. Classification is important
as it helps guide treatment and prognosis.
Epidemiology
The reported prevalence of PH in the United Kingdom is 97
cases per million population. Data showing comparative
prevalence between different classification groups is poor;
however, PH secondary to left heart disease is accepted as
the most common cause.
Idiopathic PAH is rare in the general population;
however, within certain population groups the prevalence
is high, for example, it is 9% in those with systemic
sclerosis. Mutations in the bone morphogenetic receptor 2
(BMPR2) gene are implicated in 75% of familial PAH.
Presentation
Patients initially have nonspecific insidious symptoms with
few clinical signs, and as such the condition is often
diagnosed late. The commonest symptom is progressive
exertional dyspnoea. Signs are usually owing to heart
failure secondary to raised pulmonary pressures (e.g.,
raised JVP, accentuated P2 of the second heart sound, a
third heart sound, right ventricular parasternal heave,
tricuspid regurgitation, pedal oedema and ascites) but may
be indicative of the underlying disease (e.g., connective
tissue disease).
Investigation
Investigation focuses on diagnosing PH and assessing for
underlying causes. Common investigations include an ECG,
looking for signs of right ventricular hypertrophy; a CXR to
look for evidence of cardiac failure and any underlying
respiratory pathology; and full pulmonary function tests,
including transfer factor (a measure of the capacity of the
lung to transfer gas from the air to the blood). CTPA may
be considered to look for CTEPH, especially if there is
known 
previous 
thromboembolic 
disease.
Echocardiography can be used to estimate systolic
pulmonary artery pressure and therefore predict the risk of
PH. Diagnosis can only be confirmed using right heart
catheterization, where further measurements such as the
pulmonary arterial wedge pressure can be obtained and
help differentiate the cause. A raised pulmonary arterial
wedge pressure may suggest PH secondary to left heart
disease.
Management
Treatment is specific to diagnostic group. If left heart
disease or pulmonary disease is the underlying cause,
treatment should focus on these. Supportive measures for
all patients include diuretics to treat the symptoms of right
heart failure, flu vaccination and long-term oxygen therapy.
Maternal mortality remains high in women with PH during
pregnancy and therefore women should be counselled and
offered 
contraceptive 
therapy. 
Anticoagulation 
and
pulmonary endarterectomy are considered as specific
treatments for CTEPH.
Further medical treatment options exist for PAH. High
dose calcium channel blockers such as diltiazem are of
benefit in a small proportion of patients with idiopathic
PAH. Prediction of response to calcium channel blockers
can be assessed with vasoactive testing during right heart
catheterization. Several other vasodilator drugs have been
shown to improve exercise capacity and these are
summarized in Table 21.5. Lung transplant may be
considered in severe end-stage disease.
Table 21.5
Drugs licensed in the treatment of pulmonary
hypertension
Drug class
Examples
Route
Prostanoids
Prostacyclin
Iloprost
IV infusion
Nebulized
and IV
Endothelin receptor
antagonists
Bosentan
Ambrisentan
Oral
Phosphodiesterase 5
inhibitors
Sildenafil
Oral
IV, Intravenous.
Prognosis
This is poor, as disease is often detected late, can be
rapidly progressive and response to treatment is variable.
Mean survival is 2–3 years from diagnosis. Death is usually
secondary to right heart failure.
Chapter Summary
• Pulmonary embolus (PE) is a common condition that
presents with chest pain and breathlessness, and it
can carry a high mortality if left untreated.
• Key diagnostic tests for PE include a D-dimer test
based on a patient’s Wells score, and subsequent
computed tomography pulmonary angiogram or V/Q
scanning.
• PE can be subdivided into ‘massive’ or ‘nonmassive’
depending on whether the patient is
haemodynamically stable. Acute treatment is guided
by this distinction.
• Diagnosis and management of PE in pregnant women
differs from the nonpregnant population and
specialist advice should be sought.
• Pulmonary hypertension is the end result of multiple
different pathologies and is defined as a mean
pulmonary artery pressure of > 25 mmHg at right
heart catheterization.
• Pulmonary hypertension presents with exertional
dyspnoea and, latterly, signs of right heart failure.
Further reading
European Society of Cardiology Clinical
Practical Guidelines, 2009. Pulmonary
Hypertension (Guidelines on Diagnosis and
Treatment of). Available online at:
http://www.escardio.org/guidelines-
surveys/esc-guidelines/Pages/pulmonary-
arterial- hypertension.aspx.
Condliffe, et al. Pulmonary hypertension:
Diagnosis & Management. In: BMJ. 2013.
NICE guidelines thromboembolic disease.
2014 ESC Guidelines on the diagnosis and
management of acute 2014 ESC Guidelines on
the diagnosis and management of acute
pulmonary embolism: The Task Force for the
Diagnosis and Management of Acute
Pulmonary Embolism of the European Society
of Cardiology (ESC).
RCOG Green Top Guidelines No 37b –
Thromboembolic Disease in Pregnancy and
the Puerperium. April 2015.
22
Sleep disorders
Sleep apnoea
Sleep apnoea is the cessation of breathing during sleep.
There are two recognized forms: obstructive sleep apnoea
(OSA) and central sleep apnoea. Whilst both share the
common apnoeic episodes—suspension of breathing for
short periods—the pathogenesis is quite different for each
condition. Whilst OSA is becoming an increasingly common
condition, central sleep apnoea remains rare.
Obstructive sleep apnoea
In OSA, there is either partial (hypopnoea) or total
(apnoea) collapse of the pharyngeal airway during sleep,
causing arousal and partial wakening. This phenomenon
occurs multiple times during the night, resulting in
interrupted, nonrestorative sleep.
Prevalence
It is estimated that 1 in 10 people over the age of 65 years
in the United States, and 1.5 million people in the United
Kingdom, suffer from OSA. Although OSA can affect
anyone, it is more common in those who are overweight
and obese, affecting up to 70% of morbidly obese
individuals. Whilst true figures are unknown, it is estimated
that half of all OSA cases are in overweight individuals.
With the current obesity crisis in the developed world the
prevalence is increasing, and, whilst awareness of the
condition is improving, it is thought that many cases
remain undiagnosed.
Pathogenesis
OSA results from occlusion of the upper airway and is
common in overweight, middle-aged men. On inspiration
upper-airway pressure becomes negative, but airway
patency is maintained by upper-airway muscle (e.g.,
genioglossus) tone. During deep sleep, these muscles relax
causing narrowing of the upper airways, even in normal
subjects. However, if the airway is already narrowed, for
example, by the weight of adipose tissue in obese patients
or because of a small jaw (micrognathia), the airway
collapses and OSA results. Other risk factors include:
• Down syndrome
• Adenotonsillar hypertrophy
• Soft tissue deposition seen in hypothyroidism or
amyloidosis
• Macroglossia—enlarged tongue (seen in acromegaly)
• Nasal obstruction (as in rhinitis)
• Alcohol (which reduces the arousal response and has
been shown to reduce muscle tone.
A cycle is generated during sleep in which:
• The upper-airway dilating muscles lose tone (usually
accompanied by loud snoring)
• The airway is occluded
• The patient wakes (often not completely, patients are
not consciously aware of the waking process)
• The airway reopens.
As a consequence of this cycle, sleep is unrefreshing and
daytime 
sleepiness 
is 
common, 
particularly 
during
monotonous situations such as motorway driving. Each
arousal also causes a transient rise in blood pressure
through a burst of sympathetic activity and catecholamine
release, which in combination with hypoxaemia may lead to
sustained 
hypertension, 
pulmonary 
hypertension, 
cor
pulmonale, ischaemic heart disease and stroke.
Clinical features
• Chronic snoring, with pauses in breathing, followed
by a choking or gasping sound (often noticed by
partners rather than the patient themselves)
• Daytime somnolence
• Morning headaches
• Difficulty concentrating
• Mood swings
• Dry throat
• Loss of libido.
In addition to the above, the patient may appear obese
and have a wide neck or small jaw, enlarged tonsils or
nasal obstruction (polyps, deviated septum).
Investigations
Patients can have the severity of their suspected sleep
apnoea assessed using the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (see
http://epworthsleepinessscale.com/ and Box 22.1), a scale
used to assess daytime somnolence. A score of 9 or less is
normal. Between 10 and 15 indicates likely mild-to-
moderate disease, and specialist medical advice should be
sought. A score of 16 or over is indicative of severe disease.
Box 22.1
Epworth sleepiness score
How likely are you to doze off or fall asleep in the
following situations, rather than just feeling tired? From
0 = would never doze to 3 = high chance of dozing.
Situation
Score (0-
3)
Sitting and reading
Watching TV
Sitting inactive in a public place (e.g.,
theatre or meeting)
As a passenger in a car for an hour without a
break
Lying down in the afternoon to rest
Sitting and talking to someone
Sitting quietly after lunch (without alcohol)
In a car whilst stopped in traffic
Copyright NW Johns 1990–1997.
Patients are subsequently referred to a sleep or
respiratory specialist for overnight sleep studies and
polysomnography (Fig. 22.1): 15 apnoeas/hypoapnoeas (of
10 seconds or longer) per hour of sleep is diagnostic. These
apnoeic episodes are usually associated with oxygen
desaturation of >  4%. The following parameters are
measured:
• Brain activity (assess stage of sleep with
electroencephalography (EEG)).
• Eye movements
• Oxygen and carbon dioxide levels
• Blood pressure and pulse
• Inspiratory and expiratory flow.
FIG. 22.1  Example results of polysomnographs showing
the two types of sleep apnoea. Sleep apnoea can be
detected by reduced air flow and a delayed desaturation
following the apnoea. Normally, the thorax and abdomen
move in the same direction; however, in obstructive sleep
apnoea the thorax and abdomen move in opposite directions
to each other—an abnormal pattern called paradoxical
breathing. Conversely, in central sleep apnoea there is
neither thoracic nor abdominal movement because the
respiratory centre in the brain has stopped instructing the
respiratory muscles to move.
This is the gold standard investigation. In practical terms,
sleep studies are increasingly carried out in the patient’s
own home using a portable kit (without EEG or advanced
monitoring).
Treatment
Weight loss is a key treatment for those who are
overweight, not just for the apnoea but also for the other
metabolic 
syndrome-associated 
risks. 
This 
is 
often
challenging 
and 
can 
require 
significant 
support 
to
maintain, with more extreme measures such as bariatric
surgery an option in select cases. Other conservative
measures, such as avoiding alcohol and sedatives that relax
the upper airway, can be effective.
Despite these measures, for most patients nightly
continuous 
positive 
airway 
pressure 
(CPAP) 
is
recommended. With CPAP, respiratory support is given via
the 
patient's 
upper 
airway. 
The 
patient 
breathes
spontaneously and the lungs are expanded by a volume of
gas delivered at a positive pressure. This decreases the
work 
of 
the 
respiratory 
muscles, 
particularly 
the
diaphragm. As the name implies, CPAP delivers a
continuous positive air pressure throughout the respiratory
cycle, and is used to keep the upper airway open in OSA.
The results can be remarkable and it is recommended for
those with moderate or severe symptoms.
However, there are downsides to CPAP. The equipment
requires specialist training to use and set up. For many,
using a CPAP machine becomes a lifelong commitment,
bringing a burdensome piece of equipment wherever the
patient goes. Some patients find CPAP difficult to use
because the mask is uncomfortable, as is the sensation of
having air forced in through the mouth and nose. CPAP
exists in many forms, with whole airway and nasal masks
available. Patients also often complain that the machine is
noisy and cumbersome, thus affecting their relationship
with their partner. However, this should be balanced
against the increased health risks associated with sleep
apnoea, as well as the noise from snoring! (Fig. 22.2.)
FIG. 22.2  Continuous positive airway pressure machine for
obstructive sleep apnoea in position.
Other treatments include a mandibular repositioning
device, recommended for mild-to-moderate symptoms. This
is a dental device worn in the mouth whilst sleeping and is
recommended to be fitted by a dental practitioner with an
interest in dental sleep medicine, following a dental
assessment. The device moves the mandible forward and
increases the area of the oropharynx. These have been
shown to be effective and may be a useful alternative in
less 
severe 
cases. 
Other 
treatments 
may 
include
tonsillectomy 
with 
tonsil 
enlargement, 
or 
nasal
polypectomy in certain instances (Fig. 22.3).
FIG. 22.3  Mandibular repositioning device. (From
Vecchierini MF, Léger D, Laaban JP, et al. Efficacy and
compliance of mandibular repositioning device in obstructive
sleep apnea syndrome under a patient-driven protocol of
care, Sleep Med 9:762–769, 2008.)
Complications
Sleep apnoea can have many serious consequences on
various aspects of a patient's life. On a personal level, the
constant snoring can put a major strain on the relationship
between a patient and his or her partner. Furthermore, it
can have more widespread consequences for patients who
drive, as daytime somnolence significantly increases the
risk 
of 
falling 
asleep 
at 
the 
wheel, 
a 
dangerous
consequence for both the patient and anyone else on the
road. It is important to tell patients that they must inform
the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency of their diagnosis.
Sleep apnoea is also dangerous for the physical health of
the patient. As most patients are overweight or obese, they
are already at increased risk of heart disease, diabetes and
associated complications. However, even taking that into
account, these patients are at increased risk for developing
hypertension, heart disease and stroke.
Central sleep apnoea
Central sleep apnoea is a rarer condition causing an
irregular breathing pattern during sleep. In central sleep
apnoea, either the airway remains patent but there is no
efferent output from the respiratory centres in the brain, or
there is a primary weakness of the respiratory muscles.
Either way, there is no respiratory effort by the respiratory
muscles, causing PaCO2 levels to rise. The high PaCO2
arouses the patient, who then rebreathes to normalize the
PaCO2 and then falls asleep again. This cycle can be
repeated many times during the night and leads to a
disruptive sleep pattern. Central sleep apnoea is more
common in patients with congestive heart failure and
patients with neurological diseases (e.g., strokes). It can
also be seen in people with no abnormalities, such as those
who live at high altitude, or simply be a normal variant.
The result is multiple apnoeic episodes a night, some of
which the patient may or may not be aware of, again
causing unrefreshing sleep and daytime somnolence. In
certain instances, there is a predictability of the regular
cyclical 
timings 
of 
apnoeic 
episodes 
followed 
by
hyperventilation, resulting in a pattern known as Cheyne–
Stokes respiration. The pattern of pauses is also described
in polysomnography on Fig. 22.1 and is investigated with
sleep studies in the same way as OSA.
Given that central sleep apnoea can be a normal variant
or suggest a significant underlying pathological process,
the treatments vary considerably. If separate underlying
pathology is present, detecting and treating it may resolve
the apnoeic episodes. If there are no underlying problems
and the patient is not symptomatic, reassurance can be
given that nothing is wrong. Sometimes CPAP, or
noninvasive 
ventilation 
(NIV) 
with 
bilevel 
positive
pressures if carbon dioxide retention is occurring, can play
a role in more complex central sleep apnoea management
(see Chapter 12: Acute respiratory failure).
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome
Obesity 
hypoventilation 
syndrome, 
or 
Pickwickian
syndrome, is a disorder of breathing commonly associated
with OSA, characterized by chronic hypoxia and daytime
hypercapnia, in the absence of parenchymal lung disease.
The exact underlying mechanisms are not known but it is
thought to be a combination of a lack of stimulation from
the brainstem combined with a large volume of excess
weight compressing the chest and upper airways.
The condition presents in a similar way to sleep apnoea,
with daytime somnolence, depression and headaches (from
hypercapnia). In fact, as patients often have the two
conditions, it can be very difficult to distinguish them.
Diagnosis is through a combination of clinical findings
(obese patient, cyanosis) and arterial blood gas results,
which reveal the characteristic hypoxia and hypercapnia
pattern of type II respiratory failure. Other diagnostic
criteria include the demonstration of a sleep disorder
(overnight oximetry or polysomnography) with absence of
other causes of hypoventilation.
Clinical notes 
Diagnostic criteria for obesity hypoventilation
syndrome
Body-mass index > 30
Daytime PaCO2 > 4.5 mmHg
Associated sleep apnoea syndrome
Absence of other causes of hypoventilation
Treatment, as with OSA, initially involves conservative
measures such as weight loss. Bilevel positive airway
pressure (BiPAP, in order to blow off excess carbon
dioxide) is used as a secondary measure where weight loss
alone is not effective (see Chapter 12 for more details).
Chapter Summary
• Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) causes collapse of the
pharyngeal airway during sleep, resulting in partial
wakening during the night and subsequent
interrupted, nonrestorative sleep. Clinical features
include snoring and daytime somnolence.
• Screening for OSA is performed with a sleepiness
score to assess symptom severity. Overnight sleep
studies measure the duration and frequency of
apnoeic episodes, as well as associated desaturations.
• Management for OSA includes weight loss and
avoidance of sedatives, and overnight continuous
positive airways pressure (CPAP) to splint open the
airway at night.
• Central sleep apnoea is a complex phenomenon
caused by central nervous system pathology,
resulting in multiple apnoeic episodes at night.
Management is by treating the underlying cause, with
nocturnal CPAP or bilevel positive airway pressure
(BiPAP) used if symptomatic.
• Obesity hypoventilation syndrome is a related
extension of OSA with associated hypercapnia and
type II respiratory failure. It is managed with weight
loss and nocturnal BiPAP.
Useful links
http://sleepmed.com.au/bariatric1.pdf.
http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/health-
topics/topics/sleepapnea/atrisk.html.
https://www.sleepsociety.org.uk/wp-
content/uploads/2015/07/OSA-Toolkit-2015-
FINAL.pdf.
23
Respiratory manifestations
of systemic disease
Introduction
Respiratory symptoms are common to many disorders.
There are many disease processes that, whilst not having a
primary lung pathology, often present to respiratory clinics
or wards. Whilst the breadth of conditions with respiratory
manifestations is too vast to cover, here is an overview of a
number of key conditions not to be missed, including:
• Sarcoidosis
• Vasculitis
• Rheumatological diseases
• HIV-related lung disease.
Sarcoidosis
Definition and epidemiology
Sarcoidosis is a multisystem granulomatous disorder of
unknown aetiology. Pulmonary involvement is common and
noncaseating granulomas form within the lung.
Sarcoidosis is a relatively rare condition and prevalence
in the United Kingdom is estimated to be 19 per 100,000
population. It is more common in women and the peak age
of incidence is 20–40 years. Women of black African origin
are more likely to suffer with severe disease.
Pathology
Sarcoidosis 
is 
characterized 
by 
the 
formation 
of
noncaseating 
(nonnecrotizing) 
granulomas. 
These
granulomas are infiltrated by Th1 lymphocytes and
macrophages, 
which 
fuse 
to 
form 
multinucleated
epithelioid cells.
Often these granulomas resolve, leading to spontaneous
remission; however, in 10%–20% of cases the persistent
inflammation results in interstitial fibrosis of the affected
tissue.
Clinical features
The clinical presentation of sarcoidosis is dependent on the
organ involved. Often patients are asymptomatic, and the
diagnosis is made after an incidental finding on chest
radiograph. The majority of patients (>  90%) have
pulmonary involvement, which may cause:
• Dyspnoea
• Chest pain
• Dry cough.
Other nonspecific constitutional features include:
• Lymphadenopathy
• Fever
• Fatigue
• Weight loss.
Common extrapulmonary features include:
• Erythema nodosum/lupus pernio of the skin (Fig.
23.1). Note lupus pernio is rare but pathognomonic
of sarcoidosis.
B 
FIG. 23.1  Skin manifestations of sarcoidosis. (A)
Erythema nodosum. (B) Lupus pernio. (C) Sarcoid
nodules. (From Weller R, Hunter JAA, Savin J, Dah M. Clinical
dermatology, 4th edition. Wiley-Blackwell, 2009, with permission)
(From Wanat KA, Rosenbach M. Cutaneous sarcoidosis, Clin Chest
Med 36:685–702, 2015.) (From Freund KB, Sarraf D, Mieler WF,
Yannuzzi L. The retinal atlas, 2nd edition, 2017, Elsevier.)
• Arthralgia.
• Uveitis.
• Cranial nerve palsies (in neurosarcoid).
• Cardiomyopathies (rare).
Clinical notes 
lofgren syndrome
This is a subtype of acute sarcoidosis with a common
constellation of symptoms:
• Hilar lymphadenopathy
• Erythema nodosum
• Joint symptoms (arthralgia, commonly of the ankles)
• Fever.
Patients with Lofgren syndrome tend to have a good
prognosis, with most patients achieving spontaneous
remission.
Investigation
Table 23.1 demonstrates useful investigations in a patient
with suspected sarcoidosis. The Global Initiative for
Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) standard diagnostic
method for sarcoidosis remains biopsy, showing epithelioid
noncaseating granulomas on histology.
Table 23.1
Useful investigations in sarcoidosis
Test
Use
Full blood count
May show a normochromic
normocytic anaemia
Erythrocyte
sedimentation
rate
Often raised; can be used to
monitor disease activity
Serum calcium
Granulomas secrete vitamin D,
causing hypercalcaemia
Serum ACE
Granulomas secrete ACE. Can be
twice normal levels. Used to
monitor disease activity
Chest X-ray
Typical features. Useful in staging
disease
High-resolution
computed
tomography
Disease staging, identifying
pulmonary fibrosis
Biopsy
GOLD standard for diagnosis
ACE, Angiotensin-converting enzyme; GOLD, Global Initiative for Obstructive
Lung Disease.
Chest radiographs can be useful in staging disease and
determining prognosis (Fig. 23.2). It is important to
remember that staging disease in sarcoidosis does not
reflect disease progression, i.e., stage III disease can
develop with a patient never having developed stage I.
FIG. 23.2  The staging of sarcoidosis by chest radiographs.
Management
If the patient has hilar lymphadenopathy and no lung
involvement, then no treatment is required.
If infiltration has occurred for more than 6 weeks, treat
with corticosteroids (20–40 mg/day for 4–6 weeks, then a
reduced dose for up to 1 year).
Prognosis is dependent on disease stage. Mortality is less
than 5% in UK whites and approximately 10% in Afro-
Americans. If shadowing is present on chest radiographs
for more than 2 years, the risk of fibrosis increases.
Vasculitis
Vasculitis is a broad term incorporating a heterogeneous
group of disorders that share a common underlying feature
—inflammation of blood vessels.
They tend to be multiorgan diseases primarily affecting
the kidney, lungs, joints and skin. This section will consider
three 
vasculitides 
with 
well-described 
pulmonary
manifestations:
• Goodpasture syndrome
• Wegener granulomatosis
• Churg–Strauss disease.
Goodpasture syndrome
Goodpasture 
syndrome 
is 
a 
small-vessel 
vasculitis
characterized 
by 
glomerulonephritis 
and 
respiratory
symptoms. 
The 
syndrome 
is 
driven 
by 
a 
type 
II
hypersensitivity reaction whereby immunoglobulin (Ig)G
autoantibodies to the glomerular basement membrane
(anti-GBM) 
attach 
to 
the 
glomerulus, 
causing
glomerulonephritis. In the lung, anti-GBM antibodies cross-
react with the alveolar basement membrane, causing
diffuse pulmonary haemorrhage.
Patients present with haemoptysis, haematuria and
anaemia. Serum anti-GBM antibodies are diagnostic but not
always present, with patterns of anaemia, acute renal
failure and haematuria also seen. A full autoimmune screen
should be performed and a renal biopsy may be required in
the absence of anti-GBM antibodies. Chest radiography is
variable but typically shows bilateral patchy consolidation.
Treatment is by corticosteroids or plasmapheresis to
remove antibodies. The course of the disease is variable:
some patients resolve completely, whereas others proceed
to renal failure.
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis
Granulomatosis 
with 
polyangiitis 
(formerly 
Wegener
granulomatosis, with the name changed after the discovery
that Wegener was a Nazi) is a rare, necrotizing vasculitis of
unknown aetiology affecting small blood vessels. It
classically involves midline structures, including the nose
(Fig. 
23.3), 
lungs 
and 
kidneys, 
where 
it 
causes
glomerulonephritis. Other areas of the body such as joints,
eyes and skin are less commonly affected.
FIG. 23.3  Features of Wegener granulomatosis. Classical
saddle-shaped nose deformity.
Symptoms often begin as a flu-like illness with fevers,
rhinorrhoea and cough. In the lung, mucosal thickening
and ulceration occur, producing the clinical features of
cough, haemoptysis and dyspnoea. Granulomatosis with
polyangiitis can be suggested by an autoantibody screen
with 
the 
presence 
of 
cytoplasmic 
antineutrophil
cytoplasmic antibodies (cANCA), although this is not
positive in 20% of patients. The GOLD standard of
diagnosis remains biopsy (renal, nasal mucosa or affected
area).
If untreated, mortality after 2 years is 93%, but the
disease responds well to a combination of high-dose
prednisolone 
and 
cyclophosphamide. 
Other
immunosuppressant treatments include methotrexate or
rituximab.
Churg–Strauss disease
Churg–Strauss disease is a small-vessel vasculitis. It
classically presents with a triad of:
• Late-onset asthma
• Eosinophilia (seen on full blood count)
• Small-vessel vasculitis.
Other typical features include sinusitis, pulmonary
infiltrates and neuropathy, with any system affected.
Vasospasm is also a common feature and patients are at
risk 
of 
developing 
myocardial 
infarction, 
pulmonary
embolism 
or 
deep 
vein 
thrombosis. 
Investigations
demonstrate eosinophilia, positive cANCA in 40%, raised
inflammatory markers, infiltrates on chest imaging and a
characteristic lung biopsy. Treatment is usually with high-
dose corticosteroids or interferon.
Systemic rheumatological diseases
Respiratory involvement is often a cause of high morbidity
and a sign of poor prognosis in patients with autoimmune
diseases, such as:
• Rheumatoid arthritis
• Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
• Systemic sclerosis
• Ankylosing spondylitis.
Rheumatoid arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis is a chronic inflammatory condition
characterized by a symmetrical deforming polyarthropathy.
It 
has 
many 
extraarticular 
features, 
including
manifestations in the lung.
In all, 10%–15% of patients with rheumatoid arthritis
have lung involvement and usually these patients have
severe disease. Patients can develop:
• Diffuse pulmonary fibrosis
• Bronchiolitis obliterans
• Follicular bronchiolitis
• Pleural fibrosis
• Pleural effusions
• Rheumatoid nodules within the lung (rare).
Management 
of 
rheumatoid 
arthritis 
is 
with
immunosuppression through steroids, disease-modifying
antirheumatic drugs and biological treatments. Note that
the immunosuppressive treatments predispose to infection
(including atypical or fungal infections) and rare but
significant side-effects of methotrexate treatment are
pneumonitis or pulmonary fibrosis.
Clinical notes 
Caplan syndrome
Caplan syndrome is the combination of rheumatoid
arthritis and pneumoconiosis, characterized by well-
defined 
intrapulmonary 
nodules 
seen 
on 
chest
radiography. Patients present with cough, shortness of
breath and the arthropathy with early morning stiffness
of inflammatory arthritis. The condition occurs in miners
working 
with 
fine 
dusts 
(coal, 
silica, 
asbestos).
Management is as per rheumatoid arthritis, with an
important differential being tuberculosis.
Systemic lupus erythematosus
SLE is a multisystem autoimmune disease in which multiple
autoantibodies form immune complexes, which deposit in a
variety of organs, including the skin, joints, kidneys and
lung.
Respiratory involvement is usually in the form of pleurisy,
with or without an effusion, and pulmonary fibrosis is rare.
Investigation is with autoimmune profiling of antinuclear
antibodies, a highly sensitive test, and anti-double stranded
DNA, 
a 
highly 
specific 
test, 
with 
multiple 
other
autoantibody 
variants. 
Again, 
treatment 
is 
with
immunosuppression and the risk of respiratory infection
remains.
Systemic sclerosis
Systemic sclerosis is a severe autoimmune connective
tissue disorder where there is increased fibroblast activity
resulting in the abnormal growth of connective tissue. It
exists in two forms, limited cutaneous or diffuse cutaneous,
with the latter being the more aggressive and with a higher
mortality. Pulmonary involvement is common but often
asymptomatic. If symptomatic, it is a sign of severe disease
and is associated with a poor prognosis. Patients typically
develop pulmonary fibrosis presenting as progressive
exertional dyspnoea and cough. In severe forms, rapidly
progressive pulmonary hypertension develops, which leads
to cor pulmonale. There are a number of autoantibodies
associated with systemic sclerosis, with anti-topoisomerase
1 (anti-Scl 70) strongly associated with lung and renal
disease. Broad spectrum immunosuppressants are used in
management.
Ankylosing spondylitis
Ankylosing spondylitis is a chronic inflammatory condition
of the spine and sacroiliac joints, which predominantly
affects men. It has several extraarticular manifestations,
including:
• Acute iritis
• Aortic regurgitation
• Apical lung fibrosis.
It is classed as a seronegative arthropathy. Diagnosis is
clinical and should be managed by a rheumatologist. The
presence of lung fibrosis is a marker of disease severity and
patients should be told for monitor for symptoms of
breathlessness, prompting further investigation.
HIV-related lung disease
HIV is a blood-borne retrovirus that produces suppression
of the host immune system by binding to CD4 receptors on
lymphocytes, monocytes, macrophages and neural cells. As
the disease progresses the number of CD4 cells reduce,
creating immunosuppression and opportunity for infection.
Once the CD4 count lowers significantly (CD4 < 200 cells/
μL), an acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS)
develops, allowing life-threatening opportunistic infections
and neoplasms to develop. There are several opportunistic
infections known as AIDS-defining illnesses that can occur,
indicating AIDS regardless of the CD4 count.
In respiratory medicine, there are many ways that HIV-
related illnesses can present. A patient’s CD4 count can
effectively predict the risk of developing certain conditions,
with different illnesses presenting at certain thresholds of
CD4 count (Table 23.2). Knowledge of the different
illnesses that can present at differing CD4 counts can prove
vital in diagnosing the complicating illness, meaning
specialist 
testing 
such 
as 
high-resolution 
computed
tomography, serology and cultures can be performed
appropriately.
Table 23.2
CD4 count and respiratory presentations in HIV
infection
CD4 count
Respiratory conditions in HIV infection
< 500 cells/
μL
Recurrent bacterial pneumonia
Mycobacterium infections (other than
TB)
< 200 cells/
μL
Bacterial pneumonia with bacteraemia
Pneumocystis jirivecii pneumonia
Cryptococcus neoformans pneumonitis
< 100 cells/
μL
Staphylococcus aureus or Pseudomonas
pneumonia
Toxoplasma gondii
Kaposi sarcoma with pulmonary
involvement
< 50 cells/
μL
Endemic fungi
CMV lung disease
Mycobacterium avium
Aspergillus
CMV, Cytomegalovirus; TB, tuberculosis.
Diagnosis is often difficult in HIV infection, and a high
index of suspicion should be present in any patient
presenting with recurrent pneumonia or atypical infection.
Management requires specialist input from genitourinary
and infectious disease specialists once diagnosis is
confirmed. Management is with antiretroviral therapy,
meaning few patients progress to AIDS. The disease is
monitored by assessing the viral load of HIV and
monitoring the CD4 count. Management of complicating
respiratory conditions is discussed in Chapter 18.
Chapter Summary
• Sarcoidosis is a condition of infiltrative granulomas
which form in multiple organs, with lung involvement
in > 90% of cases. Typically, hilar lymphadenopathy
is a defining characteristic, with diagnosis made on
granuloma biopsy.
• Vasculitis is an inflammation of blood vessels that can
affect small, medium and large vessels. The three
vasculitides most commonly affecting the lung are
granulomatosis with polyangiitis, Goodpasture
syndrome and Churg–Strauss disease.
• Connective tissue diseases can cause lung pathology,
either through the disease process itself or through
complications of their treatment.
• Lung involvement of rheumatoid arthritis can involve
diffuse pulmonary fibrosis, bronchiolitis obliterans
and pleural effusions.
• Human immunodeficiency virus-related lung disease
involves atypical infections secondary to
immunosuppression and even rare malignancies.
Knowledge of the patient’s CD4 count can assist in
predicting the type of pathology likely to affect the
patient, with a greater number of atypical infections
occurring the more immunosuppressed the patient is.
Several respiratory infections are known as AIDS-
defining illnesses.
Single best answer (SBA)
questions
Chapter 1  Overview of the
respiratory system
1. Which of the following is a restrictive lung disorder?
A. Asthma.
B. Chronic bronchitis.
C. Pulmonary fibrosis.
D. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD).
E. Bronchiectasis.
2. Which of these abbreviations represents the partial
pressure of alveolar oxygen tension?
A. PO2
B. PaO2
C. PvO2
D. PAO2
E. PaCO2
Chapter 2  Organization of the
respiratory tract
3. Which of the following is true of the larynx?
A. It is a structure discontinuous with the
trachea.
B. It protects the trachea and bronchi during
swallowing.
C. It contains multiple external muscles.
D. It is innervated by the pharyngeal plexus.
E. It is unimportant in phonation.
4. The hilum of the lung contains which of the
following?
A. The vagus nerve.
B. The pulmonary ligament.
C. The recurrent laryngeal nerve.
D. Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
(MALT).
E. The bronchial circulation.
5. Which of the following is true of the nasal cavity?
A. It contains Clara cells.
B. It is lined with columnar epithelium in the
upper region.
C. It is important in gas exchange.
D. It is covered in olfactory epithelium in the
lower region.
E. It is important in defence against infection.
6. Which of the following is true of the lower
respiratory tract?
A. The trachea is encircled by rings of
cartilage.
B. The left main bronchus is more acutely
angled than the right.
C. Both type I and type II pneumocytes exist.
D. It contains respiratory bronchioles where
the majority of gas exchange occurs.
E. It lacks mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue
(MALT).
7. Which of the following is true of alveolar
macrophages?
A. They are neutrophil-derived blood cells.
B. They circulate in the blood in macrophage
form.
C. They phagocytose foreign material.
D. They are a prominent physical defence
against infection.
E. They exist mainly outside the respiratory
zone.
8. Which of the following comments about the
respiratory tree is most accurate?
A. The main bronchi turn to segmental
bronchi at the carina.
B. Bronchioles contain no cartilage in their
walls.
C. There are approximately 12–14 divisions of
the respiratory tree.
D. Three main airway zones are described.
E. Approximately 500 mL of the respiratory
tree by volume is described as anatomical
dead space in a 75-kg man.
9. Which of the following is true about physical airway
defences?
A. S-fibres are the main irritant airway
receptor stimulated by infective material.
B. Filtering of air by the nasopharynx
removes fine particulate matter from
inspired air.
C. Coughing involves a high-velocity
expiration against a closed glottis.
D. Mucociliary clearance removes the
majority of large particulate matter.
E. Cilia beat at around 10,000 strokes per
minute.
10. The components of cellular and humoral lung
defences include which of the following?
A. A predominance of IgG antibody.
B. Surfactant produced by type I
pneumocytes.
C. A predominant basophilic response to
bacterial infection.
D. Filtration of air by the nasopharynx.
E. Antiproteases, including hepatic α1-
antitrypsin.
Chapter 3  Pulmonary circulation
11. Which of the following best describes the pulmonary
circulation?
A. A high-pressure, high-resistance system.
B. A high-pressure, low-resistance system.
C. A low-pressure, high-resistance system.
D. A low-pressure, low-resistance system.
E. A negative-pressure, low-resistance
system.
12. Which one of the following statements is true?
A. Blood vessels at the lung bases are
subjected to a lower hydrostatic pressure
than those at the apices.
B. Blood flow is greater at the apices of the
lungs.
C. Blood flow is greater at the bases of the
lungs.
D. The pressure in the pulmonary circulation
is normally equal to that of the systemic
circulation.
E. The pressure in the pulmonary circulation
is normally greater than that of the
systemic circulation.
13. An 80-year-old woman with severe pneumonia and
extensive consolidation of the right lung desaturates
whenever nurses turn her on to her right side. Why
is this?
A. Increased ventilation of the right lung
increasing ventilation:perfusion mismatch.
B. Reduced ventilation of the right lung
reducing ventilation:perfusion mismatch.
C. Reduced blood flow to the right lung
increasing ventilation:perfusion mismatch.
D. Increased blood flow to the right lung
increasing ventilation:perfusion mismatch.
E. Increased blood flow to the right lung
reducing ventilation:perfusion mismatch.
Chapter 4  Physiology, ventilation and
gas exchange
14. The functional residual capacity (FRC) is defined as
which of the following?
A. Volume of air remaining in lungs at the
end of a normal expiration.
B. Volume of air that can be breathed in by a
maximum inspiration following a maximum
expiration.
C. Volume of air remaining in lungs at the
end of a maximum expiration.
D. Volume of air that can be expelled by a
maximum effort at the end of a normal
expiration.
E. Volume of air breathed in by a maximum
inspiration at the end of a normal
expiration.
15. A patient with chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) has become increasingly breathless
and tachypnoeic over the past 6 months. On
examination the patient is hyperexpanded and has a
barrel chest. Which of the following answers best
accounts for these findings?
A. Increased functional residual capacity.
B. Increased inspiratory capacity.
C. Increased tidal volumes.
D. Increased residual volume.
E. Reduced inspiratory capacity.
16. An elderly man attends the outpatient clinic
complaining of breathlessness on exertion and
weight loss. On examination, he has clubbing, is
cyanosed and has fine inspiratory crackles. The
patient is sent for spirometry. Which of the following
is most likely?
A. Reduced forced expiratory volume in 1
second (FEV1) and normal forced vital
capacity (FVC).
B. Reduced FEV1 and FVC.
C. Normal FEV1 and reduced FVC.
D. Normal FEV1 and FVC.
E. Increased FEV1 and FVC.
Chapter 5  Perfusion and gas
transport
17. Which of the following is true of the
ventilation:perfusion (V:Q) ratio?
A. Ventilation increases towards the apex of
the lung.
B. Perfusion decreases towards the base of
the lung.
C. VA/Q is dependent on lung volume and
posture.
D. VA/Q is uniform throughout the lung in the
healthy patient.
E. Perfusion is increased to those areas of the
lung that are underventilated.
18. Which of the following best describes gas transport
in the blood?
A. Once oxygen is bound to the haem group
of haemoglobin, the ferrous (Fe2 +) ion
changes to the ferric state (Fe3 +).
B. Myoglobin has a lower affinity for oxygen
than haemoglobin A.
C. Carbon dioxide and oxygen have similar
diffusing capacity in the lung.
D. During exercise an individual will
hyperventilate in order to blow off carbon
dioxide.
E. Increase in carbon dioxide and decrease in
pH enhance dissociation of oxygen from
oxyhaemoglobin.
Chapter 6  Control of respiratory
function
19. Which of these factors do not affect ventilator
response to PaCO2?
A. PaO2.
B. Psychiatric state.
C. Genetics.
D. Pulmonary disease.
E. Fitness.
20. With regards to respiratory regulation, where do
peripheral chemoreceptors typically lie?
A. Alveoli.
B. Carotid sinus and aortic arch.
C. Brainstem.
D. Cerebral cortex.
E. Laryngopharynx.
Chapter 7  Basic pharmacology
21. Which of the following regarding salbutamol is
correct?
A. It is used predominantly in the treatment
of allergic rhinitis.
B. It has a short duration of action.
C. It exerts its action via β1-receptors.
D. It is highly receptor specific.
E. It commonly causes a bradycardic
response.
22. Which of the following statements on formoterol is
correct?
A. It is a partial receptor agonist.
B. It is a full receptor agonist.
C. It has near identical pharmacokinetics to
salmeterol.
D. It is unsuitable for use in single
maintenance and reliever therapy
(SMART).
E. It causes a greater change in heart rate
than salmeterol.
23. Which of the following makes the use of
theophyllines challenging?
A. They exert effects in a similar manner to
β2-agonists.
B. Both oral and intravenous formulations
exist.
C. Hepatic enzyme activity varies markedly
between patients.
D. Their complete mechanism of action is not
understood.
E. They are only useful in severe asthma
attacks.
24. Which of the following therapies are not used to aid
smoking cessation?
A. Varenicline
B. B. Bupropion.
C. Nicotine replacement therapy.
D. Chlordiazepoxide.
E. Motivational interviewing.
Chapter 8  Taking a respiratory
history
25. A 50-year-old male presents with a chronic dry
cough for 3 months. He is a nonsmoker and has a
past medical history of ischaemic heart disease.
Which of the following medication is the most likely
potential cause?
A. Statin.
B. Beta blocker.
C. Sildenafil.
D. Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE)
inhibitor.
E. Aspirin.
26. A patient with severe chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD) attends a respiratory clinic
complaining of bilateral ankle swelling. Which
complication of COPD does this symptom suggest?
A. Deep vein thrombosis (DVT).
B. Cor pulmonale.
C. Bronchial carcinoma.
D. Tuberculosis.
E. Pseudomonas colonization.
Chapter 9  Examination of the
respiratory system
27. A 60-year-old woman with a new diagnosis of
metastatic breast cancer attends the A&E unit with a
4-day history of increasing shortness of breath. On
examination, there is markedly reduced chest
expansion on the left side with stony dull percussion
and absent breath sounds at the left base. Vocal
resonance is reduced at the left base. What is the
most likely diagnosis?
A. Pleural effusion.
B. Lung collapse.
C. Lung fibrosis.
D. Consolidation.
E. Pneumothorax.
28. Which of the following best describe the four typical
characteristics of Horner syndrome?
A. Unilateral ptosis, mydriasis, anhidrosis,
exophthalmos.
B. Unilateral ptosis, mydriasis, anhidrosis,
enophthalmos.
C. Bilateral ptosis, meiosis, anhidrosis,
exophthalmos.
D. Unilateral ptosis, meiosis, anhidrosis,
enophthalmos.
E. Neck engorgement, cyanosis, facial
swelling, arm swelling.
Chapter 10  The respiratory patient:
clinical investigations
29. What is a normal value for peak expiratory flow rate
(PEFR) in a healthy adult?
A. 50–150 L/min.
B. 150–250 L/min.
C. 250–350 L/min.
D. 350–450 L/min.
E. 450–600 L/min.
30. Which of these tests assesses breathlessness by
asking the patient to walk a 10-metre distance
during increasingly short time intervals?
A. Six-minute walk test.
B. Exercise electrocardiograph.
C. Shuttle test.
D. Cardiopulmonary exercise testing.
Chapter 11  The respiratory patient:
imaging investigations
31. A 60-year-old smoker with a 6-week history of a
nonproductive cough, weight loss and a single
episode of haemoptysis has a chest radiograph
performed that demonstrates a 4-cm mass at the
right hilum, when he comes to see you in clinic.
What is the next most appropriate investigation in
this patient’s management?
A. Repeat the chest radiograph in 6 weeks to
assess for resolution.
B. Order a high-resolution computed
tomography (CT) chest scan.
C. Order a chest magnetic resonance image
(MRI).
D. Perform bronchoscopy.
E. Order a CT chest and abdomen with liver
and adrenal views.
32. You see a 40-year-old female presenting with acute
shortness of breath following a recent long-haul
flight. She is tachypnoeic, requiring 40% oxygen to
maintain saturations. Which of these is the most
appropriate initial imaging investigation for the
patient?
A. Erect chest radiograph.
B. Chest ultrasound.
C. Computed tomography pulmonary
angiogram (CTPA).
D. Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scan.
E. High-resolution CT.
Chapter 12  Acute respiratory failure
33. Which of these is not a typical management strategy
for airway obstruction?
A. Head tilt and chin lift.
B. Laryngeal mask airway.
C. Nasopharyngeal airway.
D. Thyroidectomy.
E. Jaw thrust.
34. Which of the following oxygen delivery devices is
most appropriate to use in the initial assessment of a
severe asthma attack?
A. Nasal oxygen.
B. Nonrebreather reservoir mask.
C. Venturi mask.
D. Continuous positive airway pressure
(CPAP).
E. Noninvasive ventilation (NIV).
35. An arterial blood gas (ABG) reading was taken from
a patient with an infective exacerbation of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) on air. The
ABG analysis gives the following readings:
Parameter
Reading
Normal range
pH
7.28
7.35–7.45
pO2
7.4
10–14 kPa
pCO2
9.3
4.5–6 kPa
HCO3
38
22–26 mmol/L
Which of the following options best describes
this ABG result?
A. Respiratory alkalosis with
metabolic compensation.
B. Decompensated metabolic
acidosis.
C. Type I respiratory failure with a
compensated metabolic acidosis.
D. Type II respiratory failure with a
decompensated respiratory
acidosis.
E. Type II respiratory failure with a
fully compensated respiratory
acidosis.
36. An arterial blood gas (ABG) reading was taken from
a patient with a severe pneumonia requiring 35%
oxygen. The ABG analysis gives the following
readings:
Parameter
Reading
Normal range
pH
7.30
7.35–7.45
pO2
9.6
10–14 kPa
pCO2
3.0
4.5–6 kPa
HCO3
18
22–26 mmol/L
Which of these phrases below best describes
the ABG result?
A. Respiratory acidosis.
B. Respiratory alkalosis.
C. Metabolic acidosis.
D. Metabolic alkalosis.
E. Respiratory alkalosis with
metabolic compensation.
Chapter 13  The upper respiratory
tract
37. An anxious mother brings her 2-year-old son to the
GP surgery with a 3-day history of cough and fevers.
The child’s cough is particularly bad at night and as
a result he has not been sleeping. On examination,
the child is irritable and has a characteristic barking
cough. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Asthma.
B. Epiglottitis.
C. Croup.
D. Bronchiolitis.
E. Viral-induced wheeze.
38. Which of the following is the appropriate dose of
adrenaline to give in adult anaphylaxis?
A. 0.5 mL of 1:1000 intravenous (IV)
adrenaline.
B. 0.5 mL of 1:10,000 IV adrenaline.
C. 1 mL of 1:1000 intramuscular (IM)
adrenaline.
D. 0.5 mL of 1:1000 IM adrenaline.
E. 1 mL of 1:1000 IV adrenaline.
Chapter 14  Asthma
39. You are working as junior doctor in a GP surgery
when an 18-year-old young woman presents with an
intermittently tight chest. Symptoms come on whilst
she is playing football. Respiratory and
cardiovascular examinations are normal. A peak
expiratory flow rate diary shows diurnal variation.
Which of these symptoms would prompt you to
investigate for an alternative diagnosis?
A. Wheeze.
B. Chest tightness.
C. Cough.
D. Breathlessness.
E. Weight loss.
40. Which of these is not a symptom of life-threatening
acute asthma?
A. Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) 45%
predicted.
B. PaO2 < 8 kPa.
C. Silent chest.
D. Confusion.
E. Bradycardia.
Chapter 15  Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
41. A 75-year-old man with a 50-pack-year smoking
history attends the GP surgery complaining of
shortness of breath and a productive cough every
day for the past 6 months. Which of the following
investigations would be most helpful in making a
diagnosis of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(COPD)?
A. Erect chest radiograph.
B. Spirometry.
C. Echocardiogram.
D. Full blood count.
E. Sputum culture.
42. A 70-year-old woman has been admitted to hospital
with an acute exacerbation of chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD). She is managed with
35% oxygen on facemask, nebulized bronchodilators,
antibiotics and steroids. The patient develops type II
respiratory failure and her most recent blood gas
demonstrates pH 7.18, PO2 7.9 kPa and PCO2
11 kPa. What is the most appropriate next
management step?
A. Give 15 L oxygen through a nonrebreather
mask.
B. Reduce the level of oxygen.
C. Refer to intensive care.
D. Start patient on noninvasive ventilation
(NIV) (bilevel positive airway pressure).
E. Increase the dose of steroids.
Chapter 16  Disorders of the
interstitium
43. Which of these is not a commonly recognized cause
of hypersensitivity pneumonitis?
A. Bird proteins.
B. Mushroom spores.
C. Asbestos.
D. Mouldy hay.
E. Sugar cane fibres.
44. A 70-year-old male nonsmoker presents to clinic
with a 1-year history of breathlessness on exertion
and a dry cough. He is clubbed and on chest
auscultation he has bilateral fine inspiratory
crackles. Which of the following investigation results
would most support a diagnosis of idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis (IPF)?
A. A high-resolution computed tomography
(HRCT) scan with bilateral honeycomb
change.
B. An obstructive pattern on spirometry.
C. A chest radiograph showing cardiomegaly
and pulmonary oedema.
D. A raised white cell count (WBC) and C-
reactive protein (CRP) level on blood tests.
E. An HRCT with consolidation and collapse
of the right lower lobe.
Chapter 17  Lung cancer
45. To which sites would you typically expect bronchial
carcinomas to metastasise?
A. Bone, brain, skin, thyroid, bowel.
B. Bone, breast, adrenals, skin, bowel.
C. Liver, bone, brain, adrenals, skin.
D. Liver, breast, bone, kidney, thyroid.
E. Liver, breast, brain, bone, bowel.
46. A squamous cell lung tumour is described as stage
T2 N1 M0 by the tumour, node, metastasis (TNM)
staging system. Which of these descriptions best fits
this staging?
A. A single 5-cm right-sided apical lung
tumour with spread to contralateral hilar
lymph nodes.
B. A solitary 4-cm left-sided hilar lung tumour
with involvement of two ipsilateral hilar
lymph nodes but no distal metastases.
C. Multiple lung masses seen throughout
both lungs with a large mass seen in the
right breast
D. A solitary peripheral 3-cm lung mass
which has invaded into the pleural space.
Five ipsilateral lymph nodes are seen and
there are multiple nodular deposits in the
liver.
E. A single 5-mm peripheral lung mass is
seen in the left lung with no nodal or
metastatic disease seen.
47. A 62-year-old man is referred with a 3-month history
of persistent dry cough, weight loss and anorexia. He
is a lifelong smoker of 20 cigarettes/day and has
recently returned from a week-long holiday in Spain.
His wife has recently been diagnosed with Cushing
disease. His chest X-ray shows a solitary 4-cm round
mass near his right hilum. Routine blood tests,
including full blood count, and renal function,
observations and examination are otherwise
unremarkable. Which of these is the most
appropriate next investigative step?
A. Request a lateral chest X-ray.
B. Measure his 9.00 am cortisol level.
C. Perform a Mantoux test.
D. Arrange a staging computed tomography
(CT) chest scan including the neck, liver
and adrenals.
E. Arrange for a high-resolution CT scan of
the chest and start a course of oral
steroids.
48. A 58-year-old woman with known small-cell lung
cancer presents to the A&E department with severe
headaches, facial swelling and breathlessness. She
completed a course of chemotherapy 2 months ago
and missed her last two follow-up appointments. On
examination, she has a swollen, flushed face with
venous engorgement of her neck. Which are the next
most appropriate management steps?
A. Give intramuscular (IM) adrenaline,
intravenous (IV) hydrocortisone and
antihistamines.
B. Give her subcutaneous morphine and wait
for her symptoms to settle.
C. Arrange an urgent computed tomography
(CT) scan of the chest and consider oral
dexamethasone.
D. Discharge her with paracetamol for her
headaches.
E. Start IV antibiotics and perform a set of
blood cultures.
49. Which of the following statements is true?
A. Small-cell lung cancer is the commonest
form of lung cancer.
B. All patients with lung cancer have
haemoptysis.
C. Finger clubbing is specific to lung cancer.
D. Spinal cord compression is an example of
a paraneoplastic syndrome.
E. Stopping smoking improves life
expectancy even after lung cancer
diagnosis.
Chapter 18  Respiratory infections
50. Which of the following is the most common
causative organism in community-acquired
pneumonia?
A. Staphylococcus aureus.
B. Klebsiella pneumoniae.
C. Streptococcus pneumoniae.
D. Moraxella catarrhalis.
E. Haemophilus influenzae.
51. A 75-year-old man with chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) is admitted to hospital
following 1 week of flu-like symptoms. Over the past
2 days he has developed a productive cough, fevers
and progressive dyspnoea. Sequential chest X-rays
show a rapidly progressive left-sided consolidation
with evidence of cavitation. What is the most likely
causative organism?
A. Staphylococcus aureus.
B. Klebsiella pneumoniae.
C. Streptococcus pneumoniae.
D. Moraxella catarrhalis.
E. Haemophilus influenzae.
52. A 25-year-old male is admitted to the A&E
department with a dry cough and worsening
dyspnoea over several weeks. He appears very
cachectic and discloses that 6 months ago he was
diagnosed with HIV infection but he has not
attended any clinic appointments. What is the most
likely causative organism?
A. Moraxella catarrhalis.
B. Pneumocystis jiroveci.
C. Aspergillus fumigatus.
D. Cytomegalovirus.
E. Influenza A.
Chapter 19  Bronchiectasis and cystic
fibrosis
53. Which of these is not an acquired cause of
bronchiectasis?
A. Childhood measles.
B. Foreign body.
C. Obstructing tumour.
D. Cystic fibrosis.
E. Whooping cough.
54. An 80-year-old female nonsmoker with a history of
childhood measles infection presents to the
respiratory clinic with a chronic productive cough
and recurrent infections over several years. You
suspect a diagnosis of bronchiectasis. What would be
the most useful diagnostic investigation?
A. High-resolution computed tomography
scan.
B. Chest radiograph.
C. Sweat test.
D. Routine blood tests.
E. Flexible bronchoscopy.
Chapter 20  Pleural disease
55. Which of the following is not a recognized cause of
pleural effusion?
A. Hepatic failure.
B. Chronic kidney disease.
C. Malnourishment.
D. Leukaemia.
E. Hypocalcaemia.
56. A 67-year-old smoker presenting with weight loss
and malaise is found to have a unilateral pleural
effusion on chest X-ray. A diagnostic tap drains
bloody fluid. What is the most likely diagnosis?
A. Bronchial carcinoma.
B. Hepatitis C.
C. Bronchiectasis.
D. Cardiac failure.
E. Sarcoidosis.
57. A 40-year-old male is brought into the A&E unit
following a road traffic accident. He has sustained a
chest wall injury and is in acute respiratory distress.
ATLS assessment reveals that he is tachypnoeic,
hypoxic and hypotensive. Chest examination reveals
left-sided hyperresonance with absent breath
sounds. What is the next most appropriate step?
A. Administer high flow oxygen, take a chest
radiograph and arrange analysis of arterial
blood gas.
B. Insert a large bore cannula into the
midclavicular line of the left second
intercostal space.
C. Arrange an urgent computed tomography
(CT) pulmonary angiogram of the chest.
D. Insert a chest drain into the left chest
using the Seldinger technique under
ultrasound guidance.
E. Perform ultrasound-guided pleural fluid
aspiration from the left side of the chest.
58. Which of the following features on pleural aspiration
would indicate empyema?
A. Pleural fluid pH of > 7.2.
B. Pleural fluid protein of 20 g/dL.
C. Haemorrhagic appearance of pleural fluid.
D. Pleural fluid microscopy showing no
organisms.
E. Appearance of pus on pleural aspirate.
Chapter 21  Thromboembolic disease
and pulmonary hypertension
59. A 60-year-old man presents to the A&E unit with
sudden-onset chest pain, breathlessness and
haemoptysis. He also has a 3-day history of a swollen
and painful right calf. Given the likely diagnosis
causing his breathlessness, which of the following
investigations is the gold standard for diagnosis?
A. D-dimer test.
B. Computed tomography (CT) pulmonary
angiogram.
C. Pulmonary angiography.
D. Chest radiograph.
E. Spirometry.
60. A 25-year-old woman presents with pleuritic pain
and breathlessness following a long-haul flight.
Chest radiograph is normal. Which of these factors is
not taken into account in the Wells scoring system?
A. Previous pulmonary embolism.
B. Oral contraceptive pill.
C. Malignancy.
D. Haemoptysis.
E. Evidence of deep vein thrombosis.
61. You are the FY1 on the respiratory ward looking
after a patient who has had a recent pulmonary
embolism. Your consultant would like to start the
patient on anticoagulation with a direct inhibitor of
factor X. Which of the following medications would
be appropriate to start?
A. Warfarin.
B. Rivaroxaban.
C. Dabigatran.
D. Enoxaparin.
E. Unfractionated heparin.
62. Which of the following statements about pulmonary
hypertension (PH) is false?
A. PH is defined as a mean pulmonary artery
pressure of > 25 mmHg at rest, as assessed
by right heart catheterization.
B. The most common cause of PH in the
United Kingdom is pulmonary artery
hypertension.
C. PH is associated with connective tissue
disorders such as systemic sclerosis.
D. Where appropriate, PH may be treated by
vasodilators including prostanoids and
phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitors.
E. PH presents insidiously with progressive
exertional dyspnoea.
Chapter 22  Sleep disorders
63. Which of the following are risk factors for the
development of obstructive sleep apnoea?
A. Down syndrome.
B. Obesity.
C. Acromegaly.
D. Amyloidosis.
E. All of the above.
64. Which of these options best describes the
progressive investigation of obstructive sleep
apnoea?
A. Score the Epworth Sleepiness Scale then,
if positive, perform a sleep study.
B. Perform overnight pulse oximetry then, if
positive, arrange arterial blood gas
analysis.
C. Perform overnight pulse oximetry then, if
positive, perform a full sleep study.
D. Score the Epworth Sleepiness Scale then,
if positive, arrange arterial blood gas
analysis.
E. Score the Epworth Sleepiness Scale then,
if positive, perform a trial of continuous
positive airways pressure.
Chapter 23  Respiratory
manifestations of systemic disease
65. Which of these descriptions best matches Lofgren
syndrome?
A. A triad of late onset asthma, eosinophilia
and small vessel vasculitis.
B. A presentation of sarcoidosis combining
hilar lymphadenopathy, erythema nodosum,
joint symptoms and fever.
C. A variant of Guillain–Barré syndrome,
comprising ophthalmoplegia, ataxia and
hyporeflexia.
D. A combination of rheumatoid arthritis and
pneumoconiosis, with well-defined
pulmonary nodules on chest radiography.
E. A combination of rheumatoid arthritis,
neutropenia and splenomegaly.
66. Which of these rheumatological conditions
classically causes apical lung fibrosis?
A. Rheumatoid arthritis.
B. Systemic sclerosis.
C. Systemic lupus erythematosus.
D. Sjögren syndrome.
E. Ankylosing spondylitis.
Extended-matching
questions (EMQs)
Chapter 1  Overview of the
respiratory system
Ventilation and gas exchange
A. Partial pressure.
B. Diffusion.
C. Perfusion.
D. Restrictive disorder.
E. Obstructive disorder.
F. Ventilation.
G. Expiration.
H. Tidal volume.
I. Respiration.
For each scenario below, choose the most likely
corresponding option from the list given above. Each
answer can be used once, more than once or not at all.
1. The movement of air in and out of the respiratory
system.
2. A passive process, due to the elastic recoil of lung
tissue.
3. A disorder because of difficulty expanding the lungs,
such as owing to stiffening of the lung tissue or
weakness of the respiratory muscles.
4. Occurs at the gas-exchange surface, using partial
pressures.
5. Can be determined by the gas content of liquids.
Chapter 2  Organization of the
respiratory tract
Cells and tissues of the lower
respiratory tract
A. Alveolar ducts.
B. Alveolar macrophages.
C. Alveoli.
D. Bronchiole.
E. Bronchus.
F. Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue.
G. Trachea.
H. Type I pneumocytes.
I. Type II pneumocytes.
Match the cell or tissue to its description. Each answer
can be used once, more than once or not at all.
1. This structure contains no cartilage and but has a
prominent smooth muscle layer which can alter
airway diameter.
2. This structure contains C-shaped rings of hyaline
cartilage.
3. These cells have flattened nuclei and few
mitochondria.
4. These cells have rounded nuclei and are rich in
mitochondria. Also, microvilli are present on their
exposed surface.
5. These structures have perforations between cells to
communicate with adjacent similar structures.
Chapter 4  Physiology, ventilation and
gas exchange
Physiology, ventilation and gas
exchange
A. Vital capacity.
B. Forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1).
C. Total lung capacity.
D. Functional residual capacity.
E. Residual volume.
F. Expiratory reserve volume.
G. Tidal volume.
H. Inspiratory capacity.
Match the above terms to their definition below. Each
answer can be used once, more than once or not at all.
1. The volume of air remaining in lungs at end of a
maximum expiration.
2. The volume of air remaining in lungs at the end of a
normal expiration.
3. The volume of air that can be breathed in by a
maximum inspiration following a maximum
expiration.
4. The volume of air breathed in and out in a single
breath.
5. The volume of air that can be expelled by a
maximum effort at the end of a normal expiration.
Chapter 5  Perfusion and gas
transport
Matching acid–base disturbance
A. Compensated respiratory acidosis.
B. Compensated respiratory alkalosis.
C. Compensated metabolic acidosis.
D. Compensated metabolic alkalosis.
E. Metabolic acidosis.
F. Metabolic alkalosis.
G. Respiratory acidosis.
H. Respiratory alkalosis.
(Normal values: pH 7.35–7.45: PO2 = 90–110 mmHg;
PCO2 = 34–45 mmHg; [HCO3
-] = 21–27 mmol/L)
Match the acid–base imbalances given above to the
following blood gas results. Each answer can be used once,
more than once or not at all.
1. pH 7.4; PO2 70 mmHg; PCO2 26 mmHg; [HCO3
-]
15 mmol/L.
2. pH 7.4; PO2 94 mmHg; PCO2 20 mmHg; [HCO3
-]
14 mmol/L.
3. pH 7.6; PO2 94 mmHg; PCO2 40 mmHg; [HCO3
-]
35 mmol/L.
4. pH 7.2; PO2 80 mmHg; PCO2 55 mmHg; [HCO3
-]
22 mmol/L.
5. pH 7.2; PO2 100 mmHg; PCO2 40 mmHg; [HCO3
-]
16 mmol/L.
Chapter 6  Control of respiratory
function
Mechanisms and anatomy of
respiratory control
A. Pontine neurones.
B. Bötzinger complex.
C. Medullary neurones.
D. Chemoreceptors.
E. Carotid bodies.
F. C-fibres.
G. Rapidly adapting receptors.
H. Slowly adapting receptors.
Match the description below to the best answer from the
list above. Each answer can be used once, more than once
or not at all.
1. Form part of the cough reflex.
2. Situated rostral to the nucleus ambiguus.
3. Regulate the dorsal respiratory group.
4. Sensitive to PaO2, PaCO2, pH, blood flow and
temperature.
5. Stimulation of these results in bradycardia and
hypotension.
Chapter 8  Taking a respiratory
history
Giving a diagnosis based on a short
respiratory history
A. Asthma.
B. Bronchiectasis.
C. Carcinoma of the bronchus.
D. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
E. Cystic fibrosis.
F. Gastrooesophageal reflux disease.
G. Iatrogenic.
H. Inhaled foreign body.
I. Pulmonary embolism.
J. Tuberculosis.
Match the most likely diagnosis from the list above to the
following clinical scenarios. Each answer can be used once,
more than once or not at all.
1. A 3-year-old boy attends hospital having an acute
bout of coughing. On auscultation the doctor hears a
unilateral, monophonic inspiratory wheeze.
2. A 12-year-old boy attends hospital after having an
acute bout of coughing and breathlessness. On
auscultation the doctor hears a bilateral polyphonic
expiratory wheeze.
3. A 27-year-old man presents with (at least) a 5-month
history of purulent sputum. He has never smoked
and he tells you that he had whooping cough as a
child.
4. A 48-year-old woman who is being managed for
diabetes and hypertension complains of a constant
dry cough.
5. A 60-year-old woman, who smokes 25 cigarettes per
day, presents with a 5-week history of cough,
malaise and weight loss.
Chapter 9  Examination of the
respiratory system
Giving a diagnosis based on
examination findings
A. Pleural effusion.
B. Consolidation.
C. Pneumothorax.
D. Atelectasis.
E. Asthma.
F. Pulmonary oedema.
G. Interstitial lung disease.
H. Tension pneumothorax.
For each of the following select the most likely diagnosis
from the list above. Each answer can be used once, more
than once or not at all.
1. An 80-year-old woman is admitted to hospital with
shortness of breath. She is tachypnoeic and
desaturates on air. On examination, you notice a
raised jugular venous pressure and bilateral fine
inspiratory crackles on auscultation.
2. An 80-year-old woman is admitted to hospital with
shortness of breath. On examination, there is
reduced chest expansion on the left side with dull
percussion and reduced breath sounds at the left
base. Vocal resonance is reduced.
3. An 80-year-old woman is admitted to hospital with
shortness of breath. On examination, there is
reduced chest expansion on the left side, with dull
percussion and increased breath sounds with coarse
crackles at the left base. Vocal resonance is
increased.
4. An 80-year-old woman is admitted to hospital with
shortness of breath. On examination, there is
reduced chest expansion on the left side with
hyperresonant percussion and absent breath sounds.
The trachea is central.
5. An 80-year-old woman is admitted to hospital with
shortness of breath. On examination, there is
reduced chest expansion bilaterally and fine
inspiratory crackles are audible at both apices of the
lungs.
Chapter 10  The respiratory patient:
clinical investigations
Investigations in respiratory
disease
A. Shuttle test.
B. Bronchoalveolar lavage.
C. Flexible bronchoscopy.
D. Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR).
E. Body plethysmography.
F. Six-minute walk test.
G. Thoracoscopy.
H. Pleural aspirate.
I. Spirometry.
J. Endobronchial ultrasound.
For each scenario below, choose the most likely
corresponding option from the list above. Each answer can
be used once, more than once or not at all.
1. A camera that is passed through the upper airways
to visualize pathology directly and take samples for
histology in a lifelong smoker complaining of a new-
onset cough with haemoptysis.
2. An investigation that can be repeated by the patient
at home throughout the day to create a diary of
readings that may help diagnose diurnal variation in
asthma.
3. Saline that is squirted through a bronchoscope and
aspirated up again to collect cells for cytology, in a
lifelong smoker complaining of new-onset cough with
haemoptysis.
4. A camera test involving the insertion of a camera
through a port into the thoracic cavity in order to
visualize and biopsy the pleura.
5. A sealed box the size of a telephone box, in which
the patient whom you suspect of having an
interstitial lung disease is asked to sit and perform
respiratory manoeuvres. Changes in lung volume are
measured.
Chapter 11  The respiratory patient:
imaging investigations
Respiratory imaging investigations
A. Posteroanterior (PA) chest radiograph.
B. Computed tomography (CT) imaging of the chest.
C. CT pulmonary angiogram (CTPA).
D. Chest ultrasound.
E. Portable anteroposterior (AP) chest radiograph.
F. High-resolution CT (HRCT).
G. Lateral chest radiograph.
H. Magnetic resonance imaging of the chest
I. Ultrasound Doppler.
J. Ventilation/perfusion (V/Q) scan.
K. Positron emission tomography scan.
For each scenario below, choose the single most
appropriate corresponding imaging technique from the list
above to investigate the underlying pathology. Each answer
may only be chosen once.
1. A patient with suspected empyema found on chest
radiograph awaiting thoracocentesis.
2. A 60-year-old male former construction worker
presents with progressive shortness of breath on
exertion. Echocardiography is normal and there is no
smoking history. Chest radiography demonstrates
reticular shadowing.
3. A patient presents with a productive cough for 10
days with fevers and shortness of breath. On
examination, there is bronchial breathing on the
right base.
4. A patient with known chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease presents in extremis with productive cough,
shortness of breath and chest pain. The patient was
thought to have a tension pneumothorax on
presentation and emergency decompression was
performed in the second intercostal space in the
midclavicular line in ED resus. The patient has
started to improve but is still requiring 60% oxygen
to maintain saturations.
5. A 70-year-old woman in hospital for a fractured hip
develops sudden-onset pleuritic chest pain and
shortness of breath, with associated tachycardia and
desaturation. A chest radiograph demonstrates no
clear cause of her symptoms, whilst an
electrocardiogram demonstrates sinus tachycardia
with an S1-Q3-T3 pattern. Her renal function is
normal.
Chapter 12  Acute respiratory failure
Respiratory failure and emergency
management
A. Positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP).
B. Confusion.
C. Obstructive sleep apnoea.
D. Type I respiratory failure.
E. Type II respiratory failure.
F. Pulmonary embolism.
G. Paralysis of the diaphragm.
H. Ventilator-associated pneumonia.
I. Early morning headaches.
For each scenario below, choose the most likely
corresponding option from the list above. Each answer can
be used once, more than once or not at all.
1. A typical initial cause of acute type I respiratory
failure.
2. A common complication of invasive ventilation.
3. Prevents alveolar collapse during expiration.
4. A symptom of hypoxia.
5. PaO2 < 8 kPa with a low or normal PaCO2.
Chapter 13  The upper respiratory
tract
Upper respiratory pathology
A. Allergic rhinitis.
B. Anaphylaxis.
C. Rhinovirus.
D. Prolonged intensive care stay.
E. Haemophilus influenzae.
F. Laryngeal cancer.
G. Parainfluenza.
H. Streptococcus pneumoniae.
I. Pollen.
J. Goodpasture syndrome.
K. Reactive nodules.
For each scenario below, choose the most likely
corresponding option from the list above. Each answer can
be used once, more than once or not at all. There may be
multiple correct answers to each question.
1. The commonest cause of the common cold.
2. Typical organism causing acute epiglottitis.
3. Caused by a type 1 immunoglobulin E (IgE)-
mediated immune response.
4. A typical allergen in allergic rhinitis.
5. An indication for laryngectomy insertion.
Chapter 14  Asthma
Treatment of asthma
A. Short-acting β2-agonist.
B. Long-acting β2-agonist (LABA).
C. Short-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist.
D. Long-acting muscarinic receptor antagonist.
E. Low-dose inhaled corticosteroid (ICS).
F. Oral corticosteroid.
G. Slow-release theophylline.
H. Oral leukotriene receptor antagonist.
I. An ICS/LABA combination inhaler.
J. Nebulized β2-agonist and oral corticosteroids.
For each scenario below, choose the most appropriate
answer from the above list of options. Each answer can be
used once, more than once or not at all.
1. The appropriate treatment for a 25-year-old woman
with known asthma presenting to the A&E unit who
is breathless on minimal exertion with a peak
expiratory flow rate of 50%.
2. An inhaled treatment given as part of single
maintenance and reliever therapy (SMART).
3. A first-line regular inhaled preventer therapy in
asthma.
4. A drug used as an add on therapy in uncontrolled
asthma.
5. Short courses of this medication are given during an
asthma exacerbation.
Chapter 15  Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
COPD management
A. Pulmonary rehabilitation.
B. Inhaled bronchodilators.
C. Antibiotics.
D. Long-term oxygen therapy.
E. Long-term oral steroids.
F. Noninvasive ventilation (NIV).
G. Smoking cessation.
H. Carbocisteine.
For each of the following, select the most appropriate
management option from the list above. Each answer can
be used once or not at all.
1. A 45-year-old female smoker attends her GP
concerned that she has developed a chronic cough.
The cough is productive and is present most days of
the year, particularly during the winter months.
2. A 77-year-old ex-smoker with severe chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) managed
with triple therapy is admitted to hospital with an
acute exacerbation of COPD. During the admission,
an echo is performed which shows a mildly dilated
right ventricle with pulmonary artery pressure of
50 mmHg.
3. A 76-year-old man with severe COPD is admitted to
hospital with an acute exacerbation of COPD. An
arterial blood gas (ABG) analysis performed on
admission demonstrates pH 7.17, PO2 7.1 and PCO2
8.9 on 35% oxygen (Venturi mask).
4. A 65-year-old female with COPD is recently
discharged from hospital and still complains of
breathlessness despite stopping smoking and
starting inhalers.
5. A 63-year old ex-smoker is diagnosed with COPD
following spirometry, which demonstrates a forced
expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1):forced vital
capacity (FVC) ratio of 0.65, FEV1 of 80% predicted
and no exacerbations.
Chapter 16  Disorders of the
interstitium
Disorders of the interstitium
A. Simple pneumoconiosis.
B. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis.
C. Asbestosis.
D. Mesothelioma.
E. Caplan syndrome.
F. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
G. Desquamative interstitial pneumonitis.
H. Sarcoidosis.
I. Progressive massive fibrosis.
For each scenario below, choose the most likely
corresponding option from the list above. Each answer can
be used once, more than once or not at all.
1. A type 3 and type 4 immunological reaction to an
inhaled antigen.
2. A condition related to rheumatoid arthritis.
3. A disease seen in coal miners that causes symptoms
of productive cough and breathlessness.
4. A fibrotic process caused by exposure to crocidolite.
5. The commonest form of interstitial pneumonia.
Chapter 17  Lung cancer
Complications of lung cancer
A. Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
secretion (SIADH).
B. Malignant pleural effusion.
C. Spinal cord compression.
D. Hypercalcaemia.
E. Brain metastases.
F. Superior vena cava obstruction.
G. Ectopic adrenocorticotropic hormone production.
H. Pancoast syndrome.
For each of the cases described below select the most
likely diagnosis from the list above.
1. A 68-year-old lifelong male smoker presents with
cough, pleuritic chest pain and progressive
breathlessness. On examination, he has reduced
expansion and dull percussion to the right mid to
lower chest.
2. A 70-year-old woman with known lung cancer
presents with worsening back pain and new difficulty
in walking. She also notes that she has been
incontinent for the last 2 days.
3. A 60-year-old man is brought to hospital by their
partner after a seizure. He is a lifelong smoker who
his partner states has had progressive weight loss
for the last 6 months. Prior to the seizure, he had
become increasingly confused and has had difficulty
getting dressed for the last week. His right arm has
become progressively weak but he had not been to a
doctor about this problem.
4. A 70-year-old woman presents with new blurring of
vision in her right eye and a droopy eyelid. She
smokes 40 cigarettes a day and uses inhalers for
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, which she
says has been poorly controlled despite a recent
course of oral steroids. Her blood tests show she is
anaemic with normal inflammatory markers.
5. An 80-year-old lung cancer patient who had
previously refused treatment presents with feeling
generally unwell with nausea, tiredness, confusion
and generalized joint pains. He is dehydrated on
examination and has a short QT interval on
electrocardiogram.
Chapter 18  Respiratory infections
Organisms in pneumonia
A. Staphylococcus aureus.
B. Influenza A.
C. Streptococcus pneumoniae.
D. Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
E. Tuberculosis.
F. Mycoplasma pneumoniae.
G. Haemophilus influenzae.
H. Legionella pneumophilia.
For each of the following, which is the most likely
causative organism? Each answer can be used once, more
than once or not at all.
1. A 48-year-old man returns from a business
conference with shortness of breath, a dry cough and
diarrhoea and vomiting. After 24 hours in hospital,
he develops type I respiratory failure and is
transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) for
ventilation.
2. A 19-year-old man develops shortness of breath and
a dry cough following a week of flu-like symptoms.
He has an associated rash with lesions that look like
‘targets’.
3. An elderly patient who has required ventilation in
the ICU for several weeks begins to spike fevers and
develops purulent green-coloured secretions.
4. A 70-year-old smoker is admitted to hospital with
shortness of breath and a productive cough following
a week of flu-like symptoms. The patient rapidly
deteriorates and chest X-ray shows cavitation.
5. A 75-year-old male admitted to hospital with
confusion, fevers and a productive cough with right
lower lobe consolidation on his chest radiograph.
Chapter 19  Bronchiectasis and cystic
fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis
A. Carbocisteine.
B. Sweat test.
C. G551D.
D. Deoxyribonuclease (DNase).
E. CFTR.
F. ΔF508.
G. Immunoreactive trypsinogen test.
H. Ivacaftor.
For each scenario below, choose the most likely
corresponding option from the list above. Each answer can
be used once, more than once or not at all.
1. A test result of > 60 mmol/L is suggestive of cystic
fibrosis (CF).
2. The most common mutation in CF.
3. Performed as a screening test on newborn babies to
detect CF.
4. A CFTR potentiator drug used in CF patients with a
specific mutation.
5. A mucolytic used in CF to improve lung function.
Treatment of bronchiectasis
A. Salbutamol inhaler.
B. Amoxicillin.
C. Colomycin.
D. Carbocisteine.
E. Acapella device.
F. Nebulized saline.
G. Azithromycin.
H. Active cycle breathing techniques.
I. Postural drainage.
For each scenario below, choose the most likely
corresponding option from the list above.
1. A mucolytic used to aid sputum expectoration in non-
cystic fibrosis bronchiectasis.
2. An oral antibiotic used long term for patients with
more than three exacerbations a year.
3. An oscillating positive expiratory pressure device.
4. A breathing pattern to aid sputum expectoration
using a combination of small and deep breaths.
5. An antibiotic used commonly as first line for acute
exacerbations in those with no contraindications.
Chapter 22  Sleep disorders
Management of sleep disorders
A. Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP).
B. Weight loss.
C. Obesity hypoventilation syndrome.
D. Tracheostomy.
E. Tonsillectomy.
F. Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA).
G. Central sleep apnoea.
H. Narcolepsy.
For each scenario choose the most appropriate diagnosis
or management option from the list above. Each answer
can be used once, more than once or not at all
1. A 50-year-old morbidly obese patient with no
respiratory history presents with daytime
somnolence and severe snoring. Epworth sleep score
is 16 and there are multiple significant dips on
overnight oximetry. Daytime arterial blood gas
sampling demonstrates a PaCO2 7 mmHg.
2. A 50-year-old morbidly obese patient with no
respiratory history presents with daytime
somnolence and severe snoring. Epworth sleep score
is 16 and there are multiple significant dips on
overnight oximetry. Daytime arterial blood gas
sampling demonstrates a PaCO2 3.9 mmHg.
3. A patient with a diagnosis of OSA attends clinic after
having trialled weight loss and a mandibular
repositioning device. They still have ongoing
symptoms and they are worried that it is impacting
their daily activities. Which is the next best
management option?
4. A patient with a diagnosis of OSA secondary to
adenotonsillar hypertrophy attends clinic having
trialled weight loss and a CPAP machine. They still
have ongoing symptoms and they are worried that it
is impacting their daily activities. Which is the next
best management option?
5. A patient who has had a previous stroke causing
significant hemiplegia and difficulty swallowing
presents after their partner noticed they had an
abnormal breathing pattern at night. The patient
complained of fatigue but is unaware of these
episodes.
Chapter 23  Respiratory
manifestations of systemic disease
Respiratory manifestations of
systemic disease
A. Churg–Strauss syndrome.
B. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis.
C. Rheumatoid arthritis.
D. Ankylosing spondylitis.
E. Systemic lupus erythematosus.
F. Sarcoid.
G. Scleroderma.
H. Goodpasture disease.
For each scenario below, choose the most likely
corresponding option from the list above. Each answer can
be used once only or not at all.
1. An elderly man has severe arthritis of the spine. On
auscultation he has an early diastolic murmur, heard
best in the aortic region, and fine inspiratory
crackles at the apices of both lungs.
2. A young woman of Afro-Caribbean origin attends her
GP surgery with a 3-month history of dry cough and
increasing shortness of breath. A chest radiograph is
organized and shows evidence of hilar
lymphadenopathy.
3. A young man attends A&E with haemoptysis and is
also found to be in acute renal failure. An
autoantibody screen reveals that his is cytoplasmic
antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (c-ANCA)
positive.
4. An 18-year-old female is admitted to hospital with
shortness of breath and pleuritic chest pain. On
examination, you notice the patient has an
erythematous rash on both cheeks that spares her
nasolabial folds.
5. A 45-year-old woman with severe arthritis affecting
both hands develops shortness of breath. On
examination the patient is clubbed, cyanotic and has
widespread fine inspiratory crackles on auscultation.
SBA answers
Chapter 1  Overview of the
respiratory system
1. C. Pulmonary fibrosis. Whilst bronchiectasis and
COPD can demonstrate restrictive components in
certain instances, pulmonary fibrosis is the only
restrictive disease available. The change to the lung
tissue restricts adequate lung expansion. All other
options are primarily obstructive conditions.
2. D. PAO2 represents the partial pressure of alveolar
oxygen tension. The large ‘A’ represents alveolar
whilst the small ‘a’ represents arterial; ‘v’ represents
venous and carbon dioxide is represented in the
same format.
Chapter 2  Organization of the
respiratory tract
3. B. The larynx is continuous with the trachea, and
moves back during swallowing to cover the trachea
and direct food down the oesophagus, preventing
aspiration. The larynx has one external muscle, the
cricothyroid, and multiple internal muscles.
Innervation is from the vagus nerve. It is crucial to
phonation (speech).
4. B. The hilum of the lung contains the main bronchi,
the pulmonary artery and vein, nerves, lymph nodes
and the pulmonary ligament. The bronchial
circulation delivers oxygenated blood to the lung
parenchyma and does not pass through the hilum.
5. E. The nasal cavity comprises the nose and
nasopharynx. The upper third of the nasal cavity is
lined with olfactory, and the remainder with
columnar, epithelium. It plays no role in gas
exchange but is important in warming and
humidifying air. Ciliated cells in the lower two-thirds
trap particulate matter and prevent it reaching the
lower airways.
6. C. The trachea is surrounded by C-shaped cartilage
rings and is not encircled. The right main bronchus
is more acute than the left, and, as such, foreign
bodies are more likely to lodge here than in the left
bronchus. The majority of gas exchange occurs in the
alveoli, although exchange does occur in the
respiratory bronchioles. MALT is present in the walls
of the lower respiratory tract.
7. C. Alveolar macrophages exist predominantly in the
alveoli and are derived from circulating monocytes.
They are a key cellular defence mechanism and
phagocytose bacteria and foreign material.
8. B. Bronchioles are the first point in the tree to
contain noncartilaginous walls. The carina describes
the division of the trachea into left and right main
bronchi. There are more than 20 divisions of the
respiratory tree, with two main zones (the
conducting zone and respiratory zone). The dead
space consists of around 150 mL.
9. D. Large material is predominantly removed by
mucociliary clearance, whether in the nasopharynx
or lower down the respiratory tract. Cilia waft at
approximately 1000 strokes per minute. Irritant C-
fibres stimulate the cough reflex.
10. E. Antiproteases are a key humoral lung defence.
IgA, not IgG, is the most prevalent antibody and
neutrophils, not basophils, are the key cellular
response to bacterial infection. Filtration of air is a
physical defence. Surfactant is a cellular response
but from type II pneumocytes.
Chapter 3  Pulmonary circulation
11. D. The pulmonary circulation is a low-pressure, low-
resistance system.
12. C. In the upright human, lung hydrostatic pressure
is greater in the blood vessels that supply the lung
than those supplying the apices. The greater
hydrostatic pressure leads to distension of the
capillaries and increased blood flow. Therefore blood
flow is greater at the lung bases compared with the
apices.
13. D. Blood flow is gravity dependent. Therefore when
this patient is turned on to her right side, blood flow
to the right lung is increased, and because this lung
is poorly ventilated owing to extensive consolidation,
ventilaton:perfusion mismatch is increased, causing
the patient to desaturate.
Chapter 4  Physiology, ventilation and
gas exchange
14. A. The FRC is the volume of air remaining in lungs
at the end of a normal expiration.
15. D. Increased residual volume.
16. B. This patient has symptoms and signs in keeping
with pulmonary fibrosis. Such patients usually
develop a restrictive lung disorder characterized by
a reduced FEV1 and FVC.
Chapter 5  Perfusion and gas
transport
17. C. VA/Q is dependent on lung volume and posture.
Changes in posture do alter the V:Q ratio. Ventilation
and blood flow are decreased at the apices
compared with the bases, and thus the V:Q is not
uniform across the lung, even in health. Perfusion is
reduced to underventilated areas of the lung by
hypoxic vasoconstriction.
18. E. Increase in carbon dioxide and decrease in pH
enhance dissociation of oxygen from
oxyhaemoglobin. This enhanced dissociation at high
carbon dioxide levels is termed the Bohr effect. The
association between oxygen and haemoglobin is not
an oxidation; it is an oxygenation. Myoglobin accepts
the oxygen molecule from oxyhaemoglobin and
temporarily stores it for skeletal muscle. Carbon
dioxide has a 20-fold greater diffusing capacity than
oxygen. In exercise, there is increase in depth of
breathing (hyperpnoea), not hyperventilation.
Chapter 6  Control of respiratory
function
19. D. Pulmonary disease. Although this may affect
levels of PaCO2, it does not affect the body’s
response to it.
20. B. Carotid sinus and aortic arch. The carotid sinus
and aortic arch contain the carotid and aortic bodies,
respectively, responsible for sensing PaO2, PaCO2,
pH and temperature. Central chemoreceptors lie in
the brainstem on the ventrolateral surface of the
medulla. There are multiple different receptors
within the lungs themselves, which respond to a
variety of stimuli.
Chapter 7  Basic pharmacology
21. B. It has a short duration of action. Salbutamol is a
short-acting β2-receptor agonist used to treat lower-
airway disease. It has a degree of nonspecific
receptor activity, and side-effects such as headache,
fine tremor and tachycardia result from cross-
stimulation of β1-receptors.
22. B. It is a full receptor agonist. Formoterol is a full
agonist of the β2-receptor, unlike salmeterol, which
is a partial agonist. For this reason, formoterol can
be used in SMART.
23. C. Hepatic enzyme activity varies markedly between
patients. Wide variations in enzyme activity and thus
breakdown across patient populations lead to
varying levels of theophyllines in the blood. This is
challenging as theophyllines have a narrow
therapeutic window and, as such, therapeutic drug
levels in the blood must be checked regularly.
24. D. Chlordiazepoxide. Chlordiazepoxide is a
medication used in alcohol withdrawal, not smoking
cessation.
Chapter 8  Taking a respiratory
history
25. D. ACE inhibitor. This is a common drug used in
patients with hypertension and ischaemic heart
disease, which can induce a dry cough as a side
effect in around 10% of patients. The patient should
be switched to an angiotensin-2 receptor blocker as
an alternative agent. None of the other agents listed
typically cause a chronic cough.
26. B. Cor pulmonale. This is right-sided heart failure
secondary to pulmonary hypertension caused by
severe chronic lung disease. Other features include a
raised jugular venous pressure and palpable
pulsatile liver edge secondary to hepatic congestion.
DVT occurs unilaterally and bronchial carcinoma or
infection are unlikely to present in this manner.
Chapter 9  Examination of the
respiratory system
27. A. Pleural effusion. These are the classical features
of a pleural effusion, likely malignant in origin.
Consolidation may cause dull percussion but you
would expect bronchial breathing on auscultation,
whilst collapse would not give such definitive signs
or progressive symptoms. Lung fibrosis would cause
fine inspiratory crepitations and pneumothorax
would give a hyperresonant percussion note.
28. D. Unilateral ptosis, meiosis, anhidrosis and
enophthalmos. Remember a small pupil, sunken
eyeball, drooping eyelid and no sweating, as the
sympathetic innervation to the face is interrupted.
Bilateral Horner syndrome is extremely rare. Answer
E describes superior vena cava obstruction.
Chapter 10  The respiratory patient:
clinical investigations
29. E. 450–600 L/min. The normal value for a patient’s
PEFR is altered depending on age, gender and
height. The predicted normal for a patient can be
calculated from PEFR charts.
30. C. Shuttle test. Spirometry is a lung function test
done with the patient at rest. The 6-minute walk test
measures the total distance that a patient can walk
in a 6-minute time period. Cardiopulmonary exercise
testing measures multiple variables during a period
of incremental exercise, usually performed on an
exercise bike.
Chapter 11  The respiratory patient:
imaging investigations
31. E. Order a CT chest and abdomen with liver and
adrenal views. The patient has a history in keeping
with a lung cancer and a mass seen on chest
radiograph. Repeating the radiograph would not add
anything. A high-resolution CT chest may miss the
mass as slices are taken further apart. MRI at
present has no clear defined role in lung cancer
management. Bronchoscopy may be needed at some
stage; however, a CT should be performed first to
give accurate guidance for staging and
demonstrating the anatomy prior to bronchoscopy.
There is enough information to suggest this is lung
cancer, and so a staging CT including liver and
adrenals at this stage would be appropriate.
32. A. Erect chest radiograph. The history is suggestive
of pulmonary embolus, however other diagnoses
such as pneumothorax, collapse or infection cannot
be completely excluded at this stage. The most
appropriate initial investigation therefore is simple
chest radiography to exclude alternative causes of
breathlessness. Once this has taken place and no
other cause of breathlessness is identified (chest
radiography is often normal in pulmonary
embolism), further imaging should be considered
such as CTPA or V/Q scan. This decision should be
guided by renal function, pregnancy status, signs of
deep vein thrombosis and degree of suspicion for the
underlying pathology.
Chapter 12  Acute respiratory failure
33. D. Thyroidectomy. A cricothyroidotomy may be an
extreme solution to managing a compromised
airway, but simply removing their thyroid gland
would not help at all.
34. B. Nonrebreather reservoir mask. Whilst A, B and C
may all provide adequate oxygenation, in the initial
assessment of an acutely unwell patient the highest
readily available oxygen delivery device is
recommended, in this case B. Note that CPAP and
NIV are not routinely used for asthma management
except under specialist use, as invasive ventilation is
often preferred.
35. D. Type II respiratory failure with a decompensated
respiratory acidosis. This gas demonstrates both a
type II respiratory failure AND a decompensated
respiratory acidosis. The pO2 demonstrates
respiratory failure, with a raised pCO2 confirming
type II rather than type I respiratory failure. The
patient has an acidosis with a pH of 7.28, which in
the context of a raised pCO2 is likely to be a
respiratory acidosis. Note that the serum
bicarbonate is raised—suggesting that there has
been some previous metabolic compensation. The
clinical context of an acute exacerbation of COPD
tells you that this is likely an acute decompensation
of a chronic type II respiratory failure.
36. C. Metabolic acidosis. A low pH with a low CO2 and
a low HCO3 demonstrates a metabolic acidosis. The
low pCO2 likely demonstrates an incomplete
respiratory compensation. Note the relatively low
pO2 with 35% oxygen, demonstrating a likely
underlying type I respiratory failure.
Chapter 13  The upper respiratory
tract
37. C. Croup. The key features are the night time
cough, acute history, fevers and barking nature of
the cough. The fact that the child is irritable
suggests that they are not significantly
compromised.
38. A. 0.5 mL of 1:1000 IM adrenaline. Remember that
for anaphylaxis the recommended dose is now
always IM not IV (can be given quickly without
waiting for access). As it is IM, the more
concentrated 1:1000 dose is given, with 0.5 mL
given initially. Something worth learning, just in
case.
Chapter 14  Asthma
39. E. Weight loss. Unexplained weight loss should
prompt further investigation into alternative
diagnoses. Intermittent wheeze, chest tightness,
cough and breathless are all typical symptoms
associated with asthma.
40. A. PEFR 45% predicted. PEFR during a life-
threatening asthma exacerbation is < 33% or not
recordable. A PEFR of 45% predicted would indicate
a moderate asthma exacerbation.
Chapter 15  Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
41. B. Spirometry. Whilst all the investigations may be
appropriate for this patient, spirometry is the gold
standard for diagnosis with a forced expiratory
volume in 1 second to forced vital capacity ratio of
< 0.7. Chest radiography is useful to exclude other
conditions such as lung cancer, infection or
interstitial lung disease; echocardiography may be
used if cardiac failure is suspected; full blood count
may show active infection or polycythaemia and
sputum culture is important to assess for active
infection.
42. D. Start patient on NIV (bilevel positive airway
pressure). The patient has become acidotic and
hypercapnic when managed with controlled oxygen
therapy and now requires NIV. If after a trial the
patient does not respond or cannot tolerate NIV,
then she might need referral to intensive care for
invasive ventilation. Giving high-flow oxygen or
simply reducing the amount of oxygen (as the
patient is already hypoxic) is likely to make the
situation worse. There is no benefit to additional
steroid use if an adequate dose was originally given.
Chapter 16  Disorders of the
interstitium
43. C. Asbestos. Asbestos is known to cause asbestosis,
pleural plaques, mesothelioma and lung cancer but it
is not commonly linked to hypersensitivity
pneumonitis.
44. A. An HRCT with bilateral basal honeycomb change.
HRCT in IPF typically shows a usual interstitial
pneumonia pattern with subpleural peripheral and
basal fibrosis and honeycomb change. Consolidation
on CT would suggest an alternative process such as
infection, as would blood tests suggestive of
infection (raised WBC and CRP level). Spirometry in
a patient with IPF normally shows a restrictive
pattern with a decreased gas transfer. A chest
radiograph showing cardiomegaly and pulmonary
oedema suggests cardiac failure, a differential for
IPF.
Chapter 17  Lung cancer
45. C. Liver, bone, brain, adrenals, skin. This is a hard
question; reread the chapter and try to remember
them.
46. B. A solitary 4-cm left-sided hilar lung tumour with
involvement of two ipsilateral hilar lymph nodes but
no distal metastases. A mass 3–7 cm is stage 2. Note
the ipsilateral (same side) hilar node involvement
giving N1 with no evidence of metastatic disease
(M = 0). Answer A demonstrates contralateral node
involvement (N = 3), C is likely metastatic breast
cancer. D gives signs of distal metastases (M = 1)
whilst E shows a very small lung lesion which may or
may not have clinical significance (more details of
features are required).
47. D. Arrange a staging CT. This man appears to have
lung cancer; a CT will define the next most suitable
investigations. A lateral chest radiograph will add
little to the current clinical picture and a cortisol
level is not indicated. Tuberculosis or other infection
may be a differential diagnosis in this patient,
however is less likely and further imaging should be
performed first.
48. C. Arrange an urgent CT chest. This patient has
superior vena cava obstruction, an oncological
emergency. Treatment is with high dose steroids,
radiotherapy or stenting. The presentation does not
fit with anaphylaxis or sepsis at this stage, but
further active investigation needs to be performed to
rule out serious underlying pathology.
49. E. Stopping smoking improves life expectancy even
after lung cancer diagnosis. It is never too late to
stop! Squamous cell is the commonest lung cancer
type in Europe; haemoptysis is seen in around 50%
of lung cancer patients. Finger clubbing has many
causes including cardiac, abdominal or respiratory.
Spinal cord compression occurs because of
metastatic disease as a structural complication
rather than a paraneoplastic syndrome.
Chapter 18  Respiratory infections
50. C. Streptococcus pneumoniae.
51. A. Staphylococcus aureus. This is a common cause
of secondary bacterial infection following influenza.
S. aureus pneumonia is often rapidly progressive and
characteristically causes cavitation on X-ray.
52. B. Pneumocystis jiroveci. Pneumocystis is a fungal
lung infection that commonly presents with
dyspnoea on exertion in immunosuppressed patients.
Patients with HIV and a CD4 count < 200 × 106/L
are at risk.
Chapter 19  Bronchiectasis and cystic
fibrosis
53. D. Cystic fibrosis is a congenital cause of
bronchiectasis. All other options are acquired causes
of bronchiectasis.
54. A. High resolution CT scan to look for typical signs
of bronchiectasis such as thickened bronchial walls
and the signet ring sign will confirm the diagnosis. A
chest radiograph is not diagnostic in bronchiectasis.
A sweat test is used to diagnose cystic fibrosis and,
as this lady is in her 80s, is not required in this case.
Flexible bronchoscopy is useful if unilobar disease
owing to obstruction is suspected. Routine blood
tests will not diagnose bronchiectasis but may be
required if acute infection is suspected.
Chapter 20  Pleural disease
55. E. Hypocalcaemia is not a recognized cause of
pleural effusion. Organ failure and malignancy
(including haematological malignancies) as well as
low-albumin states from poor nutrition are all
common causes of pleural effusion.
56. A. Bronchial carcinoma. A blood-stained effusion is
highly suggestive of pulmonary malignancy, whether
bronchial carcinoma or a pleural malignancy.
57. B. Insert a large bore cannula into the midclavicular
line of the left second intercostal space. The clinical
scenario describes a tension pneumothorax following
chest trauma. This is a medical emergency and
needle decompression of the pneumothorax should
take place before any further investigations such as
a chest X-ray or ABG analysis. A chest drain should
be inserted following needle decompression once the
patient is stabilized.
58. E. Appearance of pus on pleural aspirate. Aspiration
of pus from the pleural cavity is one of the defining
features of empyema.
Chapter 21  Thromboembolic disease
and pulmonary hypertension
59. B. CT pulmonary angiogram. The likely diagnosis in
this scenario is pulmonary embolism following a
recent deep vein thrombosis. A CT pulmonary
angiogram is the gold standard investigation for
diagnosis of a pulmonary embolism. Although
pulmonary angiography is useful, it has considerably
more risks associated with it.
60. B. Oral contraceptive pill. Although a risk factor, the
oral contraceptive pill is not on the Wells scoring
system for pulmonary embolism clinical probability.
61. B. Rivaroxaban is a direct inhibitor of factor X.
62. B. The most common cause of PH in the United
Kingdom is pulmonary artery hypertension. It is
accepted that the most common cause in the UK of
PH is left heart disease. Pulmonary artery
hypertension is rare in the general population.
Chapter 22  Sleep disorders
63. E. All of the above. Down syndrome creates
obstructive anatomy, obesity predisposes to adipose
tissue deposition in the neck, acromegaly can cause
macroglossia and amyloidosis can lead to deposition
into and hypertrophy of soft tissue.
64. A. Score the Epworth Sleepiness Scale then, if
positive, perform a sleep study. Performing a simple
straightforward questionnaire should be the initial
screening tool, followed by an in-depth sleep study to
provide a diagnosis, in most circumstances.
Chapter 23  Respiratory
manifestations of systemic disease
65. B. A presentation of sarcoidosis combining hilar
lymphadenopathy, erythema nodosum, joint
symptoms and fever. Lofgren syndrome is a classical
presentation of sarcoidosis. The other answers
described are A: Churg–Strauss syndrome, C: Miller–
Fisher syndrome, D: Caplan syndrome, E: Felty
syndrome. Well done if you got them all!
66. E. Ankylosing spondylitis. The key is apical fibrosis.
Whilst rheumatoid arthritis is again often associated
with lung fibrosis, it typically affects the lung bases.
Other causes of apical lung fibrosis include
sarcoidosis, pneumoconiosis, silicosis, radiation and
tuberculosis.
EMQ answers
Chapter 1  Overview of the
respiratory system
Ventilation and gas exchange
1. F. Ventilation. Ventilation can be defined as the
movement of air in and out of the respiratory system.
2. G. Expiration. Expiration is a passive process, unlike
inspiration.
3. D. Restrictive disorder. This group of disorders
restricts lung expansion.
4. B. Diffusion. Gases diffuse across using partial
pressure gradients.
5. A. Partial pressure. In a mixture of gases, a partial
pressure is the theoretical pressure of one gas if that
gas alone occupied the entire volume of the original
mixture.
Chapter 2  Organization of the
respiratory tract
Cells and tissues of the lower
respiratory tract
1. D. Bronchiole. Bronchioles contain no cartilage,
meaning these airways must be kept open by radial
traction. The smooth-muscle layer is prominent and
can alter airway diameter and resistance.
2. G. Trachea. The trachea contains C-shaped hyaline
cartilage that merges with the submucosa.
3. H. Type I pneumocytes. These structural cells make
up 90% of the surface lining of the alveolar wall and
are joined by tight junctions.
4. I. Type II pneumocytes. These are surfactant
producing cells and make up 5%–10% of the alveolar
wall.
5. C. Alveoli. An alveolus is a blind-ending terminal sac
of respiratory tract and is the main site of gaseous
exchange. Communication between adjacent alveoli
is possible through perforations in the alveolar wall,
called pores of Kohn.
Chapter 4  Physiology, ventilation and
gas exchange
Physiology, ventilation and gas
exchange
1. E. Residual volume.
2. D. Functional residual capacity.
3. H. Inspiratory capacity.
4. G. Tidal volume.
5. F. Expiratory reserve volume.
Chapter 5  Perfusion and gas
transport
Matching acid–base disturbance
1. A. Compensated respiratory alkalosis. The low PCO2
would cause a raised pH, compensated by the low
bicarbonate. The primary respiratory pathology is
suggested by the hypoxaemia.
2. C. Compensated metabolic acidosis. The low
bicarbonate is compensated by the low PCO2. In this
instance the normal PO2 suggests that this is a
primary metabolic rather than respiratory pathology.
3. F. Metabolic alkalosis. The raised bicarbonate would
cause an alkalosis, with no evidence of respiratory
compensation with a normal PCO2.
4. G. Respiratory acidosis. The hypercapnia with low
PO2 suggests a respiratory acidosis with type II
respiratory failure. There is no metabolic
compensation, which can take days to develop,
suggesting this is an acute pathology.
5. E. Metabolic acidosis. The low bicarbonate suggests
an underlying metabolic acidosis, with no evidence of
respiratory compensation.
Chapter 6  Control of respiratory
function
Mechanisms and anatomy of
respiratory control
1. G. Rapidly adapting receptors. Rapidly adapting
receptors form part of the cough reflex.
2. B. Bötzinger complex. The Bötzinger complex lies
rostral to the nucleus ambiguus in the medulla.
3. A. Pontine neurones. Pontine neurones regulate the
dorsal respiratory group.
4. D. and E. Chemoreceptors and carotid bodies.
Carotid bodies are the site of peripheral
chemoreceptors, which are sensitive to the
parameters described.
5. F. C-fibres. C-fibres, when stimulated, induce
bradycardia and hypotension.
Chapter 8  Taking a respiratory
history
Giving a diagnosis based on a short
respiratory history
1. H. Inhaled foreign body. Often in paediatrics the
patient is unable to give a clear history. Sometimes
clinical suspicion and examination findings are
required for the correct diagnosis.
2. A. Asthma. The patient is having an acute asthma
exacerbation.
3. B. Bronchiectasis. Any significant childhood
respiratory infection can predispose to
bronchiectasis.
4. G. Iatrogenic. Although many causes are possible,
the patient may be on an angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor. It is important to check the drug
history of such a patient.
5. C. Carcinoma of the bronchus. The patient
demonstrates red flag features of a persistent cough
and weight loss in a heavy smoker. Chest imaging is
mandatory in such patients.
Chapter 9  Examination of the
respiratory system
Giving a diagnosis based on
examination findings
1. F. Pulmonary oedema. The findings are in keeping
with fluid overload.
2. A. Pleural effusion. Note the reduced vocal
resonance differentiating from consolidation. (You
would expect increased vocal resonance or bronchial
breathing in consolidation.)
3. B. Consolidation. The clue is the bronchial breathing
and increased vocal resonance.
4. C. Pneumothorax. Note the deviating trachea is a
late sign and often remains central.
5. G. Interstitial lung disease. The patient is likely to
have pulmonary fibrosis given the examination
findings.
Chapter 10  The respiratory patient:
clinical investigations
Investigations in respiratory
disease
1. C. Flexible bronchoscopy. Flexible bronchoscopy is a
fibreoptic camera that can be passed via the nose
into the bronchial tree. Indications for this procedure
include suspected malignancy or a suspected
infection caused by an atypical pathogen.
2. D. PEFR. Serial peak flow measurements can be
performed by the patient, both pre and post inhaled
bronchodilators, and the readings recorded in a
diary. This is a useful investigation to diagnose
diurnal variation, which is common in asthma.
3. B. Bronchoalveolar lavage. This is performed in
bronchoscopy and samples are sent for cytology (to
look for malignant cells) and microscopy and culture
to look for infectious pathogens.
4. G. Thoracoscopy. This procedure is used to help
diagnose the cause of exudative pleural effusions.
5. E. Body plethysmography.
Chapter 11  The respiratory patient:
imaging investigations
Respiratory imaging investigations
1. D. Chest ultrasound. This is the most appropriate
imaging used to guide thoracocentesis and can be
performed at the bedside.
2. F. HRCT. The history and chest radiograph findings
are suggestive of pulmonary fibrosis or other
interstitial lung disease. Silica exposure is common
in construction workers. HRCT is the modality of
choice for investigating lung parenchymal disease.
3. A. PA chest radiograph. The history and clinical
findings are suggestive of pneumonia. The best
imaging for diagnosing this is a PA chest radiograph.
4. E. Portable AP chest radiograph. Here the diagnosis
of pneumothorax is given. Whilst the patient has had
an initial treatment, they still sound unwell,
requiring high levels of oxygen. In this setting a
portable chest radiograph, performed in AP position,
seems most appropriate to confirm the diagnosis,
and more definitive treatment with intercostal drain
insertion can be provided.
5. C. CTPA. The clinical history and investigation
findings so far are consistent with the diagnosis of
pulmonary embolism. A CTPA should be performed
as no clear contraindications are demonstrated.
Chapter 12  Acute respiratory failure
Respiratory failure and emergency
management
1. F or H. Pulmonary embolism or ventilator-associated
pneumonia. Pulmonary embolism and pneumonia can
cause acute type II respiratory failure. Whilst this is
also possible in obstructive sleep apnoea, this tends
to be a chronic process.
2. H. Ventilator-associated pneumonia is a common
complication of invasive ventilation.
3. A. PEEP. Patients with chronic lung disease can be
seen to create their own PEEP by pursing their lips
as they breathe out to provide splinting of the small
airways.
4. B. Confusion. Confusion is an important sign of
hypoxia, suggesting inadequate cerebral perfusion.
In the acute setting, it can be a sign of critical illness
and is part of new criteria for sepsis diagnosis.
5. D. Type I respiratory failure. Type I respiratory
failure is defined by these criteria.
Chapter 13  The upper respiratory
tract
Upper respiratory pathology
1. C. Rhinovirus. Think ‘rhino’—Latin for ‘nose’. The
rhinovirus family are the commonest cause of
infectious rhinitis.
2. E. Haemophilus influenzae. Remember the incidence
of epiglottitis has significantly reduced with the HIB
vaccine.
3. A and B. Allergic rhinitis and anaphylaxis. Both are
type 1 IgE-mediated immune responses to an
allergen. Anaphylaxis is the more severe, acute form.
4. J. Pollen. Typically, the allergen responsible for
seasonal allergic rhinitis or hay fever.
5. F. Laryngeal cancer. This relies on the
differentiation between laryngectomy and
tracheostomy, which has a broader differential.
Chapter 14  Asthma
Treatment of asthma
1. J. Nebulized β2-agonist and oral corticosteroids. This
woman is presenting with symptoms of a moderate-
to-severe asthma exacerbation and should be initially
treated with nebulized bronchodilators and
corticosteroids.
2. I. An ICS/LABA combination inhaler. Inhalers used in
the SMART regime contain a LABA and ICS
combination. They can be used as both maintenance
and reliever therapy in asthma.
3. E. ICS. An ICS is an appropriate initial preventer
inhaler in patients with asthma.
4. H. Oral leukotriene receptor antagonist. Montelukast
is a leukotriene receptor antagonist oral tablet that
can be trialled in asthma in addition to inhaled
corticosteroid and bronchodilator therapy.
5. F. Oral corticosteroid. Short courses of oral
corticosteroids are used during acute asthma
exacerbations.
Chapter 15  Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
Chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease management
1. G. Smoking cessation. Smoking cessation is the most
appropriate initial step in management.
2. D. Long-term oxygen therapy. The patient has
evidence of pulmonary hypertension despite maximal
preventative treatment.
3. F. NIV. The patient has evidence of decompensated
type II respiratory failure despite controlled oxygen
therapy. Depending on the clinical circumstance, a
trial of maximal nebulized treatment may be given
first and the ABG analysis repeated in 1 hour, prior
to initiating NIV.
4. A. Pulmonary rehabilitation. This has been shown to
reduce symptoms, and improve quality of life and
survival.
5. B. Inhaled bronchodilators. By the Global Initiative
for Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) classification,
the patient has GOLD1 group A disease severity,
requiring a trial of either SABA or SAMA. Pulmonary
rehabilitation may also be appropriate as part of the
patient’s management.
Chapter 16  Disorders of the
interstitium
Disorders of the interstitium
1. F. Hypersensitivity pneumonitis.
2. E. Caplan syndrome. Caplan syndrome is seen in
coal workers with seropositive rheumatoid arthritis
and is characterized by rounded lesions on chest X-
ray.
3. I. Progressive massive fibrosis is a disease found in
coal workers that causes symptoms of progressive
breathlessness and a productive cough. Large round
fibrotic nodules are seen on chest X-ray.
4. C. Asbestosis. Crocidolite (blue asbestos) is thought
to be the most pathogenic of the asbestos fibres. It
can also cause pleural plaques and malignancies
such as lung cancer and mesothelioma.
5. B. Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis. Idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis is the commonest idiopathic
interstitial pneumonia.
Chapter 17  Lung cancer
Complications of lung cancer
1. B. Malignant pleural effusion. The patient is high
risk, presents with red flag symptoms and has
clinical signs of pleural effusion. This is lung cancer
until proven otherwise.
2. C. Spinal cord compression. Back pain is a common
symptom but in the presence of neurological features
suggests compression of the spinal cord. The
presence of incontinence suggests significant disease
and urgent magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
imaging is required to assess for spinal cord
compression.
3. E. Brain metastases. This may not be immediately
obvious based on the history alone and a detailed
neurological examination is also required. Note the
risk factors for malignancy in the history. A
computed tomography brain image would be the
initial investigation of choice followed by MRI, to
assess for a mass lesion provoking seizures, with
alternative causes also to be excluded such as
intracranial haemorrhage. Note low sodium
secondary to SIADH can also present with seizures,
but not with focal neurological deficit.
4. H. Pancoast syndrome. Remember the classic
symptoms of Horner syndrome: ptosis, meiosis,
enopthalmos and anhydrosis. Given the patient’s
smoking history, a Pancoast tumour is the most likely
cause.
5. D. Hypercalcaemia. This is difficult to diagnose
based on the patient’s symptoms alone as the
features of hypercalcaemia are nonspecific. It should
always be something to consider in any patient with
active malignancy and can be investigated with a
simple blood test.
Chapter 18  Respiratory infections
Organisms in pneumonia
1. H. L. pneumophilia. This presents with multisystem
features including diarrhoea and vomiting and is
often associated with recent travel or hotel stays.
2. F. M. pneumonia. This is associated with
autoimmune phenomena such as erythema
multiforme, a rash with typical target lesions.
3. D. P. aeruginosa. This organism is often associated
with ventilator-associated pneumonia in the ICU.
4. A. S. aureus. A common organism in secondary
bacterial pneumonia that can cause cavitation.
5. C. S. pneumoniae. The commonest cause of
community acquired pneumonia.
Chapter 19  Bronchiectasis and cystic
fibrosis
Cystic fibrosis
1. Sweat test. A sweat test result of > 60 mmol/L is
suggestive of CF.
2. F. ΔF508. This is the most common mutation in CF.
3. G. Immunoreactive trypsinogen test. This test is part
of the Guthrie test, a heel prick test used to screen
newborn babies for multiple diseases. The
immunoreactive trypsinogen is used to detect CF.
4. H. Ivacaftor. This is a CFTR potentiator drug that
keeps the CFTR channel open in patients with CF
who have the G551D mutation.
5. D. DNase is a nebulized mucolytic that improves
lung function in patients with cystic fibrosis.
Treatment of bronchiectasis
1. D. Carbocisteine. This is a mucolytic that is
commonly prescribed to patients with bronchiectasis
to aid sputum production. There is a limited evidence
base for its use.
2. G. Azithromycin. Macrolide antibiotics such as
azithromycin are used both for their antibacterial
and their immune-modulating properties. An
example regime is 250 mg three times weekly.
3. E. Acapella device. This oscillating positive
expiratory pressure device is used to aid sputum
expectoration in bronchiectasis.
4. H. Active cycle breathing techniques. These use a
combination of small and deep breaths to help bring
up sputum. They are commonly taught by respiratory
physiotherapists to patients with bronchiectasis.
5. B. Amoxicillin. This is commonly used as a first-line
antibiotic in exacerbations of bronchiectasis in
nonpenicillin-allergic patients. Reference should
always be made to previous and current sputum
cultures where possible.
Chapter 22  Sleep disorders
Management of sleep disorders
1. C. Obesity hypoventilation syndrome. The clue is the
abnormally raised PaCO2 differentiating from OSA.
2. F. OSA. Note the normal PaCO2 result.
3. A. CPAP. This is the next most appropriate
management step and can create dramatic results.
4. E. Tonsillectomy. In cases of tonsillar hypertrophy
this is often the definitive management step.
5. G. Central sleep apnoea. This complex condition is
more common in those with a previous cerebral
insult.
Chapter 23  Respiratory
manifestations of systemic disease
Respiratory manifestations of
systemic disease
1. D. Ankylosing spondylitis. The combination of back
pain with findings consistent with apical fibrosis and
aortic regurgitation indicate ankylosing spondylitis.
2. F. Sarcoid. Whilst the symptoms of cough and
shortness of breath are nonspecific, the chest X-ray
findings are highly suggestive of sarcoidosis, a
condition more common in young women of Afro-
Caribbean origin.
3. B. Granulomatosis with polyangiitis. The features of
haemoptysis and renal failure suggest vasculitis,
with a positive cANCA highly suggestive of
granulomatosis with polyangiitis. In Goodpasture
disease you would expect haematuria.
4. E. Systemic lupus erythematosus. The rash
distribution suggests a typical malar rash of lupus,
with symptoms suggestive of pleurisy.
5. C. Rheumatoid arthritis. The patient has features of
a deforming polyarthropathy of the hands with the
likely complication of pulmonary fibrosis.
Glossary
Acinus Airways involved in gaseous exchange, beginning
with respiratory bronchioles and ending with the alveoli.
Alveolar dead space Air reaching the alveoli that does not
partake in gas exchange, for example, because the alveoli
are not perfused. This volume is included in physiological
dead space.
Anatomical dead space Airways that do not partake in
gas exchange, i.e., from the nose and mouth to and
including the terminal bronchioles. This volume is usually
about 150 mL and included in physiological dead space.
Antitussive An airway disease with symptoms caused by
reversible and intermittent airway obstruction. There is
underlying inflammation characterized by eosinophilic
infiltration. Often associated with other allergic diseases.
Asthma An airway disease with symptoms caused by
reversible and intermittent airway obstruction. There is
underlying inflammation characterized by eosinophilic
infiltration. Often associated with other allergic diseases.
Atelectasis Collapse of part of the lung.
Bronchiectasis Permanent dilatation of the bronchi
secondary to chronic infection. It is the end stage of
many pulmonary diseases, including cystic fibrosis.
Bronchitis See ‘Chronic bronchitis’.
Bronchoalveolar lavage A diagnostic test performed
during bronchoscopy. Saline is squirted down the
bronchoscope into the lungs, then sucked back up and
the cells collected sent for cytology. The cellular profiles
indicate different pathologies.
Bronchoscopy A diagnostic technique where a (usually
fibreoptic) camera is inserted into the lungs to visualize
pathology and take biopsy samples.
Chronic bronchitis A disease that is defined clinically by
a persistent cough for at least 3 months of the year, for 2
consecutive years. Part of the spectrum of chronic
obstructive pulmonary disease.
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) A
collective term for inflammatory airway diseases
(emphysema, chronic bronchitis and others) occurring
almost exclusively in smokers, characterized by
irreversible and progressive airway obstruction.
Inflammation is characterized by neutrophilic infiltration.
Conducting airways Airways not involved in gas
exchange, i.e., airways proximal to respiratory
bronchiole.
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) A method
of noninvasive ventilation whereby air is blown into the
airways (positive pressure) for the whole of the
respiratory cycle. CPAP is delivered by mask and is a
common treatment for obstructive sleep apnoea.
Corticosteroid (glucocorticosteroid) A commonly used
immunosuppressive drug that acts at a nuclear level to
inhibit inflammation.
Cystic fibrosis An autosomal-recessive condition causing a
defect in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane receptor
(CFTR), resulting in abnormally viscous lung secretions.
In the lung the mutation predisposes to chronic lung
infection and bronchiectasis; it also affects the pancreas
and can cause male infertility.
Emphysema Defined anatomically as destruction of the
alveolar septa resulting in permanent enlargement of the
air spaces distal to the terminal bronchiole. Part of the
spectrum of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Haemoptysis A term to describe the symptom of coughing
up blood.
Hypoxic vasoconstriction Constriction of pulmonary
blood vessels in response to low alveolar oxygen tension.
This mechanism acts to prevent a ventilation:perfusion
mismatch.
Interstitial lung disease (ILD) A diverse group of more
than 200 different lung diseases affecting the
interstitium (the tissue extending from and including the
alveolar epithelium to capillary endothelium).
Mediastinum The collective name to describe structures
situated in the midline and separating the two lungs. It
contains the heart, great vessels, trachea, oesophagus,
lymph nodes and phrenic and vagus nerves.
Mesothelioma Cancer of the lung pleura, almost always
caused by asbestos inhalation.
Obstructive lung diseases Diseases which narrow the
airways and increase resistance to air flow.
Physiological dead space The total amount of air in the
lung that does not partake in gas exchange. Includes
anatomical dead space and alveolar dead space.
Pleura An epithelial lining which covers the external
surface of the lungs (visceral pleura) and then is
reflected back to line the chest wall (parietal pleura).
Pleural effusion Fluid in the pleural space.
Pneumocytes The cells lining the alveoli. They are either
type I, which are thin and primarily structural, or type II,
which are rounded and secrete surfactant.
Pneumonia Infection of peripheral lung tissue.
Pneumothorax Air in the pleural space; the tension type is
a medical emergency.
Pulmonary embolism Thrombi lodging in pulmonary
vasculature causing ventilation:perfusion mismatches of
varying severity. A serious complication of venous
thrombosis.
Pulmonary fibrosis A restrictive lung disease where lung
parenchyma is stiffened by deposition of collagen; the
end point of many different lung diseases.
Respiratory tree Another name for the airways,
particularly referring to their branching pattern. Does
not include alveoli.
Restrictive lung diseases Diseases which stiffen the
lungs so that expansion of the lungs is compromised.
Sarcoidosis A multisystem granulomatous disorder of
unknown origin that can cause a granulomatous ILD.
Surfactant A liquid rich in phospholipids and apoproteins
that lines the alveoli to reduce surface tension and
defend the host against inhaled pathogens. It is secreted
by type II pneumocytes.
Spirometry A diagnostic technique used to measure speed
of air flow and the volume of air exhaled from the lungs.
Wheeze The musical sound heard on expiration, caused by
airway narrowing.
Index
Note: Page numbers followed by f indicate figures, t
indicate tables, and b indicate boxes.
A
Abnormal breath sounds 87t
Acid–base balance 52–55
acid production 52
buffers 52
disturbances 53–54, 53f
normal pH 52
regulation 7–8
Acidosis 
metabolic 54
respiratory 54
Acid production, acid-base balance 52
Acinus 
anatomy 4f
respiratory tract 13, 17f
structure 3–4
Acute asthma 134–136, 135f, 135t
Acute bronchitis 75
Acute coryza 120
Acute epiglottitis 124, 124t
Acute exacerbation 
investigation 144–145
management 145–146
severity 144
treatment 178–179
Acute respiratory failure 
airway 111
arterial blood gas result 112–113, 112t
breathing 111–112
circulation 112
disability 112
exposure 112
Acute sinusitis 
aetiology 122
anatomy 122f
clinical features 122
investigations 122
management 122–123
paranasal sinuses, radiology 123f
pathology 122
Adamantases, influenza management 172
Adenocarcinoma 156–157, 156t, 162
Adenoids 9, 14, 120, 123f
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), lung cancer 155,
157t
AIDS 
high-resolution CT 107
lung disease 205
Airway (A) 111
Airway remodelling, asthma 129
Airway resistance 35–38 see also specific factors
bronchial smooth muscle tone 37, 37f
determining factors 36–37
dynamic compression in disease 38
flow patterns 36
laminar flow 36, 36f
lung volume 36–37
measurement 38f
sites of 36
transmural pressure 37–38, 37f
turbulent flow 36, 36f
Alkalosis 
metabolic 54–55
respiratory 54
Allergens, asthma 127
Allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis (ABPA) 133b, 175
Allergic rhinitis 120–122
aetiology 120–121, 121f
classification 121, 121t
definition 120
epidemiology 120
investigations 122
management 122, 122t
pathology 121
polygenic inheritance 121f
symptoms 122
α1-antitrypsin deficiency, COPD 137
Alveolar capillaries 
lung volume effects 23
membranes 3
Alveolar collapse prevention, surfactant 35, 35f
Alveolar destruction 138–139
Alveolar ducts 
anatomy 4f
microscopic anatomy 16, 17f
Alveolar macrophages 
cellular defences 19
microscopic structure 16–17
respiratory tract defence mechanisms 16–17
Alveolar oxygen tension (PAO2) 7t
Alveolar ventilation 32–33
Alveolar vessels, pulmonary blood flow 23, 24f
Alveoli 
anatomy 4f
bronchial tree 15f
microscopic anatomy 16, 17f
Alveolous 13
Anaemic hypoxia 51–52
Anaerobic cultures, sputum 91
Anaphylaxis 
acute respiratory failure 114t
aetiology 119
clinical features 119
investigations 119
pathogenesis 119
Anatomical dead space 32
Angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) 202t
Ankle swelling, history-taking 76
Ankylosing spondylitis 204–205
Anterior cervical chain lymph nodes 84f
Anterior ethmoidal artery 9
anatomy 9f
Anterior mediastinal masses, radiography 104
Anteroposterior chest radiograph 99
Antibiotics 
bronchiecstasis treatment 177
COPD 145
cystic fibrosis 178
Antibodies  See Immunoglobulins (Ig)
Anticholinergics 66
Antiinflammatory medications 178
Antimicrobial peptides, respiratory tract defence
mechanisms 18
Antiproteases, respiratory tract defence mechanisms 19
Aorta, diaphragm passage 30, 30f
Aortic impression, lungs 13f
Arterial baroreceptors 60
Arterial blood gases 
acute respiratory failure 112–113, 112t
asthma 134
COPD 145
investigations 89–90
pulmonary embolism 191
tests 89–90
Arterial oxygen tension 6–7, 7t
Arytenoid cartilage 
anatomy 10f
larynx 10, 10f
Asbestos-related lung diseases 153–154
Aspergilloma 173
Aspergillus fumigatus 133b, 173
Aspiration pneumonia 165
Asthma 127–136
background 127
classification 127, 127t
acute 134–136, 135f, 135t
extrinsic 127
intrinsic 127
clinical features 129
wheeze 75
COPD vs. 131, 131t
definition 127
diagnosis 129–133, 132f
differential diagnosis 132–133
extrinsic 127
intrinsic 127
investigations 129–133, 131f
occupational 127–128
pathogenesis 128–129, 128f, 130f
airway remodelling 129
immediate (early) responses 129
inflammatory mediators 128–129
late responses 129
precipitating factors 127
sputum production 74
prevalence 127
severity 135t
treatment 133–134
education 134
nonpharmacological 133
pharmacological 133–134, 133f
Atelectasis, radiography 101, 101t
Auscultation, chest examination 86, 87t
B
Bacillus Calmette–Guérin (BCG) vaccine 170
Baroreceptors, arterial 60
Barrel chest 85f
Basement membrane, alveolus 14, 15f, 16
Beclometasone dipropionate 67
β2 adrenoceptor agonists, long-acting  See Long-acting β2
agonists
Bicarbonate 
as pH buffer 52
tests 90, 90t
Bicarbonate ions, carbon dioxide transport 49, 50f
Biopsy 
fine-needle aspiration biopsy 160
lung 92
sarcoidosis 202t
transbronchial 92
transthoracic fine-needle aspiration biopsy 160
Blood–air interface 14
Blood culture 
microbiology 91
pneumonia 166
Blood gases 89–90, 90t
arterial  See Arterial blood gases
Blood, gas transport  See Gas transport in blood
Blood tests 89, 89–90t
asthma 132
foreign body aspiration 120
Body plethysmography 96, 96f
Body temperature regulation 8
Bohr equation 33
Bones  see also specific bones
lateral radiograph 101
radiography 101
Bony deformities, hands 81
Bötzinger complex 57
Boutonniére deformities 82f
Branch bronchi 4f
Breathing (B)  See also Respiration
acute respiratory failure 111–112
patterns 79, 79t
Breathlessness  See Dyspnoea (breathlessness)
Breath sounds 
abnormal 87t
diseases/disorders 87t
British Thoracic Society (BTS) 
acute asthma management 132–133f, 133–134
asthma treatment 132–133f, 133–134
pleural effusion treatments 183f, 186f
Bronchi 3
anatomy 4f
blood supply 21–22
branch 4f
microscopic anatomy 16, 16f
tertiary 16
Bronchial breathing 86, 87t
Bronchial carcinoma 155–162
aetiology 155
clinical features 157–158
complications 158–159
fitness for treatment 160
haemoptysis 75
hilar masses 104t
histology 155–157, 156t
investigations 159–160
metastases 158–159
prognosis 162
staging 160
Bronchial provocation tests 128
Bronchial smooth muscle tone 37, 37f
Bronchiectasis 175–177
acquired 175
adults 176
aetiology 175
children 176
clinical features 175
definition 175
high-resolution computed tomography 106–107
investigations 176–177
pathogenesis 175
physical examination 175
treatment 177
Bronchioles 4
anatomy 4f
microscopic anatomy 16, 17f
respiratory  See Respiratory bronchioles
terminal 4f
Bronchitis, chronic  See Chronic bronchitis
Bronchoalveolar lavage 92
Bronchodilators 65–66 see also specific drugs
inhaled, COPD management 142–143
long-acting β2 agonists 65–66
short-acting β2-agonists 65
Bronchogenic carcinomas 74–75
Bronchopulmonary segments, lungs 12–13
Bronchoscopy 91–92
bronchial carcinoma 160
bronchiecstasis 177
flexible 160
foreign body aspiration 120
Bronchus 15f, 15t
BTS  See British Thoracic Society (BTS)
Budesonide 66–67
Buffers, acid-base balance 52
Bupropion 69
C
Calcium 
levels 89
sarcoidosis 202t
Cancer 
large cell lung cancer 157t
lung 
communication and lifestyle advice 161
COPD 140–141
multidisciplinary team assessment 160
staging 160
treatment 160–162
metastases  See Malignant lung disease; Metastases
non-small cell lung cancer 159t, 162
bronchial carcinoma 156–157
radiation therapy 161–162
staging 159t
surgery 161
small-cell lung cancer 159–160, 162
CAP  See Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP)
Caplan syndrome 153
Carbamino compounds 49, 50f
Carbocisteine, COPD management 143
Carbon dioxide (CO2) 
dissociation curve 50
dissolved 49
fetal haemoglobin affinity 48
gaseous exchange 40
high ventilation-perfusion ratio 44, 45f
low ventilation-perfusion ratio 44, 45f
oxygen dissociation curve 47–48
response to 60–61, 60f
retention, examination 81
transport in blood 49
Carbon dioxide partial pressure (PaCO2) 
cyclical changes 57–60
respiration control 57, 59–60f, 60–61
tests 90, 90t
Carbon monoxide (CO) 
diffusion 39–40, 95–96
poisoning 48, 49f
Carboxyhaemoglobin 48–49, 49f
Carcinoid tumours 157
Carcinomas 
bronchial  See Bronchial carcinoma
bronchogenic 74–75
nasopharynx  See Nasopharynx
Cardiac impression, lungs 13f
Cardiac notch, lungs 13–14f
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing 97
Carotid bodies, respiratory control 58–59
Cellular defences 19 see also specific cells
Central chemoreceptors 58
Central necrosis, bronchial carcinoma 158
Central sleep apnoea 199–200
Central tendon, diaphragm 30, 30f
Centriacinar emphysema 138, 139f
Centrilobular emphysema 138, 139f
C-fibres 
nerve endings 17
respiratory control 59–60, 59t
CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductive regulator)
gene 177–178
Chemoreceptors 
central 58
peripheral 58
respiratory control 58–59
Chemotherapy, bronchial carcinoma 162
Chest computed tomography, pneumothorax 185
Chest drains 183–185
Chest examination 83–87
auscultation 86, 87t
palpation 84, 86f
percussion 86, 86t
vocal resonance 87
whispering pectoriloquy 87
Chest pain, history-taking 75, 76f
Chest wall 
deformities 83, 85f
excursion 87t
mechanics 7
receptors 60
respiration control 7, 60
Chest wall compliance (CW) 34
Chest X-ray (CXR) 
asthma 131
bronchial carcinoma 159
COPD 141, 145
diseases/disorders 87t
foreign body aspiration 120
interstitial lung diseases 149f
pleural effusions 181
pneumothorax 185
pulmonary embolism 191
reporting 99
sarcoidosis 201
tuberculosis 168–170, 169f
Cheyne–Stokes respiration 62, 62f, 79t
Children, bronchiecstasis 176
Chronic bronchitis 74
definition 137t
haemoptysis 74
sputum production 74
Chronic laryngitis 124
Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) 137–146
aetiology 137
assessment 141
asthma vs. 131, 131t
classification 141, 141t
clinical features 139, 141t
ankle swelling 76
sputum production 74
wheeze 75
complications 139–141
cor pulmonale 140
emphysema 137t, 138–139
exacerbations 139–140
lung cancer 140–141
respiratory failure 140
definition 137t
epidemiology 137
genetic risk factors 137
high-resolution CT 107
investigations 141, 141t
management 142–144
acute exacerbations 144–146
bronchodilators 65–66
conservative measures 142
interventional treatments 144
pharmacological management 142–143
pulmonary rehabilitation 142
palliative care and 144
pathophysiology 137–139
Chronic rhinitis 120
Chronic sinusitis 123
Chronic thromboembolic disease 194
Churg–Strauss disease 203–204
Chylothorax 183
Ciclesonide 67
Circulation (C) 112
Clavicle 11f
Clearance, respiratory tract 17–18
Clinical chemistry 89
Clubbing 80–81, 81f
Coal worker’s pneumoconiosis 152–153
Coarse crackles 87t
Common carotid arteries 11
Common cold 120
Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) 165, 165t
Complement 19
Computed tomography (CT) 106
bronchial carcinoma 159–160
high-resolution  See High-resolution computed
tomography (HRCT)
lung carcinoma 106
mediastinal masses 106
pleural lesions 106, 106f
pulmonary nodules 106
vascular lesions 106
Computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) 
investigations 107
pulmonary embolism 192
Conducting airways 4
Conducting zone, tracheobronchial tree 13
Consolidation 
examination 87t
radiography 101–103, 102f
Contact tracing, tuberculosis 170
Continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) 114–115
COPD  See Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD)
Cor pulmonale, COPD 140
Corticosteroids  See Glucocorticosteroids
Coryza, acute 120
Costal cartilages 11, 11f
Costodiaphragmatic recess 12, 14f
Cough 
bronchiecstasis 175
history-taking 74–75
respiratory tract defence mechanisms 17–18
Crackles 86, 87t
Cranial nerve V, pharynx 9–10
Cranial nerve IX, pharynx 9–10
Cranial nerve X (vagus nerve) 
larynx 11
pharynx 9–10
C-reactive protein (CRP) 89
Cricoid cartilage 
anatomy 10, 10f
larynx 10, 10f
Cricosternal distance 84f
Cricothyroid cartilage 10–11, 10f
Cricotracheal membrane 10f
Croup (laryngotracheobronchitis) 124, 124t
CRP (C-reactive protein) 89
Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia 150
CT  See Computed tomography (CT)
CTOT (total compliance) 33
CW (chest wall compliance) 34
Cyanosis 
gas transport 47
peripheral 81
Cystic fibrosis 177–180
aetiology 178
clinical features 178
definition 177–180
diagnosis 178
organs affected by 179f
pathophysiology 177–180
prevalence 178
prognosis 180
surgical management 179–180
treatment 178–180
Cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductive regulator (CFTR)
gene 177–178
Cytotoxic hypoxia 52
D
D-dimer test, pulmonary embolism 192
Dead space 31–38
anatomical 32
physiologial 32–33
Deflation reflex 60
Diaphragm 30, 30f
inspiration 6
lateral radiograph 101
quiet inspiration 31
radiography 101
Differential white blood cell count 89, 90t
Diffusing capacity of carbon monoxide (DLCO) 40
Diffusion 3, 6–7
defects in 7
gaseous exchange 38–41, 40f
measurement 40–41
oxygen transport 7
partial pressures 6–7
tests of 95–96
Diffusion limitation, gaseous exchange 39–40
2,3-Diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) 47f, 48
Disability (D) 112
Dissolved carbon dioxide 49
Dissolved oxygen 46
DLCO (diffusing capacity of carbon monoxide) 40
Dorsal respiratory group neurons 57
DPG (2,3-Diphosphoglycerate) 47f, 48
Drugs 
asthma treatment 127, 134
history 77
pulmonary hypertension 195t
smoking cessation 69
Dry powder inhalers 67–68
Dynamic compression in disease 37–38
Dyspnoea (breathlessness) 
history-taking 73–74
E
E-cigarettes 69
Ectopic adrenocorticotrophic hormone, lung cancer 157t
EKG  See Electrocardiogram (EKG)
Electrocardiogram (EKG) 
exacerbation 145
pulmonary embolism 191–192
Emphysema 138–139
centriacinar/centrilobular 138, 139f
classification 138, 139f
COPD 137t, 138–139
definition 137t
lung compliance 34, 34f
mucus hypersecretion 139, 140f
panacinar/panilobular 139, 139f
Empyema (pyothorax) 182
Endobronchial ultrasound (EBUS) 92
ENT examination, asthma 132
Environmental factors 
allergic rhinitis 120–122
COPD 137
Eosinophils 90t
Epidemics 171
Epiglottis 4f, 10, 10f, 17
Epiglottitis, acute 124, 124t
Epworth Sleepiness Scale 197, 198b
ERV  See Expiratory reserve volume (ERV)
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), sarcoidosis 202t
ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate), sarcoidosis 202t
Ethambutol 170
European Society of Cardiology (ESC) 193f
Exacerbations 139–140
Examination 79–87, 87t
breathing patterns 79, 79t
carbon dioxide retention 81
chest  See Chest examination
eyes 82–83, 83f
face 82, 82f
general inspection 79
hands 80–81
head 82–83
jugular venous pressure 83, 84f, 84t
lung fibrosis 81
lymph nodes 83, 84f
muscle wasting 81, 82f
neck 82–83
peripheral cyanosis 81
radial pulse 81–82, 82t
respiratory rate 79, 79t
trachea 83, 83f
tremor 81
Excretion, respiration effects 8
Exercise 
asthma 134
respiration control 61–62
testing 97
Exhaled nitric oxide, asthma 132
Expiration 6
forced  See Forced expiration
quiet 31
transmural pressure 37–38
Expiratory reserve volume (ERV) 27t, 28f
disease effects 28f
lung volumes 28f
Exposure (E) 112
External carotid artery 9, 9f
External intercostal muscles 11, 12f, 29
External pressure, pulmonary blood flow 23, 23–24f
Extraalveolar vessels 23
Extracellular fluid pH, respiration control 7
Extrapulmonary tuberculosis 168, 168f
Extrinsic allergic alveolitis  See Hypersensitivity
pneumonitis (HP)
Extrinsic asthma 127
Eye examination 82–83, 83f
F
Face, examination 82, 82f
Family history 
allergic rhinitis 121
history-taking 77
Fetal haemoglobin (HbF) 48, 48f
FEV1 (forced expiratory volume in one second) 94
Fevers, history-taking 76
Fick’s law 
diffusion 39
pulmonary blood flow measurement 24, 25f
Fine crackles 87t
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy, transthoracic 160
Finger clubbing 80–81, 81f
Fissures, lateral radiograph 101
Flow patterns, airway resistance 36
Flow–volume loops 94–95, 95f
Fluticasone fuorate 67
Fluticasone propionate 67
Fluticasone, with salmeterol 66
Forced expiration 31, 32f
tests 94
transmural pressure 37, 37f
Forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) 94
Forced expiratory volume in one second:forced vital
capacity (FEV1:FVC) ratio 94, 141
Forced inspiration 31
Forced vital capacity (FVC) 94
Foreign body aspiration 119–120
acute respiratory failure 114t
aetiology 120
clinical features 120
investigations 120
management 120
prevalence 120
Formoterol 
and beclometasone (Fostair) 66
and budesonide (Symbicort) 66
Fostair (formoterol and beclometasone) 66
Fowler’s method, anatomical dead space measurement 32,
33f
FRC  See Functional residual capacity (FRC)
Full blood count 89, 89t
sarcoidosis 202t
Functional residual capacity (FRC) 27, 28f
disease effects 28, 28f
lung volumes 28f
tests for 96
Fungal respiratory infections 173–174
FVC (forced vital capacity) 94
G
Gaseous exchange 38–41, 40f
carbon dioxide 40
diffusion limitation 39–40, 40f
oxygen uptake 40
perfusion 39–40, 40f
Gas transport in blood 46–50
dissolved oxygen 46
oxygen 46
Global Initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease (GOLD) 201
COPD diagnosis 137
tuberculosis diagnosis 171t
Glucocorticosteroids 67
inhaled corticosteroids 67
with long-acting β2 agonists 67
oral 143
GOLD  See Global Initiative for Obstructive Lung Disease
(GOLD)
Golgi tendon organs 60
Gonadotrophins, lung cancer 157t
Goodpasture’s syndrome 202–203
Granulomatosis with polyangiitis 203
Gravitational effects, ventilation-perfusion ratio 44, 44f
H
Haemoglobin 46
alternate forms 48–49
carbon monoxide binding 48–49, 49f
fetal  See Fetal haemoglobin (HbF)
high altitudes 62
oxygen binding 46–47
oxygen dissociation curve 47–48, 47f
as pH buffer 52
reduced 47
structure 46
testing of 89t
Haemoglobin S 48
Haemophilus influenzae infections community-acquired
pneumonia 123
Haemoptysis 
bronchiecstasis 175
history-taking 75
Haemothroax 182–183
Haldane effect 49–50
Hands 
bony deformities 81
examination 80–81
muscle wasting 81, 82f
tar staining 80, 80f
HAP  See Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP)
HbF  See Fetal haemoglobin (HbF)
Head examination 82–83
Heart radiography 100–101
Hering-Breuer reflex 60
High altitudes, response to 62
High-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) 106–107,
107f
bronchiectasis 106–107, 177f
COPD 107
hypersensitivity pneumonitis 151, 152f
infections 107
interstitial lung diseases 106, 147–148, 149f
lymphangitis carcinomata 107
sarcoidosis 202t
Hilum of lungs 
lateral radiograph 101
lungs 13f
macroscopic structure 12, 12f
History-taking 73–77
ankle swelling 76
breathlessness 73–74
chest pain 75, 76f
drug history 77
family history 77
general steps 73
haemoptysis 75
hoarseness 76
past medical history 76–77
social history 77
sputum 74–75
weight loss 76
wheezes 75
HIV-related lung disease 173, 205, 205t See also AIDS
Hoarseness, history-taking 76
Honeycomb lung, radiography 103
Hormonal activity, respiration effects 8
Horner’s syndrome 82–83, 83f
Hospital-acquired pneumonia (HAP) 165, 165t
Humoral defences, respiratory tract 18–19
Hydrostatic pressure 22–23
Hygiene hypothesis 121, 121f
Hyoid bone anatomy 10, 10f
Hypercalcaemia, lung cancer 157t
Hypercapnia 5t, 51
Hypersensitivity pneumonitis (HP) 
antigens 151t
clinical features 151
definition 150–151
imaging 151t
investigations 151
pathogenesis 151
treatment 151–152
Hypersensitivity reactions type I 116f
Hypertension, pulmonary  See Pulmonary hypertension
(PH)
Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy 157t
Hyperventilation 50
definition 5t
high altitudes 62
hypoventilation vs. 50t
Hypocapnia 5t, 51
Hypoventilation 50
definition 5t
hyperventilation vs 50t
Hypoxaemia 5t
Hypoxia 51–52
anaemic 51–52
cytotoxic 52
definition 5t
hypoxic 51, 51b
stagnant 52
tissue 4–5
Hypoxic hypoxia 51, 51b
Hypoxic vasoconstriction 26
I
Idiopathic interstitial pneumonias 
cryptogenic organizing pneumonia 150
idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis 149–150
Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) 147, 149–150
clinical features 150
definition 149
investigations 150
pathology 150
treatment 150
ILD  See Interstitial lung disease (ILD)
Imaging 99–108 see also specific methods
Immunoglobulins (Ig) 
bronchiecstasis 176
respiratory tract defence mechanisms 19
Immunotherapy, bronchial carcinoma 162
Impaired mucocilliary clearance, COPD 138
Indacaterol 65
Indicator dilution method, pulmonary 24
Infections  see also specific diseases/disorders
fungal respiratory infections 173–174
high-resolution CT 107
lower respiratory tract infection 165
viral infections 127
Infectious rhinitis 120
Inferior constrictor muscle, pharynx 9–10
Inferior laryngeal artery 11
Inferior lobe, lungs 13f
Inferior vena cava 30, 30f
Inflammatory cells, COPD 138
Inflammatory mediators 128–129
newly generated mediators 129
preformed mediators 128–129
Inflation reflex 60
Influenza 
clinical features 171–172
definition 171
epidemiology 171
investigation 172
management 172
pathology 171
prevention 172–173
Influenza A virus 171
Influenza B virus 171
Influenza C virus 171
Inhaled bronchodilators, COPD management 142–143
Inhaled corticosteroids 67
Inhaled soluble gas uptake, pulmonary blood flow
measurement 24
Inhalers 67–68
dry powder 67–68
metered-dose 67
Inspiration 
diaphragm 6
forced 31
quiet 30
transmural pressure 37, 37f
Inspiratory capacity (IC), lung volumes 28f
Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV) 
disease effects 28f
lung volumes 28f
Intercostal muscles 29–30
external 11, 12f, 29
forced inspiration 31
internal 11, 12f, 30
quiet inspiration 30, 31f
Intercostal space 11
Internal carotid artery 9, 9f
Internal intercostal muscles 11, 12f, 30
Interstitial fluid, alveolus 15f
Interstitial lung disease (ILD) 106 see also specific
diseases/disorders
aetiology 147
chest X-ray 149f
clinical features 147
complications 149
disorders related to 148f
HRCT 147–148, 149f
investigations 147–148
treatment 148–149
Interstitial patterns, radiography 103
Interstitium disorders 
hypersensitivity pneumonitis 150–152
idiopathic interstitial pneumonias 149–150
interstitial lung disease 147–149
occupational lung diseases 152–154
Intrapleural pressure, breathing 29
Intrapleural space 29
Intrinsic asthma 127
Invasive aspergillosis 173
Invasive ventilation 116–117
Investigations 89–97 see also specific investigations
IRV  See Inspiratory reserve volume (IRV)
Isoniazid, tuberculosis management 170
J
Joint receptors, respiratory control 60
Jugular venous pressure (JVP) 83, 84f, 84t
JVP (jugular venous pressure) 83, 84f, 84t
K
Kartagener’s syndrome 123b, 175
KCO (transfer coefficient of carbon monoxide) 40–41
Kussmaul’s respiration 79t
L
Lamina propria, bronchi 16, 16f
Laminar flow, airway resistance 36, 36b
Laplace’s law 34, 35b
Large-cell anaplastic tumour 157
Large cell lung cancer 157t
Laryngectomy 125–126, 125f
Laryngitis 
aetiology 124
chronic 124
epidemiology 123
investigation 124
management 124
symptoms 124
Laryngopharynx 
anatomy 9, 10f
microscopic anatomy 14
Laryngotracheobronchitis (croup) 124, 124t
Larynx 
anatomy 4f, 10, 10f
blood supply 11
disorders 123–125
lymphatic drainage 11
microscopic anatomy 14–16
musculature 10–11
nerve supply 11
Lateral radiograph 99, 101
Left subclavian artery groove, lungs 13f
LFTs (Lung function tests) 176
Light’s criteria, pleural effusions 181
Linear patterns, radiography 103
Lingula, lungs 13f
Lobar collapse 
examination 87t
radiography 101, 102f
Lobes, lungs 12–13, 13f
Long-acting β2 agonists 65–66
asthma treatment 133f
bronchodilators 65–66
with glucocorticosteroids 67
Long-term oxygen therapy, COPD management 143–144
Lower lobe, lungs 13f
Lower respiratory tract 
anatomy 4f
microscopic anatomy 16–17
structure 3
Lower respiratory tract infection (LRTI) 165
Lung(s) 12
air into 29
biopsy 92
blood distribution 25
blood supply 21–22
bronchopulmonary segments 12–13
carcinoma, CT 106
chemoreceptors 59–60
fibrosis 81
gaseous exchange  See Gaseous exchange
hilum of  See Hilum of lungs
lateral radiograph 101
lobes 13f
metastases 162–163, 163t
nodules  See Pulmonary nodules
oedema  See Pulmonary oedema
radiography 100
receptors 57
structure 3–4
surface anatomy 13, 13–14f
Lung cancer 
communication and lifestyle advice 161
COPD 140–141
multidisciplinary team assessment 160
staging 160
treatment 160–162
Lung compliance (CL) 33–34, 34f
disease effects 34, 34f
lung volume vs. 34
Lung function tests (LFTs), bronchiecstasis 176
Lung mass 
Lung transplant, cystic fibrosis 179–180
Lung volumes 27–28, 28f
airway resistance 35–38
alveolar capillaries 23
disease effects 28, 28f
lung compliance vs. 34
pulmonary blood flow 22–26
tests of 96
Lymphangitis carcinomata 107
Lymphatic drainage 
nose 9
pharynx 9–10
Lymph nodes 
cervical 84f
examination 83, 84f
Lymphocytes 90t
Lymphomas 104–105t
M
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 108
Malignant lung disease  see also specific diseases/disorders
associated systemic disorders 157t
metastases  See Metastases
radiography 103
risk factors 157t
Malignant mesothelioma 187–189
MALT (mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue) 17
Manubrium sterni 11f
MCV (mean cell volume) 89t
Mean cell volume (MCV) 89t
Mediastinal masses 
CT, mediastinal masses 
radiography 104–105, 105t
Mediastinal shift 87t
Mediastinoscopy, bronchial carcinoma 160
Mediastinum 
macroscopic structure 11
pleurae 4
radiography 100–101
visualization 159–160
Medical Research Council (MRC), dyspnoea scale 97, 97t
Medullary neurons, respiratory control 57
Mesothelioma 163
malignant 187–189
radiography 105
Metabolic acidosis 54
Metabolic alkalosis 54–55
Metabolism, respiration effects 8
Metastases 
bronchial carcinoma 158–159
hilar masses 104, 104f
lung 162–163, 163t
Metered-dose inhalers 67
Methacholine chloride challenge testing, asthma 132
Microbiology 90–91
blood culture 91
sputum culture 91
viral testing 91
Middle constrictor muscle, pharynx 9–10
Middle lobe, lungs 13f
Middle mediastinal masses, radiography 105
Miliary tuberculosis 168, 168f
Minute ventilation (VE) 31–32
Monocytes 90t
Monophonic wheeze 87t
MRC (Medical Research Council), dyspnoea scale 97, 97t
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) 108
Mucociliary clearance 18
Mucolytics 67
cystic fibrosis 178
Mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) 17
Mucus hypersecretion 139, 140f
Mucus secretions, anticholinergic treatment 66
Multidisciplinary team (MDT) assessment 160
Multiple pulmonary nodules, radiography 104, 104f
Muscles of breathing 29–30 see also specific muscles
Muscle spindles 60
Muscle wasting 
examination 81, 82f
hands 81, 82f
Mycobacterium tuberculosis  See Tuberculosis
N
Nasal cannulae 114, 115t
Nasal cavity 9, 9f
anatomy 4f, 9f
lateral wall 9, 9f
Nasal turbinates 9, 9f
Nasopharynx 9, 14
anatomy 4f, 9, 10f, 14
filtering 17
microscopic anatomy 10f, 14
nose and 9
Nebulizers 68
Neck examination 82–83
Neoplasms, of pleura 187–189
Neuraminidase inhibitors 172
Neutrophils 
investigations 90t
respiratory tract defence mechanisms 19
Nicotine replacement therapy (NRT) 69
Nitrogen washout 96
Nitrous oxide (N2O), diffusion limitation 39, 40f
NKSS (non-keratinized stratifiedsquamous) epithelium 14
Nodules 
pulmonary  See Pulmonary nodules
radiography 103
reactive 125
Noninvasive ventilation (NIV) 
acute respiratory failure 115–116
COPD 145
Non-keratinized stratified squamous (NKSS) epithelium 14
Nonrebreather mask 114
Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) 159t, 162
bronchial carcinoma 156–157
radiation therapy 161–162
staging 159t
surgery 161
Normal breathing, lung volumes 27
Nose 9 See also Nasal cavity
diseases/disorders 120–123
lymphatic drainage 9
microscopic anatomy 14, 15f
neurovascular supply 9
NRT (nicotine replacement therapy) 69
NSCLC  See Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC)
Nutritional support, cystic fibrosis 178
O
Obesity hypoventilation syndrome 200
Oblique fissure, lungs 13–14f
Obstructive disorders 6 see also specific diseases/disorders
flow–volume loops 94–95
forced expiratory volume in one second:forced vital
capacity ratio (FEV1:FVC) 94
lung volumes 28, 28f
Obstructive sleep apnoea (OSA) 
clinical features 197
complications 199
definition 197
Epworth Sleepiness Scale 197, 198b
investigations 197–198
obesity hypoventilation syndrome 200
obstructive 197–199
PaCO2 199
pathogenesis 197
polysomnography 197–198, 198f
prevalence 197
risk factors 197
treatment 198–199
Occipital lymph node 84f
Occupational asthma 127–128, 128t
allergic 127
factors implicated in 128t
nonallergic 127
Occupational lung diseases 
asbestos-related lung diseases 153–154
coal worker’s pneumoconiosis 152–153
pneumoconioses 152
Octreotide 157
Oedema, pulmonary  See Pulmonary oedema
Oesophagus 10f, 11
anatomy 10f
diaphragm passage 30, 30f
lung impression 13f
Oral glucocorticosteroids, COPD 143
Oral steroids 67
Oropharynx 
anatomy 9, 10f
microscopic anatomy 14
Oseltamivir 172
Oxidative stress, COPD 138
Oxygen (O2) 
delivery 114
dissolved 46
fetal haemoglobin affinity 48
gas transport in blood 46–50
haemoglobin 46–48, 47f
high altitudes 62
high ventilation-perfusion ratio 45, 45f
low ventilation-perfusion ratio 44, 45f
response to 61, 61f
Oxygen partial pressure (PaO2) 
respiration control 57–59, 61, 61f
tests 90, 90t
ventilation-perfusion ratio 43–44
Oxygen saturation (SO2) 
definition 7
gas transport 47
Oxygen tension 6–7, 7t
Oxygen tension in mixed venous blood (PvO2) 7t
Oxygen therapy 
COPD 143–144
long-term, COPD management 143–144
Oxygen transport, diffusion 7
Oxygen uptake, gaseous exchange 40
Oxyhaemoglobin 47, 47f
P
PA chest (posteroanterior erect radiography) 99, 100f
PaCO2  See Carbon dioxide partial pressure (PaCO2)
PAH  See Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH)
Pain receptors, respiratory control 60
Palliative care 
bronchial carcinoma 162
and COPD 144
in respiratory medicine 69
Palpation, chest examination 84, 86f
Panacinar/panilobular emphysema 139, 139f
Pancoast syndrome 158
Pandemics 171
PaO2  See Oxygen partial pressure (PaO2)
Paranasal sinuses 9, 123f
Paraneoplastic syndromes 157t, 159 See also Malignant
lung disease; Metastases; specific diseases/disorders
Parietal pleura 12, 12f
blood supply 12, 12f
Partial pressures 
abbreviations used 7t
carbon dioxide  See Carbon dioxide partial pressure
(PaCO2
diffusion 6–7
oxygen  See Oxygen partial pressure (PaO2)
respiration control 7
Past medical history 76–77
Patchy changes, lung radiography 100
Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR) 
investigations 93, 93f
monitoring 129, 131f
Pectoriloquy, whispering 87
Pectus carinatum (pigeon chest) 85f
Pectus excavatum 85f
PEFR  See Peak expiratory flow rate (PEFR)
Percussion 
chest examination 86, 86t
diseases/disorders 87t
Percutaneous fine-needle aspiration 92
Perfusion 5f, 6
gaseous exchange 39–40, 40f
inequality 6, 107
mismatching 6f
regional variation 44, 44–45f
Perfusion scans, radiography 107
Periciliary fluid, respiratory tract defence mechanisms 18
Peripheral chemoreceptors, respiratory control 58
Peripheral cyanosis 81
PH  See Pulmonary hypertension (PH)
pH 
normal range 52
oxygen dissociation curve 48
respiration control 61
testing of 90, 90t
tests 90t
Pharmacology 65–69 see also specific drugs/drug classes
COPD 142–143
delivery devices 67–68
Pharynx 
anatomy 9, 10f
lymphatic drainage 9–10
musculature 9–10
neurovascular supply 9–10
Phosphate 52
Physical defences, respiratory tract 17
Physiologial dead space 32–33
Pigeon chest 85f
Plain radiography  See Radiography
Plasma proteins, as pH buffer 52
Pleurae 4, 12, 12f see also specific diseases/disorders
Pleural cavities 12, 12f
Pleural effusions 181–182
causes 182t
clinical features 181
diagnosis 181
examination 87t
gross appearance 181
investigations 181
Light’s criteria 181
malignant effusion 181–182
radiography 105
treatment 181–182
Pleural lesions 
CT 106, 106f
radiography 105
Pleural rub 86, 87t
Pleural thickening 87t
Pneumoconioses 152 see also specific diseases/disorders
definition 152
pathogenesis 152
Pneumoconiosis 
coal worker’s 152–153
progressive massive fibrosis 152–153
simple 152–153
Pneumocystis pneumonia 173–174
Pneumocytes type I 16
alveolus 15f
Pneumocytes type II 16
alveolus 15f
Pneumonia 165–167
aetiology 165–166
aspiration  See Aspiration pneumonia
classification 165
clinical features 166
complications 167
definition 165
follow-up 167
haemoptysis 75, 77
investigations 166
management 166–167
pathophysiology 165
Pneumothorax 185–187
chemical pleurodesis 187
clinical features 185
definition 185
examination 87t
investigations 185–186
left-sided 186f
management 186–187
persistent air leak 187
primary spontaneous 185
radiography 105
secondary spontaneous 185
surgical management 187
tension  See Tension pneumothorax
Poiseulle’s law 36, 36b
Polygenic inheritance, allergic rhinitis 121f
Polyphonic wheeze 87t
Pontine neurons, respiratory control 57
Pore of Kohn 15f
Positron emission computed tomography (PET-CT) 
bronchial carcinoma 160
investigations 108
Post-auricular lymph node 84f
Posterior cervical chain lymph nodes 84f
Posterior mediastinal masses, radiography 105
Posteroanterior erect chest radiograph 99, 100f
Pre-auricular lymph node 84f
Pressurised metered-dose inhaler 67
Primary ciliary dyskinesia (PCD) 175
Primary tuberculosis 167
Progressive massive fibrosis 152–153
Progressive tuberculosis 167–168
Psoas major muscle 30f
Pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH) 105
Pulmonary blood flow 22–26
control of 25–26
distribution within lung 25
measurement 24–25, 25f
mechanics 22–25
alveolar vessels 23, 24f
external pressure 23, 23–24f
extra-alveolar vessels 23
hydrostatic pressure 22–23, 23f
lung volume 22–26
vascular wall smooth muscle 23–24
pattern of 25, 26f
pressures 22–23, 23f
Pulmonary circulation 21–26
Pulmonary embolism (PE) 191–194
aetiology 191
chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension 194
clinical features 191
definition 191
epidemiology 191
haemoptysis 75, 76f
hilar masses 104t
hypotensive/shocked patients 192–193
investigations 191–192
management 192–193
prevention 193
radiography 107
risk stratification 193
stable patients 193
Pulmonary fibrosis, lung compliance 34
Pulmonary function investigations 93–97
Pulmonary hypertension (PH) 194–196
definition 194
drugs 195t
epidemiology 194
investigation 195
management 195
mechanisms 195t
pathophysiology 194
presentation 194–195
prognosis 195–196
Pulmonary nodules 163
CT 106
radiography  See Radiography, pulmonary nodules
Pulmonary oedema 73–74, 114–115
Pulmonary rehabilitation, COPD management 142
Pulmonary valve stenosis 104t
Pulmonary venous hypertension 105
Pulse oximetry 89
PvO2 (oxygen tension in mixed venous blood) 7t
Pyothorax (empyema) 182
Q
Quadratus lumborum muscle 30f, 31
Quiet expiration 30
Quiet inspiration 30
R
Radial pulse 81–82, 82t
Radiation therapy, bronchial carcinoma 161–162
Radiography 99–107
abnormality interpretation 101–103
atelectasis (collapse) 101, 101t
clinical data 99
consolidation 101–103, 102f
heart 100–101
honeycomb pattern 103
interstitial patterns 103
lateral 99, 101
linear patterns 103
lobar collapse 101, 102f
lungs 100
mediastinal masses 104–105, 105t
mediastinum 100–101
nodular patterns 103
perfusion scans 107
pleural lesions 105
posteroanterior erect chest radiograph 99, 100f
pulmonary embolism 107
pulmonary nodules 103–104
hilar masses 104, 104f
multiple nodules 104, 104f
solitary nodules 103–104
reporting of 99
technical qualities 99–101
trachea 105b
vascular patterns 105
ventilation patterns 105
ventilation-perfusion scans 107
Radioisotope ventilation:perfusion (V/Q) scans 192
Radiology 
bronchiectasis 176
paranasal sinuses 123f
Rapidly adapting receptors 59–60
Reactive nodules, pharynx 125
Recurrent laryngeal nerve 11
Red blood cells, testing of 89t
Reduced haemoglobin 48
Reduced lung markings 100
Reflex bronchoconstriction, anticholinergic treatment 66
Renal compensation 
respiratory acidosis 54
respiratory alkalosis 54
Residual volume (RV) 27, 28f
disease effects 27, 28f
lung volumes 28f
tests for 96
Respiration 3
air flow into lungs 29
basic concepts 4–7
intrapleural pressure 29
mechanics of 28–31
metabolic control 57–60
muscles of 29–30
normal lung volumes 27
work of 38, 39f
Respiration control 7, 57–60 see also specific
diseases/disorders
abnormalities in 62
extreme environments 62–63
Respiratory acidosis 54
Respiratory acinus, alveoli relationship 16, 17f
Respiratory alkalosis 54
Respiratory bronchioles 
anatomy 4f
microscopic anatomy 16, 17f
Respiratory compensation 
metabolic acidosis 54
metabolic alkalosis 54–55
Respiratory distress syndrome 35, 79
Respiratory epithelium 15f, 16
Respiratory failure 51, 113–114
causes 113, 113t
clinical features 113
COPD 140
definition 113
investigations 114
management 114
type I 51, 113
type II 51, 113
Respiratory medicine 3, 69
Respiratory muscles 29–30 see also specific muscles
respiratory control 57, 60
Respiratory rate 5, 79, 79t
Respiratory system 
acid–base regulation 7–8
body temperature regulation 8
excretion 8
hormonal activity 8
metabolism 8
structure 3–4
Respiratory tract 9–19 See also Pulmonary blood flow;
specific structures and components
blood interface  See Respiratory tree
blood supply 21–22, 21f
defence mechanisms 17–19, 18f
cellular defences 19
clearance 17–18
humoral defences 18–19
physical defences 17
macroscopic structure 9–13
microscopic anatomy 14–17
venous drainage 22
Respiratory tree 13, 15t
Respiratory zone, tracheobronchial tree 13
Restrictive disorders 6 see also specific diseases/disorders
flow–volume loops 94–95
forced expiratory volume in one second:forced vital
capacity ratio (FEV1:FVC) 94
lung volumes 28, 28f
Retrosternal space, lateral radiograph 101
Rheumatoid arthritis 204
Rheumatological diseases/disorders 204–205
Rhinitis 
chronic 120
infectious 120
Ribs 11, 11f
Rifampicin 170
Right subclavian artery groove, lungs 13f
Right-to-left shunt 43–44, 43f
RV  See Residual volume (RV)
S
Salbutamol 65
Salmeterol 65–66
Sarcoidosis 201–202, 202f
clinical features 201
definition 201
epidemiology 201
hilar masses 104t
investigations 201, 202f, 202t
management 201–202
pathology 201
skin manifestations 202f
staging 202t
Scalene muscles, forced inspiration 31
SCC  See Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
Schamroth sign 80, 81f
SCLC (small-cell lung cancer) 159–160, 162
Secondary spontaneous pneumothorax 185
Sensors (receptors), respiratory control 57
Seretide 66, 142
Shadowing, lung radiography 100
Short-acting β2 agonists 
bronchodilators 65, 65f
COPD 142
Shuttle test 97
SIADH  See Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic
hormone (SIADH)
Sickle cell anaemia 48
Simple oxygen mask 114
Simple pneumoconiosis 152–153
Single-breath tests 95
Single maintenance reliever therapy (SMART) 66, 133–134
Sinusitis, chronic 123
Skin prick testing 
allergic rhinitis 122
asthma 132
SLE (systemic lupus erythematosus) 204
Sleep apnoea 197
central 199–200
obstructive 197–199
Sleep disorders 197–200 see also specific
diseases/disorders
Slowly adapting receptors, respiratory control 60
Small bronchi, anatomy 4f
Small-cell lung cancer (SCLC) 159–160, 162
SMART  See Single maintenance reliever therapy (SMART)
Smoking 
cessation drugs 69
COPD 137, 138f
squamous cell carcinoma 155
Smooth muscle, within vascular wall 23–24
SO2  See Oxygen saturation (SO2)
Social history 77
Soft mist inhaler 67
Solitary pulmonary nodules, radiography 103–104
Sphenopalatine artery 9, 9f
Spinal abnormalities 83, 85f
Spirometry 
lung volumes 27
pulmonary function 94
Sputum 
bronchiecstasis 175–176
history-taking 74–75
microbiology 91
tuberculosis 170
Sputum culture 
COPD 145
tuberculosis 170
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) 156, 157t
Staging 
bronchial carcinoma 160
lung cancer 160
non-small cell lung cancer 159t
sarcoidosis 202t
Stagnant hypoxia 52
Sternocleidomastoid muscles, forced inspiration 31
Sternum 11, 11f
Steroids  See Glucocorticosteroids
Stretch receptors, respiratory control 59t
Stridor 75
Structure (of respiratory system) 3–4, 4f
Subcostal muscles 12f
Subcostal neurovascular bundles 12f
Submandibular lymph node 84f
Submental lymph node 84f
Superficial gel layer, respiratory tract defence
mechanisms 18
Superior constrictor muscle, pharynx 9–10
Superior laryngeal artery 11
Superior vena cava obstruction 158
Surface tension, surfactant 34–35
Surfactant 34–35
alveolar collapse prevention 35, 35f
functions of 33–34
respiratory distress syndrome 35
respiratory tract defence mechanisms 19
surface tension 34–35
Surfactant protein-A (Sp-A) 19
Surfactant protein-B (Sp-B) 19
Surfactant protein-C (Sp-C) 19
Surfactant protein-D (Sp-D) 19
Surgery 
bronchial carcinoma 161
thoracic incisions 83, 85f
Swallowing, respiratory tract defence mechanisms 17
Swan neck deformities 82f
Sweats, history-taking 76
Symbicort 66
Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
(SIADH) 157t
Systemic diseases 201–205 see also specific
diseases/disorders
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 204
Systemic sclerosis 204
T
Tar staining, hands 80, 80f
Temperature, oxygen dissociation curve 48
Tension pneumothorax 187
clinical features 187
investigation 187
management 187
needle decompression 188f
pathogenesis 187
radiography 105
Terminal bronchioles 4f
Tertiary bronchi 16
Thalassaemias 48
Theophyllines 66, 66f
COPD management 143
Thoracic cage 11, 11f
Thoracic inlet 11, 11f
Thoracic outlet 11, 11f
Thoracic vertebrae 11, 11f
Thoracic wall, anatomy 29
Thoracoscopy 93
Throat, microbiology 90
Thyrohyoid membrane 10f
Thyroid cartilage 10f
Thyroid gland 11
Thyroid notch 10f
Tidal volume (TV) 5, 27t
disease effects 28f
lung volumes 28f
Tiotropium 142–143
Tiredness 
exacerbation 178
Tissue hypoxia 4–5
TLC  See Total lung capacity (TLC)
TLCO (transfer factor) 96
Tongue 10, 10f
Total compliance (CTOT) 33
Total lung capacity (TLC) 
disease effects 28f
lung volumes 28f
Trachea 3
anatomy 4f, 10, 10f
cartilages 10f
examination 83, 83f
microscopic anatomy 15t, 16
Tracheobronchial tree 13
Tracheostomy 125–126, 125f
Transbronchial biopsy 92
Transfer coefficient of carbon monoxide (KCO) 40–41
Transfer factor (TLCO) 96
Transmural pressure 
airway resistance 37–38, 37f
expiration 37–38, 37f
forced expiration 37, 37f
inspiration 37, 37f
Transthoracic fine-needle aspiration biopsy 160
Tremor 81
Trigeminal nerve, maxillary branch 9
Tuberculosis 167–170
clinical features 168
contact tracing 170
definition 167
dissemination 167
epidemiology 167
extrapulmonary 168, 169f
haemoptysis 75
hilar masses 104t
investigations 168–170
latent 170
management 170
miliary 168
pathogenesis 168f
pathology 167–168
postprimary 168
prevention 170
primary 167
progressive 167–168
radiography 103, 103f
secondary 168
sputum samples 170
transmission 167
Tumours  See Malignant lung disease
Turbinates 9, 9f
Turbulent flow, airway resistance 36, 36f
TV  See Tidal volume (TV)
U
Ulceration, bronchial carcinoma 158
Ulnar deviation 82f
Ultrasound 108
Upper lobes, lungs 13f
Upper respiratory tract  see also specific
diseases/disorders; specific structures and components
anaphylaxis 119
anatomy 4f, 9–11, 9f, 14–16
diseases/disorders 119–126
emergency presentations 119–120
laryngectomy 125–126
larynx disorders 123–125
management 119
microscopic anatomy 14–16
nose disorders 120–123
structure 3
tracheostomy 125–126
V
Vaccination, influenza prevention 172–173
Vagus nerve  See Cranial nerve X (vagus nerve)
Varenicline 69
Vascular lesions, CT 106
Vascular patterns, radiography 105
Vascular wall smooth muscle 23–24
Vasculitis 202–204
Vasoconstriction, hypoxic 26
VC  See Vital capacity (VC)
VE (minute ventilation) 31–32
Venous drainage 22
Venous thromboembolism (VTE) 
anticoagulation 194t
epidemiology 191
in pregnancy 192b
risk factors 191t
Ventilation 5–6 see also specific tests
alveolar ventilation 32–33
definition 27
function 27
impairment 6
mechanism of 6
minute ventilation (VE) 31–32
non-invasive  See Noninvasive ventilation (NIV)
radiography 107
regional variation 44, 44–45f
tests for 93
Ventilation control 57–60
metabolic control 57–60
within respiratory system 57
Ventilation inequality, radiography 107
Ventilation patterns, radiography 105
Ventilation–perfusion inequality 6, 6f
Ventilation–perfusion ratio 43
extremes of 43–44, 43f
high 44–45
low 44
Ventilation–perfusion relationship 43–45, 107
Ventilation–perfusion scans 45, 46f, 107
Ventilator-associated pneumonia 165
Ventral respiratory group neurons 57
Venturi mask 114
Viral infections, asthma 127
Viral tests 91
Visceral pleura 12, 12f, 15–16f, 31f
Vital capacity (VC) 
disease effects 28f
lung volumes 28f
Vocal resonance 
chest examination 87
diseases/disorders 87t
W
Wegener’s granulomatosis 203, 203f
Weight loss 76
Wells score, pulmonary embolism 192, 192t
Wheezes 
COPD 75
history-taking 75
monophonic 87t
polyphonic 87t
Whispering pectoriloquy 87
Work of breathing 38, 39f
X
Xanthines 66f
Xiphoid process 11f
X-rays, chest  See Chest X-ray (CXR)
Y
Young syndrome 175
Z
Zanamivir 172
Ziehl–Neelsen stain, sputum 91
Z thumbs 82f
